URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Bible
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:31:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bible - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Bible - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Bible 

 Bible (n.) 

 "the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments," early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia , Old French bible (13c.) "the Bible," also any large book generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia "the Bible" (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), from phrase biblia sacra "holy books," a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia "the holy books." The Latin word is from the Greek one, biblion "paper, scroll," also the ordinary word for "a book as a division of a larger work;" see biblio- .

 The Christian scripture was referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c. 223. Bible replaced Old English biblioðece (see bibliothec ) as the ordinary word for "the Scriptures." Figurative sense of "any authoritative book" is from 1804. Bible-thumper "strict Christian" is from 1870. Bible belt in reference to the swath of the U.S. South then dominated by fundamentalist Christians is from 1926; likely coined by H.L. Mencken.

 Her first husband was a missionary to China, and died miserably out there, leaving her with a small baby and no funds. Her second seems to have left her nearly as quickly, though under his own steam: her souvenir was another infant. For years she toured the Bible Belt in a Ford, haranguing the morons nightly under canvas. [H.L. Mencken, review of Aimee Semple McPherson's "In the Service of the King: The Story of My Life," The American Mercury, April 1928]

 Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and to that discipline — patient, accurate, and resolute — I owe, not only a knowledge of the book, which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the 15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me, even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John Ruskin, "Fors Clavigera," 1871]
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to Bible 

 bibliothec (n.) 

 also bibliothek , Old English biblioðece "the Bible, the Scriptures," from Latin bibliotheca "library, room for books; collection of books" (in Late Latin and Medieval Latin especially "the Bible"), from Greek bibliothēkē , literally "book-repository," from biblion "book" (see biblio- ) + thēkē "case, chest, sheath," from suffixed form of PIE root *dhe- "to set, put." Used of the Bible by Jerome and serving as the common Latin word for it until Biblia began to displace it 9c. (see Bible ). The word was later reborrowed from French as bibliotheque (16c.).

 biblical (adj.) 

 1734, "pertaining to the Bible," from Bible + -ical . Related: Biblically . An earlier adjective was Biblic (1680s). Related: Biblicality .

 biblio- 
 biblico- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scripture 

 early 14c., "the sacred writings of the Bible, the books of the Old and New Testaments" (in this sense commonly with a capital...); from Medieval Latin and Late Latin scriptura "the writings contained in the Bible, a passage from the Bible," in classical...The sense of "a passage from the Bible" is by late 14c....

 locust 

 In the Hebrew Bible there are nine different names for the insect or for particular species or varieties; in the English...Bible they are rendered sometimes 'locust,' sometimes 'beetle,' 'grasshopper,' 'caterpillar,' 'palmerworm,' etc....

 concordance 

 late 14c., "alphabetical arrangement of the important words in a major written work" (especially the Bible, later also of...In the precomputing era, search technology was unavailable, and a concordance offered readers of long works such as the Bible...[Wikipedia] Originally a citation of parallel passages in the books of the Bible....

 propitiatory 

 mercy seat, lid or cover of the ark of the covenant," from Late Latin propitiatorium (translating Greek hilasterion in Bible...

 mage 

 magician, learned magician," from Greek magos, a word used for the Persian learned and priestly class as portrayed in the Bible...

 goad 

 Figurative use "anything that urges or stimulates" is since 16c., probably from the Bible....

 repentance 

 Repentance goes beyond feeling to express distinct purposes of turning from sin to righteousness; the Bible word most often...

 word 

 Old English word "speech, talk, utterance, sentence, statement, news, report, word," from Proto-Germanic *wurda- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian word, Dutch woord, Old High German, German wort, Old Norse orð, Gothic waurd), from PIE *were- (3) "speak, say" (see verb). The 

 handbook 

 Old English handboc "handbook, manual;" see hand (n.) + book (n.). It translates Latin manualis, and was displaced in Middle English by manual (from French), and later in part by enchiridion (from Greek). Reintroduced 1814 in imitation of German Handbuch, but execrated through mu

 testament 

 late 13c., "last will disposing of property," from Latin testamentum "a last will, publication of a will," from testari "make a will, be witness to," from testis "witness," from PIE *tri-st-i- "third person standing by," from root *tris- "three" (see three) on the notion of "thir

 Share Bible 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Bible Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Bible">Etymology of Bible by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Bible. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Bible Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Bible," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Bible. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Bible." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Bible. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Bible." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Bible (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Bible 
 biaxial 
 bib 
 bibber 
 bibelot 
 bibitory 
 Bible 
 biblical 
 biblico- 
 biblio- 
 bibliographer 
 bibliographical 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix