URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Neptune
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:33:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Neptune - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Neptune - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Neptune 

 Neptune 

 late 14c., "Roman god of the sea," from Latin Neptunus , the Roman god of the sea (son of Saturn, brother of Jupiter, later identified with Greek Poseidon ), probably from PIE root *nebh- "cloud" (source of Latin nebula "fog, mist, cloud"), via a sense of "moist, wet."

 The planet so named was discovered by German astronomer Johann Gottfried Galle (1812-1910) on the night of Sept. 23-24, 1846 and named by French astronomer Urbain Le Verrier (1811-1877), who had predicted its position based on anomalies in the motion of Uranus and sent the coordinates to Galle.

 It is too dim to be seen with the naked eye, but it had been seen by observers using telescopes as far back as Galileo, but they did not recognize and identify it as a planet. Until the identification of Pluto in 1930 (and again since that planet's demotion), it was the most distant known planet of the solar system.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to Neptune 

 Neptunian (adj.) 

 1650s, "pertaining to the god Neptune;" 1794 in the geological sense, referring to certain features (later confirmed as volcanic) believed to be formed or deposited by actions of water, from Neptune + -ian . Usually opposed in the latter sense to volcanic or plutonic . "A most violent discussion in regard to this subject was carried on, during the latter third of the eighteenth century, by geologists and theologians" [Century Dictionary]. As a noun meaning "inhabitant of the planet Neptune" it is recorded from 1870.

 neptunium (n.) 

 transuranic element, 1941, from Neptune + element ending -ium . Named for its relative position in the periodic table, next after uranium , as the planet Neptune is one beyond Uranus. See also plutonium .

 trans-Neptunian 
 *nebh- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 plutonium 

 named on suggestion of Seaborg and Wahl because it follows neptunium in the periodic table as Pluto follows (or followed) Neptune...

 Nereid 

 helpful to voyagers, and constituted the main body of the female, as the Tritons did of the male, followers of Poseidon or Neptune...

 nebula 

 mid-15c., nebule "a cloud, mist," from Latin nebula, plural nebulae, "mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation," figuratively "darkness, obscurity," from PIE root *nebh- "cloud." Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of "cataracts in the eye;" astronomical meaning "luminous cloud-like

 angle 

 "to fish with a hook," mid-15c., from Old English angel (n.) "angle, hook, fish-hook," related to anga "hook," from Proto-Germanic *angul-, from PIE *ankulo-, suffixed form of root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (see angle (n.)). Compare Old English angul, Old Norse öngull, Old High Germa

 bolt 

 Old English bolt "short, stout arrow with a heavy head;" also "crossbow for throwing bolts," from Proto-Germanic *bultas (source also of Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps originally "arrow, missile," and from PIE *bheld- "to knock, strike" (source 

 fiasco 

 1855, theater slang for "a failure in performance;" by 1862 it had acquired the general sense of "any ignominious failure or dismal flop," on or off the stage. It comes via the French phrase faire fiasco "turn out a failure" (19c.), from Italian far fiasco "suffer a complete brea

 hilarity 

 mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) "cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment," from hilaris "cheerful, merry," from Greek hilaros "cheerful, merry, joyous," related to hilaos "graceful, kindly," hilaskomai "to propitiate, appease, reconcile,"and probably from a suffix

 seminar 

 1887, "special group-study class for advanced students pursuing real research," from German Seminar "group of students working with a professor," from Latin seminarium "plant nursery, seed plot," figuratively, "breeding ground," from seminarius "of seed," from semen (genitive sem

 lest 

 c. 1200, "that not," especially "for fear that" [OED calls it a negative particle of intention], from a contraction of the Old English phrase þy læs þe "the less that," from þy, instrumental case of demonstrative article þæt "that" + læs (see less) + conjunction þe (see the). The

 sinister 

 early 15c., sinistre, "prompted by malice or ill-will; false, dishonest, intending to mislead," with suggestion, report, etc., from Old French senestre, sinistre "contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left" (14c.), from Latin sinister "left, on the left side" (opposite of dexter),

 Share Neptune 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Neptune Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Neptune">Etymology of Neptune by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Neptune. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Neptune Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Neptune," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Neptune. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Neptune." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Neptune. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Neptune." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Neptune (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Neptune 
 nephro- 
 nephrolithiasis 
 nephrology 
 nephron 
 nepotism 
 Neptune 
 Neptunian 
 neptunium 
 *ner- 
 nerd 
 nerdy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix