URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alkali
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alkali - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alkali - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alkali 

 alkali (n.) 

 late 14c., "soda ash," from Medieval Latin alkali , from Arabic al-qaliy "the ashes, burnt ashes" (of saltwort, which abounds in soda due to growing in alkaline soils), from qala "to roast in a pan." Later extended to similar substances, natural or manufactured. The modern chemistry sense is from 1813.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to alkali 

 alkalescent (adj.) 

 "becoming or tending to become alkaline," 1732, from alkali + -escent . Related: Alkalescence .

 alkaline (adj.) 

 1670s, "pertaining to alkalis," from alkali + -ine (1). Of soils, from 1850. Related: Alkalinity .

 alkalize 
 alkaloid 
 potassium 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 base 

 c. 1300, "foundation" (of a building, etc.); "pedestal" (of a statue), in general, "bottom of anything considered as its support," from Old French bas "depth" (12c.), from Latin basis "foundation," from Greek basis "a stepping, a step, that on which one steps or stands, pede

 ammonia 

 volatile alkali, a colorless gas with a strong pungent smell, 1799, coined in scientific Latin 1782 by Swedish chemist Torbern...Also known as spirit of hartshorn and volatile alkali or animal alkali....

 leach 

 "a preparation made by leaching or straining" (1630s), in later use especially "a separation of lye or alkali in solution...

 potash 

 "vegetable alkali; substance obtained originally by leaching wood-ashes and evaporating the solution obtained in a large...

 last 

 c. 1200, "latest, final, following all others," a contraction of Old English latost (adj.) "slowest, latest," superlative of læt (see late); in some uses from late (adv.). Cognate with Old Frisian lest, Dutch laatst, Old High German laggost, German letzt. Meaning "last in space, 

 salt 

 Old English sealt "salt, sodium chloride, abundant substance essential to life, used as a condiment and meat preservative," from Proto-Germanic *saltom (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Gothic salt, Dutch zout, German Salz), from PIE root *sal- "salt." Applied fr

 slat 

 late 14c., earlier sclat (c. 1300), "a roofing slate; a thin, flat stone," from Old French esclat "split piece, chip, splinter" (Modern French éclat), a back-formation from esclater "to break, splinter, burst," which probably is from Frankish *slaitan "to tear, slit" or some othe

 compound 

 late 14c., compounen, "to put together, to mix, to combine; to join, couple together," from Old French compondre, componre "arrange, direct," and directly from Latin componere "to put together," from com "with, together" (see com-) + ponere "to place" (see position (n.)). The une

 perpendicular 

 late 15c., perpendiculer, of a line, "lying at right angles to the horizon" (in astronomy, navigation, etc.), from an earlier adverb (late 14c.), "at right angles to the horizon," from Old French perpendiculer, from Late Latin perpendicularis "vertical, as a plumb line," from Lat

 diligent 

 "constant in effort to accomplish what is undertaken," mid-14c., from Old French diligent (14c.) and directly from Latin diligentem (nominative diligens) "attentive, assiduous, careful," present-participle adjective from diligere "single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; as

 Share alkali 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alkali Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alkali">Etymology of alkali by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alkali. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alkali Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alkali," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alkali. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alkali." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alkali. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alkali." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alkali (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alkali 
 -ality 
 alive 
 aliveness 
 alkahest 
 alkalescent 
 alkali 
 alkaline 
 alkalize 
 alkaloid 
 alkanet 
 alky 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix