URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/phosphorus
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:48:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Phosphorus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Phosphorus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of phosphorus 

 phosphorus (n.) 

 1640s, "substance or organism that shines of itself," from Latin phosphorus "light-bringing," also "the morning star" (a sense attested in English from 1620), from Greek Phosphoros "morning star," literally "torchbearer," from phōs "light," contraction of phaos "light, daylight" (related to phainein "to show, to bring to light," from PIE root *bha- (1) "to shine") + phoros "bearer," from pherein "to carry" (from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear children").

 As the name of a solid, non-metallic, combustible chemical element, it is recorded from 1680, originally one among several substances so called; the word used exclusively of the element from c. 1750. It was discovered in 1669 by Henning Brand, merchant and alchemist of Hamburg, who derived it from urine. Lavoisier demonstrated it was an element in 1777. According to Flood, "It is the first element whose discoverer is known."
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to phosphorus 

 phosphate (n.) 

 a salt of phosphoric acid, 1795, from French phosphate (1787), from phosphore (see phosphorus ) + -ate (3). Related: Phosphatic .

 Phosphor (n.) 

 "the morning star, Lucifer," 1630s, from Latin Phosphorus "the morning star," literally "light-bringing" (see phosphorus ). Meaning "anything phosphorescent" is from 1705.

 phosphorescent 
 phosphorous 
 *bha- 
 *bher- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 P 

 sixteenth letter of the English alphabet, descended from the Greek pi; the form of it is a pi with the second limb curved around to meet the first. A rare letter in the initial position in Germanic, in part because by Grimm's Law PIE p- became Germanic f-; even including the earl

 meiosis 

 ." — Yes Agassiz does recommend authors to eat fish, because the phosphorus in it makes brains. So far you are correct....

 planet 

 late Old English planete, in old astronomy, "star other than a fixed star; star revolving in an orbit," from Old French planete (Modern French planète) and directly from Late Latin planeta, from Greek planētēs, from (asteres) planētai "wandering (stars)," from planasthai "to wand

 platen 

 1540s, "flat plate of metal," from French plateine, from Old French platine "flat piece, metal plate" (13c.), perhaps altered (by influence of plat "flat") from patene, from Latin patina "pan; broad, shallow dish," from Greek patane "plate, dish" (from PIE root *pete- "to spread"

 element 

 c. 1300, "earth, air, fire, or water; one of the four things regarded by the ancients as the constituents of all things," from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementum "rudiment, first principle, matter in its most basic form" (translating Greek stoikheion), origin and ori

 morning 

 "first part of the day" (technically from midnight to noon), late 14c., a contraction of mid-13c. morwenynge, moregeninge, from morn, morewen (see morn) + suffix -ing, on pattern of evening. Originally the time just before sunrise. As an adjective from 1530s; as a greeting by 184

 star 

 "celestial body appearing as a luminous point," Middle English sterre, from Old English steorra "star," from Proto-Germanic *sternan- (source also of Old Saxon sterro, Old Frisian stera, Dutch ster, Old High German sterro, German Stern, Old Norse stjarna, Swedish stjerna, Danish 

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 Eucharist 

 "sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Communion," mid-14c., from Old French eucariste, from Late Latin eucharistia, from Greek eukharistia "thanksgiving, gratitude," later "the Lord's Supper," from eukharistos "grateful," from eu "well" (see eu-) + stem of kharizesthai "show favor

 Share phosphorus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/phosphorus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/phosphorus">Etymology of phosphorus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of phosphorus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/phosphorus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of phosphorus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/phosphorus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of phosphorus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/phosphorus. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of phosphorus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/phosphorus (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near phosphorus 
 Phosphor 
 phosphorescence 
 phosphorescent 
 phosphoric 
 phosphorous 
 phosphorus 
 photic 
 photo 
 photo- 
 photochemical 
 photocopier 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix