URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/prison
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:57:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Prison - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Prison - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of prison 

 prison (n.) 

 late Old English, prisoun , "place of confinement or involuntary restraint, dungeon, jail," from Old French prisoun "captivity, imprisonment; prison; prisoner, captive" (11c., Modern French prison ), altered (by influence of pris "taken;" see prize (n.2)) from earlier preson , from Vulgar Latin *presionem , from Latin prensionem (nominative prensio ), shortening of prehensionem (nominative *prehensio ) "a taking," noun of action from past-participle stem of prehendere "to take" (from prae- "before," see pre- , + -hender e, from PIE root *ghend- "to seize, take").

 In early use often "captivity, the condition of being in captivity or confinement;" hence, by extension, "a place for captives, a public building for confinement or safe custody of criminals and others committed by legal process," the main modern sense.
 also from 11c. 

 prison (v.) 

 "to imprison, shut up in a prison, restrain from liberty," literally or figuratively, early 14c., from prison (n.) or Old French prisoner (v.). Related: Prisoned ; prisoning .
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to prison 

 prize (n.2) 

 "something taken by force," mid-13c., prise "a taking, holding," from Old French prise "a taking, seizing, holding," noun use of fem. past participle of prendre "to take, seize," from Latin prendere , contraction of prehendere "lay hold of, grasp, seize, catch" (from prae- "before," see pre- , + -hendere , from PIE root *ghend- "to seize, take").

 Especially of a ship captured legally at sea (1510s). The spelling with -z- is from late 16c.

 imprison (v.) 

 c. 1300, from Old French emprisoner "imprison; be in prison" (12c.), from assimilated form of in- "in" (see in- (2)) + prison (see prison ). Formerly also emprison . Related: Imprisoned ; imprisoning .

 prehension 
 prisoner 
 unprison 
 *ghend- 
 pre- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 prisoner 

 "person confined in a prison, captive person," mid-14c. (earlier "a jailer," mid-13c., but this did not survive Middle English), from Old French prisonier "captive, hostage" (12c., Modern French prisonnier), from prisoun (see prison (n.)) and from Medieval Latin prisonarius. Figu

 *ghend- 

 also *ghed-, Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to seize, to take."  It forms all or part of: apprehend; apprentice; apprise; beget; comprehend; comprehension; comprehensive; comprise; depredate; depredation; emprise; enterprise; entrepreneur; forget; get; guess; impresario; 

 reprieve 

 1570s, reprive, "take back to prison," alteration (perhaps by influence of reprove) of Middle English repryen "to remand,...Meaning "to suspend an impending execution" is recorded from 1590s; this sense evolved probably because being sent back to prison...

 cage 

 of wires, reeds, etc.," typically for confining domesticated birds or wild beasts, c. 1200, from Old French cage "cage, prison...From c. 1300 in English as "a cage for prisoners, jail, prison, a cell."...

 deadline 

 do-not-cross" line in Civil War prisons, which figured in the trial of Henry Wirz, commander of the notorious Confederate prison...And he, the said Wirz, still wickedly pursuing his evil purpose, did establish and cause to be designated within the prison...enclosure containing said prisoners a "dead line," being a line around the inner face of the stockade or wall enclosing said prison...shifting strips of [boards nailed] upon the tops of small and insecure stakes or posts, he, the said Wirz, instructed the prison...

 hock 

 "pawn, debt," 1859, American English, in hock, which meant both "in debt" and "in prison," from Dutch hok "jail, pen, doghouse...Among thieves a man is in hock when he is in prison. [G.W. Matsell, "Vocabulum," 1859]...

 remit 

 From c. 1400 as "refer for consideration or performance from one person or group to another;" early 15c. as "send to prison...or back to prison."...

 nick 

 "notch, groove, slit," mid-15c., nik, nyke, a word of unknown origin, possibly from a variant of Old French niche (see niche). Nick of time is attested by 1640s (nick of opportunity is 1610s), possibly from an old custom of recording time as it passed by making notches on a tally

 situation 

 early 15c., situacioun, "place, position, or location," from Old French situacion or directly from Medieval Latin situationem (nominative situatio) "a position, situation," noun of action from past-participle stem of situare "to place, locate," from Latin situs "a place, position

 Bastille 

 14th century Paris fortress later used as a prison and destroyed by revolutionaries on July 14, 1789, as a symbol of royal despotism; French, literally "fortress, gate tower" (see bastion). Many French cities kept their medieval gate-towers as prisons after other fortifications w

 Share prison 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/prison Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/prison">Etymology of prison by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of prison. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/prison Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of prison," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/prison. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of prison." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/prison. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of prison." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/prison (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near prison 
 Priscilla 
 Priscillian 
 prise 
 prism 
 prismatic 
 prison 
 prisoner 
 priss 
 prissy 
 pristine 
 prithee 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix