URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/arithmetic
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:17:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Arithmetic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Arithmetic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of arithmetic 

 arithmetic (n.) 

 "art of computation, the most elementary branch of mathematics," mid-13c., arsmetike , from Old French arsmetique (12c.), from Latin arithmetica , from Greek arithmetikē (tekhnē) "(the) counting (art)," fem. of arithmetikos "of or for reckoning, arithmetical," from arithmos "number, counting, amount" (from PIE *erei-dhmo- , suffixed variant form of root *re- "to reason, count").

 The form arsmetrik was based on folk-etymology derivation from Medieval Latin ars metrica ; the spelling was corrected early 16c. in English (though arsmetry is attested from 1590s) and French. The native formation in Old English was tælcræft , literally "tell-craft."
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to arithmetic 

 arithmancy (n.) 

 "divination by numbers," 1570s, from Greek arithmos "number" (see arithmetic ) + -mancy "divination by means of." Alternative arithmomancy is recorded from 1620s.

 arithmetical (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or according to the rules of arithemetic," 1540s; see arithmetic + -al (1). In modern use, opposed to geometrical . Related: Arithmetically (late 15c.).

 arithmocracy 
 arithmomania 
 *re- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mathematical 

 Also, by 1765, "pertaining to the quadrivium," comprising arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music....The four mathematical arts are arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy; these anciently were termed the quadrivium, or...

 trivium 

 rhetoric, and logic," the first three of the seven liberal arts, considered initiatory and foundational to the other four (arithmetic...

 quadrivium 

 "arithmetic, music, geometry, astronomy" (the four branches of mathematics, according to the Pythagoreans), by 1751, from...

 rational 

 In arithmetic, "expressible in finite terms," 1560s....

 naught 

 mid-14c., "evil, an evil act," also " a trifle," c. 1400, "nothingness;" early 15c., in arithmetic, "the number zero;" from...

 multiple 

 The noun is from 1680s in arithmetic, "a number produced by multiplying another by a whole number," from the adjective....

 liberal arts 

 They were divided into the trivium — grammar, logic, rhetoric (see trivial) — and the quadrivium — arithmetic, geometry,...

 intuitive 

 1640s, "perceiving directly and immediately," from French intuitif or directly from Medieval Latin intuitivus, from intuit-, past-participle stem of Latin intueri "look at, consider," from in- "into" (from PIE root *en "in") + tueri "to look at, watch over," a word of uncertain o

 gibbous 

 c. 1400, "bulging, convex," from Late Latin gibbus "hunchbacked," from Latin gibbus "a hump, a hunch," as an adjective, "bulging," from Proto-Italic *gifri- "hump," *gifro- "hump-backed," of uncertain origin. De Vaan suggests a PIE *geibh-, with possible cognates in Lithuanian ge

 robust 

 1540s, of persons, "having or indicating great strength, muscular, vigorous," from French robuste (14c.) and directly from Latin robustus "strong and hardy," literally "as strong as oak," originally "oaken," from robur, robus "hard timber, strength," also "a special kind of oak,"

 Share arithmetic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/arithmetic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/arithmetic">Etymology of arithmetic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of arithmetic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/arithmetic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of arithmetic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arithmetic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of arithmetic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arithmetic. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of arithmetic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/arithmetic (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near arithmetic 
 aristocrat 
 aristocratic 
 aristology 
 Aristotelian 
 arithmancy 
 arithmetic 
 arithmetical 
 arithmocracy 
 arithmomania 
 Arizona 
 ark 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix