URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/granite
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:54:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Granite - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Granite - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of granite 

 granite (n.) 

 1640s, from French granit(e) (17c.) or directly from Italian granito "granite," originally "grained," past-participle adjective from granire "granulate, make grainy," from grano "grain," from Latin granum "grain" (from PIE root *gre-no- "grain"). In reference to the appearance of the rock. Used figuratively for "hardness" (of the heart, head, etc.) from 1839. New Hampshire, U.S., has been the Granite State at least since 1825.
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to granite 

 granitic (adj.) 

 1749, from granite + -ic .

 *gre-no- 

 *grə-no- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "grain."

 It might form all or part of: corn (n.1); filigree ; garner ; garnet ; grain ; granary ; grange ; granger ; granite ; granular ; granule ; grenade ; grenadine ; kernel ; pomegranate .

 It might also be the source of: Latin granum "seed," Old Church Slavonic zruno "grain," Lithuanian žirnis "pea," Old English corn .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sett 

 The extra t is an arbitrary addition in various technical senses, from a lawn-tennis to a granite set....

 silicon 

 nonmetallic element, 1817, coined by British chemist Thomas Thomson from silica (silicon dioxide), from which it was isolated. The name is patterned on carbon, etc. Silicon chip is attested from 1965; Silicon Valley for the Santa Clara Valley near San Francisco is attested by 197

 is 

 third person singular present indicative of be, Old English is, from Germanic stem *es- (source also of Old High German, German, Gothic ist, Old Norse es, er), from PIE *es-ti- (source also of Sanskrit asti, Greek esti, Latin est, Lithuanian esti, Old Church Slavonic jesti), thir

 experience 

 late 14c., "observation as the source of knowledge; actual observation; an event which has affected one," from Old French esperience "experiment, proof, experience" (13c.), from Latin experientia "a trial, proof, experiment; knowledge gained by repeated trials," from experientem 

 addict 

 1530s (implied in addicted) "to devote or give up (oneself) to a habit or occupation," from Latin addictus, past participle of addicere "to deliver, award, yield; make over, sell," properly "give one's assent to," but figuratively "to devote, consecrate; sacrifice, sell out, betr

 conservative 

 late 14c., conservatyf, "tending to preserve or protect, preservative, having the power to keep whole or safe," from Old French conservatif, from Medieval Latin conservativus, from Latin conservatus, past participle of conservare "to keep, preserve, keep intact, guard," from assi

 primitive 

 late 14c., primitif, "of an original cause; of a thing from which something is derived; not secondary" (a sense now associated with primary), from Old French primitif "very first, original" (14c.) and directly from Latin primitivus "first or earliest of its kind," from primitus "

 tribulation 

 "a state of affliction or oppression, suffering, distress," c. 1200, from Old French tribulacion (12c.), from Church Latin tribulationem (nominative tribulatio) "distress, trouble, affliction," noun of action from past-participle stem of tribulare "to oppress, afflict," a figurat

 Caucasian 

 1807, of or pertaining to the Caucasus Mountains (q.v.), with -ian. Applied to the "white" race 1795 (in Latin) by German anthropologist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1840), who in his pioneering treatise on anthropology distinguished mankind into five races: Mongolian, Ethio

 fairy 

 c. 1300, fairie, "the country or home of supernatural or legendary creatures; fairyland," also "something incredible or fictitious," from Old French faerie "land of fairies, meeting of fairies; enchantment, magic, witchcraft, sorcery" (12c.), from fae "fay," from Latin fata "the 

 Share granite 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/granite Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/granite">Etymology of granite by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of granite. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/granite Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of granite," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/granite. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of granite." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/granite. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of granite." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/granite (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near granite 
 grandsire 
 grandson 
 grandstand 
 grange 
 granger 
 granite 
 granitic 
 granny 
 granola 
 grant 
 grantee 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix