URL: https://www.ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=tea
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:59:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: American Heritage Dictionary Entry: tea

American Heritage Dictionary Entry: tea 

 HOW TO USE THE DICTIONARY
 To look up an entry in The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, use the search window above. For best results, after typing in the word, click on the “Search” button instead of using the “enter” key.
 Some compound words (like bus rapid transit, dog whistle, or identity theft ) don’t appear on the drop-down list when you type them in the search bar. For best results with compound words, place a quotation mark before the compound word in the search window.
 guide to the dictionary 

 THE USAGE PANEL
 The Usage Panel is a group of nearly 200 prominent scholars, creative writers, journalists, diplomats, and others in occupations requiring mastery of language. Annual surveys have gauged the acceptability of particular usages and grammatical constructions.
 The Panelists 

 NEED HELP SOLVING A CROSSWORD PUZZLE?

 Go to our Crossword Puzzle Solver and type in the letters that you know, and the Solver will produce a list of possible solutions.

-->
 AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY APP
 The new American Heritage Dictionary app is now available for 
 iOS and Android. 

 THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY BLOG
 The articles in our blog examine new words, revised definitions, interesting images from the fifth edition, discussions of usage, and more.

 OPEN DICTIONARY PROJECT

 Share your ideas for new words and new meanings of old words!

 Start Sharing Now! 

 --> See word lists from the best-selling 100 Words Series!
 Find out more! 

 INTERESTED IN DICTIONARIES?
 Check out the Dictionary Society of North America at http://www.dictionarysociety.com 

 tea (t ē ) 
 Share: 

 Tweet 

 n. 1. a. An evergreen shrub or small tree (Camellia sinensis) native to Asia, having fragrant, nodding, cup-shaped white flowers and glossy leaves.
 b. The young, dried leaves of this plant, prepared by various processes and used to make a beverage, usually served hot.

 2. An aromatic, slightly bitter beverage made by steeping tea leaves in boiling water.
 3. Any of various plants, such as New Jersey tea, having leaves that are or were formerly used to make a tealike beverage.
 4. Any of various beverages made by steeping the leaves, flowers, fruits, or other parts of certain plants: herbal tea; peppermint tea. 
 5. Any of various beverages made by extracting an infusion from meat, especially beef.
 6. A tea rose.
 7. Chiefly British a. An afternoon refreshment consisting usually of sandwiches and cakes served with tea.
 b. High tea.

 8. An afternoon reception or social gathering at which tea is served.
 9. Slang Marijuana.

 [Probably Dutch thee , from Malay teh , from Amoy te (equivalent to Mandarin chá ), from dialectal Early Middle Chinese da  ; akin to Middle Chinese dr ε ː (source of Mandarin chá , tea); see CHANOYU .]
 Word History: "Here thou, great Anna! whom three realms obey, / Dost sometimes counsel take — and sometimes tea." When Alexander Pope wrote these lines from The Rape of the Lock in 1714, tea still rhymed with obey. This was true of many words spelled with ea, and it was just about in Pope's time that nearly all these words started changing their pronunciation from ( ā ) to ( ē ), as in our modern pronunciation of tea (t ē ). Most modern English words whose main vowel sound is spelled -ea- were pronounced with long vowels in Middle and Old English. Many of these vowels were shortened in the 1500s and 1600s to their modern pronunciations, as in our words dead and sweat. But those words that were pronounced with an ( ā ) sound in Middle English did not undergo this sound change and kept their long vowels, undergoing the further change in Pope's time to the modern "long e" sound. There were several exceptions to this last sound change, most notably the words break, great, and steak. Interestingly, the old pronunciation is also retained in Irish family names, such as Reagan, Shea, Beatty, and Yeats (in contrast to British family names such as Keats ).

 The American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fifth Edition copyright ©2022 by HarperCollins Publishers. All rights reserved.

 Indo-European & Semitic Roots Appendices
 Thousands of entries in the dictionary include etymologies that trace their origins back to reconstructed proto-languages. You can obtain more information about these forms in our online appendices:
 Indo-European Roots 
 Semitic Roots 
 The Indo-European appendix covers nearly half of the Indo-European roots that have left their mark on English words. A more complete treatment of Indo-European roots and the English words derived from them is available in our Dictionary of Indo-European Roots .

 American Heritage Dictionary Products
 The American Heritage Dictionary, 5th Edition

 The American Heritage Dictionary of Idioms

 The American Heritage Roget's Thesaurus

 Curious George's Dictionary

 The American Heritage Children's Dictionary

 CONTACT US 
 Customer Service 
 Make Me An Author 
 Ebooks Help with Glose Reader 
 ABOUT US 
 Company Profile 
 Leadership Team 
 Corporate Social Responsibility 
 HarperCollins Careers 
 HarperCollins Imprints 
 HarperGreen 
 Social Media Directory 
 Accessibility 
 FOR READERS 
 Browse Reading Guides 
 FOR AUTHORS 
 Submit a Manuscript 
 Report Piracy 
 Agent Portal 
 MEDIA 
 Publicity Contacts 
 Press Room 
 SERVICES 
 HarperCollins Speakers Bureau 
 Library Services 
 Academic Services 
 Desk & Exam Copies 
 Review Copies 
 OpenBook API 
 Marketing Partnerships 
 COVID-19 RESOURCES & PERMISSIONS 
 Permissions for Adult Online Readings 
 Permissions for Kids Online Readings 
 SALES & RIGHTS 
 Booksellers & Retailer Ordering 
 HarperCollins Catalogs 
 Permissions 
 Subsidiary Rights 
 Media Rights and Content Development 
 GLOSE APP 
 iPhone 
 Android 

 GLOBAL DIVISIONS 
 HarperCollins US 
 HarperCollins Canada 
 HarperCollins Christian 
 HarperCollins Australia 
 HarperCollins India 
 HarperCollins UK 

 Terms of Use  • 

 Terms of Sale  • 

 Your Ad Choices  • 

 Privacy Policy  • 

 California Privacy Policy 
 Do Not Sell My Personal Information 
 Copyright 2022 HarperCollins Publishers All rights reserved.
 *This website is best viewed in Chrome, Firefox, Microsoft Edge, or Safari. Some characters in pronunciations and etymologies cannot be displayed properly in Internet Explorer.