URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/figure
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Figure - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Figure - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of figure 

 figure (n.) 

 c. 1200, "numeral;" mid-13c., "visible appearance of a person;" late 14c., "visible and tangible form of anything," from Old French figure "shape, body; form of a word; figure of speech; symbol, allegory" (10c), from Latin figura "a shape, form, figure; quality, kind, style; figure of speech," in Late Latin "a sketch, drawing" (from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build").

 Philosophical and scientific senses are from use of Latin figura to translate Greek skhema . Meaning "lines forming a shape" is from mid-14c. From mid-14c. as "human body as represented by art;" late 15c. as "a body, the human form as a whole." From late 14c. as "a cut or diagram inserted in text."

 The rhetorical use of figure , "peculiar use of words giving meaning different from usual," dates to late 14c.; hence figure of speech (1550s). Figure-skating is from 1835, so called for the circular patterns skaters formerly made on the ice to demonstrate control; they were dropped from international competition in 1990, but the name remains. Figure eight as a shape was originally figure of eight (c. 1600).
 also from c. 1200 

 figure (v.) 

 late 14c., "to represent" (in painting or sculpture), "make a likeness," also "to have a certain shape or appearance," from Old French figurer , from Latin figurare "to form, shape" (from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build"). Meaning "to shape into" is c. 1400; from mid-15c. as "to cover or adorn with figures." Meaning "to picture in the mind" is from c. 1600. Intransitive meaning "make an appearance, make a figure, show oneself" is from c. 1600. Meaning "work out a sum" (by means of arithmetical figures) is from 1833, American English; hence colloquial sense "to calculate upon, expect" (1837). Related: Figured ; figuring .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to figure 

 fig (n.2) 

 "dress, equipment," 1823, in phrase in full fig ; hence "condition, state of preparedness" (1883). Said to be an abbreviation of figure (n.), perhaps from the abbreviation of that word in plate illustrations in books, etc. According to others, from the fig leaves of Adam and Eve. Related: Figgery .

 figurehead (n.) 

 also figure-head , 1765, from figure (n.) + head (n.). The ornament on the projecting part of the head of a ship, immediately under the bowsprit; sense of "leader without real authority" is first attested 1868.

 You may say that the king is still head of the State, and that this is a sufficient basis for loyal feeling; certainly, if he were really so, and not a mere ornamented figure-head on the ship of state. [James Hadley, "Essays Philological and Critical," London, 1873]

 shadow-figure 
 *dheigh- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ground 

 Old English grund "bottom; foundation; surface of the earth," also "abyss, Hell," and "bottom of the sea" (a sense preserved in run aground), from Proto-Germanic *grundu-, which seems to have meant "deep place" (source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish grund, Dutch 

 enter 

 late 13c. entren, "enter into a place or a situation; join a group or society" (trans.); early 14c., "make one's entrance" (intrans.), from Old French entrer "enter, go in; enter upon, assume; initiate," from Latin intrare "to go into, enter" (source of Spanish entrar, Italian en

 design 

 late 14c., "to make, shape," ultimately from Latin designare "mark out, point out; devise; choose, designate, appoint," from de "out" (see de-) + signare "to mark," from signum "identifying mark, sign" (see sign (n.)). The Italian verb disegnare in 16c. developed the senses "to c

 trope 

 1530s, from Latin tropus "a figure of speech," from Greek tropos "a turn, direction, course, way; manner, fashion," in rhetoric..., "turn or figure of speech," related to trope "a turning" and trepein "to turn," from PIE root *trep- "to turn."...Technically, in rhetoric, "a figure of speech which consists in the use of a word or phrase in a sense other than that which...

 diagram 

 1610s, "an illustrative figure giving only the outlines or general scheme of the object;" 1640s in geometry, "a drawing for...the purpose of demonstrating the properties of a figure;" from French diagramme, from Latin diagramma "a scale, a musical...scale," from Greek diagramma "geometric figure, that which is marked out by lines," from diagraphein "mark out by lines,...

 quadrangle 

 late 14c., "a plane figure having four angles; a rectangle, square, etc.," from Old French quadrangle (13c.) and directly...from Late Latin quadrangulum "four-sided figure," noun use of neuter of Latin adjective quadrangulus "having four corners...

 disfigure 

 late 14c., "mar the external figure of, impair the beauty, symmetry, or excellence of," also "transform the appearance of...Latin diffigurare, from assimilated form of Latin dis- (see dis-) + figurare "to form, shape," from figura "a shape, form, figure...

 name 

 "word by which a person or thing is denoted," Old English nama, noma "name, reputation," from Proto-Germanic *naman- (source also of Old Saxon namo, Old Frisian nama, Old High German namo, German Name, Middle Dutch name, Dutch naam, Old Norse nafn, Gothic namo "name"), from PIE r

 mane 

 "growth of long hair on the back of the neck and shoulders," characteristic of the horse, lion, and some other animals, Old English manu "mane of a horse," from Proto-Germanic *mano (source also of Old Norse mön, Old Frisian mana, Middle Dutch mane, Dutch manen, Old High German m

 amen 

 Old English, from Late Latin amen, from Ecclesiastical Greek amen, from Hebrew amen "truth," used adverbially as an expression of agreement (as in Deuteronomy xxvii.26, I Kings i.36), from Semitic root a-m-n "to be trustworthy, confirm, support." Compare similar use of Modern Eng

 Share figure 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/figure Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/figure">Etymology of figure by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of figure. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/figure Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of figure," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/figure. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of figure." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/figure. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of figure." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/figure (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near figure 
 fighter 
 fighting 
 figment 
 figurante 
 figurative 
 figure 
 figurehead 
 figurine 
 Fiji 
 fike 
 filament 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close