URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alfalfa
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alfalfa - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alfalfa - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alfalfa 

 alfalfa (n.) 

 common name in North America for "lucerne," a plant in the legume family important as a forage crop, 1845, from Spanish alfalfa , earlier alfalfez , said by Iberian sources to be from Arabic al-fisfisa "fresh fodder." Watkins says it is ultimately from an Old Iranian compound *aspa-sti- "alfalfa, clover," from *aspa- "horse" (from PIE root *ekwo- "horse") + -sti- "food," from suffixed form of PIE root *ed- "to eat."
 also from 1845 

 Entries linking to alfalfa 

 *ed- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to eat," originally "to bite." 

 It might form all or part of: alfalfa ; anodyne ; comedo ; comestible ; eat ; edacious ; edible ; escarole ; esculent ; esurient ; etch ; ettin ; fret (v.); frass ; jotun ; obese ; obesity ; ort ; postprandial ; prandial .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit admi "I eat;" Avestan ad- "to eat;" Greek edo "I eat;" Latin edere "to eat;" Lithuanian ėdu "I eat," ėdžioti "to devour, bite;" Hittite edmi "I eat," adanna "food;" Armenian utem "I eat;" Old Church Slavonic jasti "to eat," Russian jest "to eat;" Old Irish ithim "I eat;" Gothic itan , Old Swedish and Old English etan , Old High German essan "to eat."

 *ekwo- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "horse." Perhaps related to *ōku- "swift."

 It might form all or part of: alfalfa ; Eohippus ; equestrian ; equine ; equus ; hippo- ; hippocampus ; Hippocratic ; Hippocrene ; hippocrepian ; hippodrome ; hippogriff ; Hippolytus ; hippopotamus ; Philip ; philippic ; Philippines ; Xanthippe .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit açva- , Avestan aspa- , Greek hippos , Latin equus , Old Irish ech , Old Church Slavonic ehu- , Old English eoh , Gothic aihwa- all meaning "horse."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sativa 

 in scientific plant name classifications from late 18c., indicating a cultivated form, is from Latin sativus "cultivated, that is sown or planted," from satus, past participle of serere "to sow, plant seed" (from PIE root *sē-  "to sow"). Sative (adj.) formerly was used in E

 theory 

 1590s, "conception, mental scheme," from Late Latin theoria (Jerome), from Greek theōria "contemplation, speculation; a looking at, viewing; a sight, show, spectacle, things looked at," from theōrein "to consider, speculate, look at," from theōros "spectator," from thea "a view" 

 blackmail 

 1550s, "tribute paid to men allied with criminals as protection against pillage, etc.," from black (adj.) + Middle English male "rent, tribute." This is from Old English mal "lawsuit, terms, bargaining, agreement," from Old Norse mal "speech, agreement;" related to Old English mæ

 brute 

 early 15c., "of or belonging to animals, non-human," from Old French brut "coarse, brutal, raw, crude," from Latin brutus "heavy, dull, stupid, insensible, unreasonable" (source also of Spanish and Italian bruto), said to be an Oscan word, from PIE *gwruto-, suffixed form of root

 Knickerbocker 

 "descendant of Dutch settlers of New York," 1831, from Diedrich Knickerbocker, the name under which Washington Irving published his popular "History of New York" (1809). The pen-name was borrowed from Irving's friend Herman Knickerbocker, and literally means "toy marble-baker," f

 virtue 

 c. 1200, vertu, "moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence," from Anglo-French and Old French vertu "force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities" (10c. in Old French), from Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) "moral strength, high character, goodness; 

 tender 

 "soft, easily injured," early 13c., from Old French tendre "soft, delicate; young" (11c.), from Latin tenerem (nominative tener) "soft, delicate; of tender age, youthful," from a derivative of PIE root *ten- "to stretch," on the notion of "stretched," hence "thin," hence "weak" o

 coherence 

 1580s, "suitable connection or dependence, consistency" (in narrative or argument), also more literally "act or state of sticking or cleaving of one thing to another," from French cohérence (16c.), from Latin cohaerentia, abstract noun from cohaerentem (nominative cohaerens), pre

 reefer 

 "marijuana cigarette," 1920s, perhaps an alteration of Mexican Spanish grifo "marijuana, drug addict" [OED]; or perhaps from reef (v.), on resemblance to a rolled sail. It also meant "pickpocket" in criminal slang (by 1935), and Century Dictionary also has it as "oyster that grow

 obsess 

 c. 1500, "to besiege" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere "watch closely; besiege, occupy; stay, remain, abide" literally "sit opposite to," from ob "against" (see ob-) + sedere "to sit," from PIE root *sed- (1) "to sit." Of evil spirits, "to 

 Share alfalfa 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alfalfa Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alfalfa">Etymology of alfalfa by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alfalfa. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alfalfa Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alfalfa," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alfalfa. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alfalfa." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alfalfa. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alfalfa." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alfalfa (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alfalfa 
 Alexander 
 Alexandria 
 Alexandrine 
 alexia 
 Alexis 
 alfalfa 
 Alfred 
 Alfredo 
 alfresco 
 alga 
 algae 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix