URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/prominent
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:24:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Prominent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Prominent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of prominent 

 prominent (adj.) 

 mid-15c., "projecting, jutting out, standing out beyond the line or surface of something," from Latin prominentem (nominative prominens ) "prominent," present participle of prominere "jut or stand out, be prominent, overhang," from pro "before, forward" (see pro- ) + -minere "project, jut out," which is related to mons "hill" (from PIE root *men- (2) "to project").

 Of features, "conspicuous, standing out so as to strike the mind or eye," from 1759; of persons, "notable, leading, eminent, standing out from among the multitude," from 1849. Related: Prominently .
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to prominent 

 promontory (n.) 

 "high point of land or rock projecting into the sea beyond the line of a coast," 1540s, from French promontoire (15c.) and directly from Medieval Latin promontorium , altered (by influence of Latin mons "mount, hill") from Latin promunturium "mountain ridge, headland," which is probably related to prominere "jut out" (see prominent ). Related: Promontorial; promontorious .

 *men- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to project." 

 It might form all or part of: amenable ; amount ; cismontane ; demeanor ; dismount ; eminence ; eminent ; imminence ; imminent ; menace ; minacious ; minatory ; mons ; montage ; montagnard ; monte ; mount (n.1) "hill, mountain;" mount (v.) "to get up on;" mountain ; mountebank ; mouth ; Osmond ; Piedmont ; promenade ; prominence ; prominent ; promontory ; remount ; surmount ; ultramontane .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit manya "nape of the neck;" Latin mons "mountain," eminere "to stand out;" Old Irish muin "neck," Welsh mwnwgl "neck," mwng "mane;" Welsh mynydd "mountain." 

 pro- 

 word-forming element meaning "forward, forth, toward the front" (as in proclaim , proceed ); "beforehand, in advance" ( prohibit , provide ); "taking care of" ( procure ); "in place of, on behalf of" ( proconsul , pronoun ); from Latin pro (adv., prep.) "on behalf of, in place of, before, for, in exchange for, just as," which also was used as a first element in compounds and had a collateral form por- .

 Also in some cases from cognate Greek pro "before, in front of, sooner," which also was used in Greek as a prefix (as in problem ). Both the Latin and Greek words are from PIE *pro- (source also of Sanskrit pra- "before, forward, forth;" Gothic faura "before," Old English fore "before, for, on account of," fram "forward, from;" Old Irish roar "enough"), extended form of root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, before, toward, near," etc.

 The common modern sense of "in favor of, favoring" ( pro-independence , pro-fluoridation , pro-Soviet , etc.) was not in classical Latin and is attested in English from early 19c.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 big 

 c. 1300, at first found chiefly in writings from northern England and north Midlands, with a sense of "powerful, strong;" a word of obscure origin. It is possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian dialectal bugge "great man"). Old English used micel (see much) in many

 large 

 c. 1200, of areas, "great in expanse," of persons, "bountiful, inclined to give or spend freely," from Old French large "broad, wide; generous, bounteous" (12c.), from Latin largus "abundant, copious, plentiful; bountiful, liberal in giving, generous" (source also of Spanish larg

 outstanding 

 1610s, "projecting, prominent, detached," from out- + standing (adj.) "having an erect position, upright." Figurative sense of "conspicuous, striking" is recorded from 1830. Meaning "unpaid, unsettled" is from 1797. The verb outstand is attested in 16c. as "endure successfully, h

 eminent 

 early 15c., "standing or rising above other places; exceeding other things in quality or degree;" from Old French éminent "prominent..." (13c.) or directly from Latin eminentem (nominative eminens) "standing out, projecting, prominent, high," figuratively..."distinguished, distinctive," present participle of eminere "stand out, project; be prominent, be conspicuous," from assimilated...

 excellent 

 mid-14c., from Old French excellent "outstanding, excellent," from Latin excellentem (nominative excellens) "towering, prominent...out from" (see ex-) + -cellere "rise high, tower," related to celsus "high, lofty, great," from PIE root *kel- (2) "to be prominent...

 Oligocene 

 So called because few modern fossils were found in Oligocene rocks, which were especially prominent in northern Germany....

 Ciceronian 

 The name evidently is related to cicer "chickpea," and may have referred to a facial wart prominent on some ancestor of the...

 striking 

 1610s, "that strikes," in a physical sense, present-participle adjective from strike (v.). The meaning "producing a vivid impression, standing out, prominent, conspicuous" is by 1752, from the verb in the sense of "catch the fancy of" (1590s). Related: Strikingly; strikingness. A

 salient 

 1560s, "leaping," a heraldic term, from Latin salientem (nominative saliens), present participle of salire "to leap," from a PIE root of uncertain form (source also of Sanskrit sisarsi, sisrate "to flow, run, hurry;"Greek hallesthai "to leap," Middle Irish saltraim "I trample," M

 regal 

 "kingly, pertaining to a king," late 14c., from Old French regal "royal" (12c., Modern French réal) and directly from Latin regalis "royal, kingly; of or belonging to a king, worthy of a king," from rex (genitive regis) "king," from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with 

 Share prominent 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/prominent Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/prominent">Etymology of prominent by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of prominent. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/prominent Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of prominent," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/prominent. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of prominent." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/prominent. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of prominent." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/prominent (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near prominent 
 promenade 
 Promethean 
 Prometheus 
 promethium 
 prominence 
 prominent 
 promiscuity 
 promiscuous 
 promise 
 promising 
 promisor 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix