URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/effendi
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:45:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Effendi - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Effendi - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of effendi 

 effendi (n.) 

 Turkish title of respect, equivalent to English sir , 1610s, from Turkish efendi , title of respect applied to professionals and officials, corruption of Greek authent ē s "lord, master" (in Modern Greek aphentes ; see authentic ).
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to effendi 

 authentic (adj.) 

 mid-14c., autentik , "authoritative, duly authorized" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French autentique "authentic; canonical" (13c., Modern French authentique ) and directly from Medieval Latin authenticus , from Greek authentikos "original, genuine, principal," from authent ē s "one acting on one's own authority," from autos "self" (see auto- ) + hent ē s "doer, being" (from PIE root *sene- (2) "to accomplish, achieve"). The sense of "real, entitled to acceptance as factual" is recorded from mid-14c.

 Traditionally in modern use, authentic implies that the contents of the thing in question correspond to the facts and are not fictitious (hence "trustworthy, reliable"); while genuine implies that the reputed author is the real one and that we have it as it left the author's hand (hence "unadulterated"); but this is not always maintained: "The distinction which the 18th c. apologists attempted to establish between genuine and authentic ... does not agree well with the etymology of the latter word, and is not now recognized" [OED, 2nd ed. print, 1989].

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Turk 

 c. 1300, from French Turc, from Medieval Latin Turcus, from Byzantine Greek Tourkos, Persian turk, a national name, of unknown origin. Said to mean "strength" in Turkish. Compare Chinese tu-kin, recorded from c. 177 B.C.E. as the name of a people living south of the Altai Mountai

 sir 

 title of honor of a knight or baronet (until 17c. also a title of priests), c. 1300, a variant of sire (q.v.) that was used originally only in unstressed position. It is not an acronym of anything. It was generalized as a respectful form of address by mid-14c., and eventually ext

 giant 

 c. 1300, "fabulous man-like creature of enormous size," from Old French geant, earlier jaiant "giant, ogre" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *gagantem (nominative gagas), from Latin gigas "a giant," from Greek Gigas (usually in plural, Gigantes), one of a race of divine but savage and m

 synagogue 

 late 12c., sinagog, "the regular public worship and religious instruction of the Jews," also a place or building for Hebrew worship, from Old French sinagoge "synagogue, mosque, pagan temple" (11c., Modern French synagogue), from Late Latin synagoga "congregation of Jews," from G

 consistency 

 1590s, "firmness of matter," from Medieval Latin consistentia   literally "a standing together," or directly from Latin consistentem (nominative consistens), present participle of consistere "to stand firm, take a standing position, stop, halt," from assimilated form of

 atavism 

 1833, in biology, "reversion by influence of heredity to ancestral characteristics, resemblance of a given organism to some remote ancestor, return to an early or original type," from French atavisme, attested by 1820s, said to have been coined by French botanist Antoine-Nicolas 

 sycophant 

 1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), "informer, talebearer, slanderer" (a sense now obsolete), from French sycophante and directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantēs "false accuser, slanderer," literally "one who shows the fig," from sykon "fig" (see fig (n.1)) + phainein

 like 

 "having the same characteristics or qualities" (as another), c. 1200, lik, shortening of y-lik, from Old English gelic "like, similar," from Proto-Germanic *(ga)leika- "having the same form," literally "with a corresponding body" (source also of Old Saxon gilik, Dutch gelijk, Ger

 syncope 

 1520s, "contraction of a word by omission of middle sounds or letters," from Latin syncope "contraction of a word by elision," from Greek synkopē "contraction of a word," literally "a cutting off, cutting up, cutting short," from synkoptein "to cut up." This is from syn- "togethe

 perpetual 

 mid-14c., perpetuel, "everlasting, unceasing, existing indefinitely, continuing forever in future time;" late 14c., "uninterrupted, continuous," from Old French perpetuel "without end" (12c.) and directly from Latin perpetualis "universal," in Medieval Latin "permanent," from per

 Share effendi 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/effendi Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/effendi">Etymology of effendi by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of effendi. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/effendi Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of effendi," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/effendi. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of effendi." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/effendi. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of effendi." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/effendi (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near effendi 
 effects 
 effectual 
 effectuate 
 effeminacy 
 effeminate 
 effendi 
 efferent 
 effervesce 
 effervescence 
 effervescent 
 effete 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix