URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/percent
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:54:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Percent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Percent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of percent 

 percent 

 "by the hundred;" with a preceding numeral expressing a proportion of the whole amount, 1560s, per cent , from Modern Latin per centum "by the hundred" (see per and see hundred ). Until early 20c. often treated as an abbreviation and punctuated accordingly.
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to percent 

 hundred (adj., n.) 

 "1 more than ninety-nine, ten times ten; the number which is one more than ninety-nine; a symbol representing this number;" Old English hundred "the number of 100, a counting of 100," from Proto-Germanic *hunda-ratha- (source also of Old Frisian hundred , Old Saxon hunderod , Old Norse hundrað , German hundert ); first element is Proto-Germanic *hundam "hundred" (cognate with Gothic hund , Old High German hunt ), from PIE *km-tom "hundred," reduced from *dkm-tom- (source also of Sanskrit satam , Avestan satem , Greek hekaton , Latin centum , Lithuanian šimtas , Old Church Slavonic suto , Old Irish cet , Breton kant "hundred"), suffixed form of root *dekm- "ten."

 The second element is Proto-Germanic *rath "reckoning, number" (as in Gothic raþjo "a reckoning, account, number," garaþjan "to count;" from PIE root *re- "to reason, count"). The common word for the number in Old English was simple hund , and Old English also used hund-teontig . Also compare duodecimal .

 The meaning "division of a county or shire with its own court" (still in some British place names and U.S. state of Delaware) was in Old English and probably represents 100 hides of land. The Hundred Years War (which ran intermittently from 1337 to 1453) was first so called in 1874. The original Hundred Days was the period between Napoleon's restoration and his final abdication in 1815.

 per (prep.) 

 "through, by means of," 1580s (earlier in various Latin and French phrases, in the latter often par ), from Latin per "through, during, by means of, on account of, as in," from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through, in front of, before, first, chief, toward, near, around, against."

 cent 
 mil 
 percentage 
 percentile 
 *dekm- 
 *per- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cent 

 late 14c., "one hundred," from Latin centum "hundred" (see hundred). The meaning shifted 17c. to "hundredth part" under influence of percent. It was chosen in this sense April 18, 1786, in a Board of Treasury report, as a name for a U.S. currency unit (the hundredth part of a dol

 Dead Sea 

 .); its water is 26 percent salt (as opposed to 3 or 4 percent in most oceans) and supports practically no life....

 chrome 

 Chrome continued in commercial use in English for "chrome steel" (steel with 2 percent or so chrome) after the chemical name...

 Eskimo 

 cream bar" was introduced in 1922 and was at first a craze that drove up the price of cocoa beans on the New York market 50 percent...

 proportion 

 late 14c., proporcioun, "due relation of one part to another," also "size, extent; comparative relation of one thing to another in size, degree, number, etc.," from Old French proporcion "measure, proportion" (13c.) and directly from Latin proportionem (nominative proportio) "com

 celebrate 

 mid-15c., "to perform publicly with appropriate rites," originally of the Mass, from Latin celebratus "much-frequented; kept solemn; famous," past participle of celebrare "assemble to honor," also "to publish; sing praises of; practice often," originally "to frequent in great num

 dog 

 "quadruped of the genus Canis," Old English docga, a late, rare word, used in at least one Middle English source in reference specifically to a powerful breed of canine; other early Middle English uses tend to be depreciatory or abusive. Its origin remains one of the great myster

 risk 

 1660s, risque, "hazard, danger, peril, exposure to mischance or harm," from French risque (16c.), from Italian risco, riscio (modern rischio), from riscare "run into danger," a word of uncertain origin. The Englished spelling is recorded by 1728. Spanish riesgo and German Risiko 

 behold 

 Old English bihaldan (West Saxon behealdan) "give regard to, hold in view," also "keep hold of; belong to," from be- + haldan, healdan (see hold (v.)). Related: Beheld; beholding. A common West Germanic compound, compare Old Saxon bihaldan "hold, keep," Old Frisian bihalda "hold,

 vehement 

 early 15c., from Old French vehement, veement "impetuous, ardent" (12c.), from Latin vehementem (nominative vehemens) "impetuous, eager, violent, furious, ardent, carried away," perhaps [Barnhart] from a lost present middle participle of vehere "to carry" (from PIE root *wegh- "t

 Share percent 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/percent Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/percent">Etymology of percent by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of percent. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/percent Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of percent," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/percent. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of percent." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/percent. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of percent." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/percent (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near percent 
 perambulation 
 perambulator 
 percale 
 perceivable 
 perceive 
 percent 
 percentage 
 percentile 
 percept 
 perceptible 
 perception 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix