URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/option
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:26:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Option - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Option - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of option 

 option (n.) 

 c. 1600, "action of choosing;" 1630s, "power or liberty of choosing," from French option (Old French opcion ), from Latin optionem (nominative optio ) "choice, free choice, liberty to choose," from optare "to desire, pray for, choose," which is of uncertain origin. De Vaan derives it from Proto-Italic *opeje- "to choose, grab," from PIE *hopeie- "to choose, grab," and compares Hittite epp/app- "to take, grab," Sanskrit apa , Avestan apa "has reached."

 The meaning "thing that may be chosen" is attested from 1885. The commercial transaction sense of "privilege secured by payment of a premium (on a stock or a certain produce at a specified time and at a specified price)" is recorded from 1755 (the verb in this sense is attested by 1880 in American English). As a North American football play in which the back may either pass the ball or run with it, it is recorded by 1953.
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to option 

 adopt (v.) 

 "take to one's self, make one's own by selection," c. 1500, a back-formation from adoption or else from Old French adopter (14c.) or directly from Latin adoptare "chose for oneself, take by choice, select, adopt," especially "to take into a family, adopt as a child," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + optare "choose, wish, desire" (see option (n.)).

 Originally in English of friends, fathers, citizens, etc., as well as children. The specific sense of "to legally take as one's own child" and that of "to embrace, espouse" a practice, method, etc. are from c. 1600. Related: Adopted ; adopting .

 adoption (n.) 

 mid-14c., adopcioun , "action of taking (a child) as one's own; condition of being adopted," from Old French adopcion or directly from Late Latin adoptionem (nominative adoptio ) "a taking as one's child," shorter form of adoptatio , noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin adoptare "chose for oneself, take by choice, select, adopt," especially "to take into a family, adopt as a child," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + optare "choose, wish, desire" (from PIE root *op- (2) "to choose;" see option (n.)).

 co-opt 
 cooptation 
 opine 
 opinion 
 opt 
 optative 
 optional 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 co-opt 

 1650s, "to select (someone) for a group or club by a vote of members," from Latin cooptare "to elect, to choose as a colleague or member of one's tribe," from assimilated form of com- "together" (see com-) + optare "choose" (see option (n.)). For some reason this defied the usual

 cooptation 

 also co-optation, 1530s, "choice, selection, mutual choice, election to fill a vacancy" on a committee, board, or society, from Latin cooptationem (nominative cooptatio) "election," noun of action from past-participle stem of cooptare "to elect, to choose as a colleague or member

 opine 

 mid-15c., opinen, "express an opinion or opinions; to think, suppose," also transitive, "be of the opinion that," from Old French oppiner, opiner (15c.) and directly from Latin opinari "have an opinion, be of opinion, suppose, conjecture, think, judge," which is of unknown origin

 canopy 

 a hard "h") "gnat" and altered in Greek by folk-etymology, but Beekes says "substrate origin is the only plausible option...

 turbid 

 well-developed word family already in Plautus, which suggests that turba had been in the language for some time, the latter option...

 local 

 Local option (1868, American English) is from the prohibition movement: "the right of a community to vote on whether to allow...

 sixty-four 

 difficulty and with ascending prizes for right answers, from $1 for the first to $64 for the seventh and last, and the option...

 choice 

 mid-14c., "that which is choice," from choice (adj.) blended with earlier chois (n.) "action of selecting" (c. 1300); "power of choosing" (early 14c.), "the person or thing chosen" (late 14c.), from Old French chois "one's choice; fact of having a choice" (12c., Modern French cho

 echoic 

 1880; see echo (n.) + -ic. A word from the OED. Onomatopoeia, in addition to its awkwardness, has neither associative nor etymological application to words imitating sounds. It means word-making or word-coining and is strictly as applicable to Comte's altruisme as to cuckoo. Ech

 election 

 c. 1300, eleccioun, "act of choosing" someone to occupy a position, elevation to office" (whether by one person or a body of electors); also "the holding of a vote by a body of electors by established procedure; the time and place of such a vote," from Anglo-French eleccioun, Old

 Share option 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/option Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/option">Etymology of option by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of option. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/option Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of option," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/option. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of option." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/option. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of option." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/option (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near option 
 optimist 
 optimistic 
 optimization 
 optimize 
 optimum 
 option 
 optional 
 optometrist 
 optometry 
 opulence 
 opulent 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close