URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/muscle
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:55:45Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Muscle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Muscle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of muscle 

 muscle (n.) 

 "contractible animal tissue consisting of bundles of fibers," late 14c., "a muscle of the body," from Latin musculus "a muscle," literally "a little mouse," diminutive of mus "mouse" (see mouse (n.)).

 So called because the shape and movement of some muscles (notably biceps) were thought to resemble mice. The analogy was made in Greek, too, where mys is both "mouse" and "muscle," and its combining form gives the medical prefix myo- . Compare also Old Church Slavonic mysi "mouse," mysica "arm;" German Maus "mouse; muscle," Arabic 'adalah "muscle," 'adal "field mouse;" Cornish logodenfer "calf of the leg," literally "mouse of the leg." In Middle English, lacerte , from the Latin word for "lizard," also was used as a word for a muscle.

 Musclez & lacertez bene one selfe þing, Bot þe muscle is said to þe fourme of mouse & lacert to þe fourme of a lizard. [Guy de Chauliac, "Grande Chirurgie," c. 1425]

 Hence muscular and mousy are relatives, and a Middle English word for "muscular" was lacertous , "lizardy." Figurative sense of "muscle, strength, brawn" is by 1850; that of "force, violence, threat of violence" is 1930, American English. Muscle car "hot rod" is from 1969.
 also from late 14c. 

 muscle (v.) 

 1913, "to accomplish by strength," from muscle (n.). Meaning "coerce by violence or pressure" is by 1929 in U.S. underworld slang. Related: Muscled ; muscling .
 also from 1913 

 Entries linking to muscle 

 mouse (n.) 

 Middle English mous , from Old English mus "small rodent," also "muscle of the arm" (compare muscle (n.)); from Proto-Germanic *mus (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Danish, Swedish mus , Dutch muis , German Maus "mouse").

 This is from PIE *mus- , the old Indo-European name of the creature, retained in several language families (source also of Sanskrit mus "mouse, rat," Old Persian mush "mouse," Old Church Slavonic mysu , Latin mus , Lithuanian muse "mouse," Greek mys "mouse, muscle").

 Plural form mice (Old English mys ) shows effects of i-mutation . As a type of something timid or weak, from late 14c. Contrasted with man (n.) from 1620s ( nor man nor mouse ).

 The meaning "black eye" (or other discolored lump on the body) is attested by 1842. The computer sense of "small device moved by the hand over a flat surface to maneuver a cursor or arrow on a display screen" is from 1965, though the word has been applied to other devices resembling a mouse in shape since 1750, mainly in nautical use.

 Parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus [Horace]

 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n.) 

 sclerosis of the spinal cord, causing atrophy of the muscles, 1874, in translations from French. Amyotropic is compounded from Greek elements: a- "not, without" (see a- (3)) + combining form of mys "muscle" (see muscle (n.)) + trophikos "feeding," from trophe "nourishment" (see -trophy ). Also ALS , and often known in U.S. as Lou Gehrig's disease , after the New York Yankees baseball player who was diagnosed with it in 1939 and died of it in 1941.

 fibromyalgia 
 intramuscular 
 murex 
 muscle-bound 
 muscled 
 muscle-man 
 muscly 
 muscular 
 muscularity 
 musculature 
 musk 
 unmuscled 
 myo- 
 musculo- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 muscular 

 1680s, "pertaining to muscles," from Latin musculus (see muscle (n.)) + -ar. Earlier in same sense was musculous (early 15c., from Latin musculosus). Meaning "brawny, strong, having well-developed muscles" is from 1736. Muscular Christianity (1857) is originally in reference to p

 musk 

 odoriferous reddish-brown substance secreted by the male musk deer (dried and used in medicinal preparations and as a perfume), late 14c., from Old French musc (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin muscus, from Late Greek moskhos, from Persian mushk, from Sanskrit muska-s "test

 brawn 

 late 13c., "boar's flesh;" early 14c., "flesh of a muscular part of the body," from Old French braon "fleshy or muscular part, buttock," from Frankish *brado "ham, roast" or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- (source also of Old High German brato "tender me

 mussel 

 "edible bivalve mollusk," Middle English muscle, from Old English muscle, musscel, from Late Latin muscula (source of Old..., Dutch mossel, Old High German muscula, German Muschel), from Latin musculus "mussel," literally "little mouse," also "muscle...;" like muscle, derived from mus "mouse" on the perceived similarity of size and shape (see mouse (n.))....The modern spelling, distinguishing the word from muscle, is recorded from c. 1600 but was not fully established until 1870s...

 sphincter 

 in anatomy, "contractile muscle enclosing an aperture," 1570s, from French sphincter, from Late Latin sphincter "contractile...muscle," from Greek sphinktēr "band, lace, contractile muscle, anything that binds tight," from sphingein "to squeeze, bind...

 biceps 

 As a noun meaning "biceps muscle of the arm," from 1640s, so called for its structure....

 cramp 

 "involuntary and painful muscle contraction," late 14c., from Old French crampe (13c.), from a Frankish or other Germanic...

 strength 

 Middle English strengthe, from Old English strengþu, strengð "property of being strong, bodily power, muscular force; vigor, firmness, fortitude, manhood; violence; moral resistance," from Proto-Germanic *strangitho (source also of Old High German strengida "strength"), from PIE 

 sinew 

 "cord or tendon of the body," connecting a muscle to a bone or other body part, Middle English sineu, from Old English seonowe, oblique form of nominative sionu "sinew," from Proto-Germanic *sinwō (source also of Old Saxon sinewa, Old Norse sina, Old Frisian sine, Middle Dutch se

 dowry 

 c. 1400, "money, goods, or estate which a woman brings to her husband in marriage," from Anglo-French dowarie, Old French doaire (late 13c.) "dower, dowry, gift," from Medieval Latin dotarium, from Latin dotare "to endow, portion," from dos (genitive dotis) "marriage portion," fr

 Share muscle 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/muscle Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/muscle">Etymology of muscle by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of muscle. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/muscle Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of muscle," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/muscle. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of muscle." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/muscle. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of muscle." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/muscle (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near muscle 
 murmuring 
 Murphy 
 murrain 
 muscat 
 muscatel 
 muscle 
 muscle-bound 
 muscled 
 muscle-man 
 muscly 
 Muscovy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix