URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cube
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:34:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cube - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cube - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cube 

 cube (n.) 

 1550s, "regular geometric body with six square faces," also "product obtained by multiplying the square of a quantity by the quantity itself," from French cube (13c.) and directly from Latin cubus , from Greek kybos "a six-sided die," used metaphorically of dice-like blocks of any sort, also "cake; piece of salted fish; vertebra," of uncertain origin. Beekes points out that "words for dice are often loans" and that "the Lydians claimed to have invented the game" of kybos .

 The mathematical also was in the ancient Greek word: the Greeks threw with three dice; the highest possible roll was three sixes. The word was attested in English from late 14c. in Latin form. The 1960s slang sense of "extremely conventional person" (1959) is from the notion of a square squared. Cube-root is from 1550s (in Middle English this was simply a cubick ).
 also from 1550s 

 cube (v.) 

 1580s in the mathematical sense "to raise to the third power" (in Middle English the verb was cubiken , mid-15c.); 1947 with the meaning "cut in cubes," from cube (n.). The Greek verbal derivatives from the noun all referred to dice-throwing and gambling. Related: Cubed ; cubing .
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to cube 

 cubic (adj.) 

 mid-15c., "being of the third power;" 1550s, "having the form of a cube," from Old French cubique (14c.), from Latin cubicus , from Greek kybikos , from kybos "cube" (see cube (n.)). Meaning "solid, three-dimensional" is from 1650s.

 Cubical is attested from 1590s with the meaning "of or pertaining to a cube," and according to OED it is "Now more usual than cubic in this sense." Related: Cubically .

 Cubism (n.) 

 "early 20c. revolutionary movement in visual arts characterized (at first) by simple geometric forms," 1911, from French cubisme , from cube (see cube (n.) + -ism ). Said to have been coined by French art critic Louis Vauxcelles at the 1908 Salon des Indépendants in reference to a work by Georges Braque. Related: Cubist (by 1914 as an adjective, 1920 as a noun).

 cuboid 
 ice-cube 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ice-cube 

 "ice cut in small blocks for cooling drinks, etc.," 1902, from ice (n.) + cube (n.). One of the newest plans for the economical use of artificial ice has recently been patented by Van der Weyde, of Holland. The invention is based on the fact that two smooth surfaces of freshly c

 block 

 "solid piece," early 14c., blok, blokke, "large solid piece of wood," usually with one or more plane faces, from Old French bloc "log, block" of wood (13c.), which is from a Germanic source such as Middle Dutch bloc "trunk of a tree," Old High German bloh (from PIE *bhlugo-, from

 dice 

 plural of die (n.), early 14c., des, dys, plural of dy, altered 14c. to dyse, dyce, and 15c. to dice. "As in pence, the plural s retains its original breath sound, probably because these words were not felt as ordinary plurals, but as collective words" [OED]. Sometimes used as si

 Delian 

 Delian problem "find the length of the side of a cube having double the volume of a given cube," was set by the oracle at...Delos when it answered (430 B.C.E.) that the plague in Athens would end when Apollo's (cube-shaped) altar was doubled....

 tessellated 

 square stones or tiles," past participle of tesselare, from tessella "small square stone or tile," diminutive of tessera "a cube...

 tassel 

 fastening, clasp" (12c., Modern French tasseau), from Vulgar Latin *tassellus, said to be from Latin taxillus "small die or cube...

 contesseration 

 contact friendship by means of square tablets," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + tessera "a die, cube...

 solid 

 late 14c., "not empty or hollow, hardened;" of figures or bodies, "having three dimensions," from Old French solide "firm, dense, compact," from Latin solidus "firm, whole, undivided, entire," figuratively "sound, trustworthy, genuine," from suffixed form of PIE root *sol- "whole

 multiply 

 mid-12c., multeplien, "to cause to become many, cause to increase in number or quantity," from Old French multiplier, mouteplier (12c.) "increase, get bigger; flourish; breed; extend, enrich," from Latin multiplicare "to increase," from multiplex (genitive multiplicis) "having ma

 cut 

 c. 1300, "to make, with an edged tool or instrument, an incision in; make incisions for the purpose of dividing into two or more parts; remove by means of a cutting instrument;" of an implement, "have a cutting edge," according to Middle English Compendium from a presumed Old Eng

 Share cube 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cube Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cube">Etymology of cube by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cube. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cube Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cube," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cube. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cube." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cube. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cube." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cube (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cube 
 cteno- 
 cub 
 Cuba 
 cubby 
 cubbyhole 
 cube 
 cubic 
 cubicle 
 Cubism 
 cubit 
 cuboid 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix