URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stoichiometry
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stoichiometry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stoichiometry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stoichiometry 

 stoichiometry (n.) 

 also stoicheiometry , "science of calculating the quantities of chemical elements involved in chemical reactions," 1807, from German Stöchiometrie (1792), coined by German chemist Jeremias Benjamin Richter (1762-1807) from Latinized form of Greek stoikheion "one of a row; shadow-line of a sundial," in plural "the elements" (from PIE *steigh- "to stride, step, rise"). Also see -metry "a measuring of." Related: Stoichiometric .
 also from 1807 

 Entries linking to stoichiometry 

 -metry 

 word-forming element meaning "process of measuring," Middle English -metrie , from French -metrie , from Latin -metria , from Greek -metria "a measuring of," from -metros "measurer of," from metron "measure," from PIE root *me- (2) "to measure."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ratio 

 1630s, in theological writing, "reason, rationale," from Latin ratio "a reckoning, account, a numbering, calculation," hence also "a business affair; course, conduct, procedure," also in a transferred sense, of mental action, "reason, reasoning, judgment, understanding, that facu

 rock 

 [stone, mass of mineral matter], Middle English rokke, roche "stone as a substance; large rocky formation, rocky height or outcrop, crag," from Old English rocc (as in stanrocc "stone rock or obelisk") and directly from Old North French roque, variant of Old French roche, which i

 ambiguous 

 "of doubtful or uncertain nature, open to various interpretations," 1520s, from Latin ambiguus "having double meaning, shifting, changeable, doubtful," an adjective derived from ambigere "to dispute about, contend, debate," literally "to wander, go about, go around," figuratively

 prayer 

 c. 1300, preiere, "earnest request, entreaty, petition," also "the practice of praying or of communing with God," from Old French prier "prayer, petition, request" (12c., Modern French prière), from Medieval Latin precaria "petition, prayer," noun use of Latin adjective precaria,

 busy 

 Old English bisig "careful, anxious," later "continually employed or occupied, in constant or energetic action" cognate with Old Dutch bezich, Low German besig, but having no known connection with any other Germanic or Indo-European language. Still pronounced as in Middle English

 shock 

 1560s, "violent encounter of armed forces or a pair of warriors," a military term, from French choc "violent attack," from Old French choquer "strike against," probably from Frankish, from a Proto-Germanic imitative base (compare Middle Dutch schokken "to push, jolt," Old High Ge

 acolyte 

 early 14c., "inferior officer in the church," from Old French acolite or directly from Medieval Latin acolytus (Late Latin acoluthus), from Greek akolouthos "following, attending on," as a noun, "a follower, attendant," literally "having one way," from a- "together with," copulat

 integrity 

 c. 1400, integrite, "innocence, blamelessness; chastity, purity," from Old French integrité and directly from Latin integritatem (nominative integritas) "soundness, wholeness, completeness," figuratively "purity, correctness, blamelessness," from integer "whole" (see integer). Th

 athlete 

 early 15c. (Chauliac), "competitor in athletic games and contests," from Latin athleta "a wrestler, athlete, combatant in public games," from Greek athlētēs "prizefighter, contestant in the games," agent noun from athlein "to contest for a prize," which from athlos "a contest," e

 higgledy-piggledy 

 "confusedly, hurriedly," 1590s, a "vocal gesture" [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky, hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c. 160

 Share stoichiometry 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stoichiometry Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stoichiometry">Etymology of stoichiometry by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stoichiometry. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stoichiometry Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stoichiometry," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stoichiometry. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stoichiometry." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stoichiometry. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stoichiometry." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stoichiometry (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stoichiometry 
 stockyard 
 stodgy 
 stogie 
 stoic 
 stoical 
 stoichiometry 
 stoicism 
 stoke 
 stoker 
 stola 
 stole 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix