URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pillage
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:00:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pillage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pillage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pillage 

 pillage (n.) 

 late 14c., "act of plundering" (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) "plunder," from pillier "to plunder, loot, ill-treat," possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare "to plunder," probably from a figurative use of Latin pilare "to strip of hair," perhaps also meaning "to skin" (compare figurative extension of verbs pluck , fleece ), from pilus "a hair" (see pile (n.3)).

 Pillage and 
 spoil especially suggest the great loss to the owner, completely stripping or despoiling them of their property ; 
 plunder suggests the quantity and value of that which is taken : as, loaded with 
 plunder ; 
 booty is primarily the spoils of war, but also of a raid or combined action, as of pirates, brigands, or burglars .... [Century Dictionary]
 also from late 14c. 

 pillage (v.) 

 "to plunder, despoil, strip of money or goods by open violence," 1590s, from pillage (n.). Related: Pillaged ; pillaging; pillager . The earlier form of the verb in English was simply pill (late Old English pilian ), which probably is from Medieval Latin pillare .
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to pillage 

 pile (n.3) 

 mid-14c., "downy plumage;" late 15c, "fine, soft hair," from Anglo-French pyle or Middle Dutch pijl , both from Latin pilus "a hair" (source of Italian pelo , Old French pel ), a word of uncertain origin. Phonological evidence rules out transmission of the English word via Old French cognate peil , poil . Meaning "soft, raised surface of a regular and closely set kind upon cloth" is from 1560s.

 caterpillar (n.) 

 "larva of a butterfly or moth," mid-15c., catyrpel , probably altered (by association with Middle English piller "plunderer;" see pillage (n.)) from Old North French caterpilose "caterpillar" (Old French chatepelose ), literally "shaggy cat" (probably in reference to the "wooly-bear" variety), from Late Latin catta pilosa , from catta "cat" (see cat (n.)) + pilosus "hairy, shaggy, covered with hair," from pilus "hair" (see pile (n.3)).

 Compare also French chenille "caterpillar," literally "little dog." A Swiss German name for it is teufelskatz "devil's cat." "The caterpillar has in many idioms received the name of other animals" [Kitchin, who cites also Milanese cagnon "little dog," Italian dialectal gattola "little cat," Kentish hop-dog , hop-cat , Portuguese lagarta "lizard."] Compare also American English wooly-bear for the hairy variety. An Old English name for it was cawelworm "cole-worm." Caterpillar tractor , one which travels on endless steel belts, is from 1908, so called from its way of moving.

 piller (n.) 

 "plunderer," mid-14c., pilour , from obsolete verb pill "to plunder, to pillage" (see pillage (v.)). Related: Pillery "robbery, plunder" (mid-15c.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 loot 

 "goods taken from an enemy, etc.," 1802 (in Charles James's "Military Dictionary," London, which defines it as "Indian term for plunder or pillage"), Anglo-Indian, from Hindi lut, from Sanskrit loptram, lotram "booty, stolen property," from PIE *roup-tro-, from root *reup- "to sn

 plunder 

 "take goods or valuable forcibly from, take by pillage or open force," 1630s, from German plündern, from Middle High German plunderen "to plunder," originally "to take away household furniture," from plunder (n.) "household goods, clothes," also "lumber, baggage" (14c.; compare M

 prize 

 "that which is obtained or offered as the reward of exertion or contest; reward or symbol of victory," spelling alteration of Middle English prise (c. 1300 in this sense), from Old French pris "price, value, worth; reward" (see price (n.)). Figuratively, "anything worth striving 

 rifle 

 early 14c., riflen (implied in rifling), "to plunder or pillage" (a place, house, receptacle, bag, etc.), from Old French...wrinkle," Old High German riffilon "to tear by rubbing," Old Norse rifa "grapple, seize; pull up, tear, break," hrifsa "rob, pillage...

 spoil 

 violently of clothes, strip a slain enemy," from Anglo-French espoiller, Old French espoillier, espillier "strip, plunder, pillage..." and directly from Latin spoliare "strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder, pillage," a verb from spolia...It is attested from late 14c. in English as "strip with violence, rob, pillage, plunder (a place), dispossess; impoverish...

 ravenous 

 from Old French ravinos, ravinous, of people, "rapacious, violent," of water, "swift-flowing," from raviner "to seize, pillage...

 havoc 

 early 15c., from the expression cry havoc "give the signal to pillage" (Anglo-French crier havok, late 14c.)....

 spoliation 

 "robbery, plunder, loot, theft," c. 1400, spoliacioun, Anglo-French esploiacion, from Latin spoliationem (nominative spoliatio) "a robbing, plundering, pillaging," noun of action from past-participle stem of spoliare "to plunder, rob" (see spoil (v.)). Related: Spoliator; spoliat

 hostility 

 early 15c., hostilite, "hostile action," from Old French hostilité "enmity" (15c.), or directly from Late Latin hostilitatem (nominative hostilitas) "enmity," from Latin hostilis "inimical," from hostis, in earlier use "a stranger, foreigner," in classical use "an enemy," from PI

 depredation 

 "act of plundering, pillaging," late 15c. (Caxton), from Old French depredacion (15c., Modern French déprédation), from Late Latin depraedationem (nominative depraedatio) "a plundering," from past-participle stem of Latin depraedari "to pillage," from de- "thoroughly" (see de-) +

 Share pillage 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pillage Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pillage">Etymology of pillage by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pillage. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pillage Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pillage," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pillage. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pillage." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pillage. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pillage." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pillage (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pillage 
 pilferage 
 pilgrim 
 pilgrimage 
 Pilipino 
 pill 
 pillage 
 pillar 
 pillbox 
 pillbug 
 piller 
 pillion 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix