URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hostage
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:28:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hostage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hostage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hostage 

 hostage (n.) 

 late 13c., from Old French ostage , hostage "kindness, hospitality; residence, dwelling; rent, tribute; compensation; guarantee, pledge, bail; person given as security or hostage" (11c., Modern French ôtage ), which is of uncertain origin. Either from hoste "guest" (see host (n.1)) via notion of "a lodger held by a landlord as security" [Watkins, Barnhart]; or else from Late Latin obsidanus "condition of being held as security," from obses "hostage," from ob- "before" + base of sedere "to sit," with spelling influenced by Latin hostis . [OED, Century Dictionary]. Modern political/terrorism sense is from 1970.
 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to hostage 

 host (n.1) 

 "person who receives guests," especially for pay, late 13c., from Old French oste , hoste "guest, host, hostess, landlord" (12c., Modern French hôte ), from Latin hospitem (nominative hospes ) "guest, stranger, sojourner, visitor (hence also 'foreigner')," also "host; one bound by ties of hospitality."

 This appears to be from PIE *ghos-pot- , a compound meaning "guest-master" (compare Old Church Slavonic gospodi "lord, master," literally "lord of strangers"), from the roots *ghos-ti- "stranger, guest, host" and *poti- "powerful; lord." The etymological notion is of someone "with whom one has reciprocal duties of hospitality" [Watkins]. The biological sense of "animal or plant having a parasite" is from 1857.

 H 

 eighth letter of the alphabet; it comes from Phoenician, via Greek and Latin. In Phoenician it originally had a rough guttural sound like German Reich or Scottish loch . In Greek at first it had the value of Modern English -h- , and with this value it passed into the Latin alphabet via Greek colonies in Italy. Subsequently in Greek it came to be used for a long "e" sound; the "h" sound being indicated by a fragment of the letter, which later was reduced to the aspiration mark.

 In Germanic it was used for the voiceless breath sound when at the beginning of words, and in the middle or at the end of words for the rough guttural sound, which later came to be written -gh .

 The sound became totally silent in Vulgar Latin and in the languages that emerged from it; thus the letter was omitted in Old French and Italian, but it was restored pedantically in French and Middle English spelling, and often later in English pronunciation.

 Thus Modern English has words ultimately from Latin with missing -h- ( able , from Latin habile ); with a silent -h- ( heir , hour ); with a formerly silent -h- now often vocalized ( humble , humor , horizon , herb ); and even a few with an unetymological -h- fitted in confusion to words that never had one ( hostage , hermit ). Relics of the formerly unvoiced -h- persist in pedantic insistence on an historical (object) and in obsolete mine host .

 The pronunciation "aitch" was in Old French ( ache "name of the letter H"), and is from a presumed Late Latin *accha (compare Italian effe , elle , emme ), with the central sound approximating the rough, guttural value of the letter in Germanic. In earlier Latin the letter was called ha . The use in digraphs (as in -sh- , -th- ) goes back to the ancient Greek alphabet, which used it in -ph- , -th- , -kh- until -H- took on the value of a long "e" and the digraphs acquired their own characters. The letter passed into Roman use before this evolution, and thus retained there more of its original Semitic value.

 *ghos-ti- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "stranger, guest, host," properly "someone with whom one has reciprocal duties of hospitality," representing "a mutual exchange relationship highly important to ancient Indo-European society" [Watkins]. But as strangers are potential enemies as well as guests, the word has a forked path.

 The word ghos-ti- was thus the central expression of the guest-host relationship, a mutual exchange relationship highly important to ancient Indo-European society. A guest-friendship was a bond of trust between two people that was accompanied by ritualized gift-giving and created an obligation of mutual hospitality and friendship that, once established, could continue in perpetuity and be renewed years later by the same parties or their descendants. [Calvert Watkins, "American Heritage Dictionary of Indo-European Roots"]

 It might form all or part of: Euxine ; guest ; hospice ; hospitable ; hospital ; hospitality ; hospodar ; host (n.1) "person who receives guests;" host (n.2) "multitude;" hostage ; hostel ; hostile ; hostility ; hostler ; hotel ; Xenia ; xeno- ; xenon .

 It might also be the source ofy: Greek xenos "guest, host, stranger;" Latin hostis , in earlier use "a stranger," in classical use "an enemy," hospes "host;" Old Church Slavonic gosti "guest, friend," gospodi "lord, master;" Old English gæst , "chance comer, a stranger."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 surety 

 c. 1300, seurte, "a guarantee, promise, pledge or assurance," from Old French seurté "a promise, pledge, guarantee; assurance, confidence" (12c., Modern French sûreté), from Latin securitatem (nominative securitas) "freedom from care or danger, safety, security," from securus (se

 Stockholm 

 Four bank employees were held hostage in a vault for more than five days during which time the hostages developed a dramatic...

 prisoner 

 (earlier "a jailer," mid-13c., but this did not survive Middle English), from Old French prisonier "captive, hostage" (12c...

 yellow ribbon 

 displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage...When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the yellow ribbon as their symbol...

 pledge 

 mid-14c., plegge, "surety, bail," from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) "hostage, security, bail," also Anglo-Latin...

 congregation 

 late-14c., congregacioun, "a gathering, assembly, a crowd; an organized group, as of a religious order or body of scholars; act of congregating," from Old French congregacion (12c., Modern French congrégation) and directly from Latin congregationem (nominative congregatio) "an as

 touch 

 late 13c., "make deliberate physical contact with," from Old French tochier "to touch, hit, knock; mention, deal with" (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare "to knock, strike" as a bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative orig

 course 

 c. 1300, "onward movement, motion forward, a running in a prescribed direction or over a prescribed distance; path or distance prescribed for a race, a race-course" from Old French cors "course; run, running; flow of a river" (12c.), from Latin cursus "a running; a journey; direc

 interpret 

 late 14c., "expound the meaning of, render clear or explicit," from Old French interpreter "explain; translate" (13c.) and directly from Latin interpretari "explain, expound, understand," from interpres "agent, translator," from inter "between" (see inter-) + second element proba

 care 

 Old English caru, cearu "sorrow, anxiety, grief," also "burdens of mind; serious mental attention," in late Old English also "concern, anxiety caused by apprehension of evil or the weight of many burdens," from Proto-Germanic *karō "lament; grief, care" (source also of Old Saxon 

 Share hostage 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hostage Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hostage">Etymology of hostage by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hostage. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hostage Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hostage," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hostage. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hostage." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hostage. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hostage." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hostage (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hostage 
 hospitaller 
 hospodar 
 hoss 
 host 
 hosta 
 hostage 
 hostel 
 hostelry 
 hostess 
 hostile 
 hostility 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix