URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/marble
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:27:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Marble - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Marble - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of marble 

 marble (n.) 

 type of crystalline limestone much used in sculpture, monuments, etc., early 14c., by dissimilation from marbra (mid-12c.), from Old French marbre (which itself underwent dissimilation of 2nd -r- to -l- in 14c.; marbre persisted in English into early 15c.), from Latin marmor , from or cognate with Greek marmaros "marble, gleaming stone," of unknown origin, perhaps originally an adjective meaning "sparkling," which would connect it with marmairein "to shine."

 Marblestone is attested from c. 1200, and the Latin word was taken directly into Old English as marma . German Marmor is restored Latin from Old High German marmul . Meaning "piece of sculptured or inscribed marble" (especially a marble tomb or tombstone) is from early 14c. Meaning "little ball of marble used in a children's game" is attested from 1690s; see marbles .
 also from early 14c. 

 marble (adj.) 

 late 14c., "consisting of marble," from marble (n.). Meaning "mottled like marble" is mid-15c. The earlier adjective in this sense was marbrin (early 14c.). From 1590s as "resembling marble in some figurative quality" (cold, hard, insensible, etc.). Marble cake is attested from 1864.
 also from late 14c. 

 marble (v.) 

 1590s (implied in marbled ), "to give (something) the veined and clouded appearance of marble," from marble (n.). Of meat with "veins" of fat, from 1770. Of books, "having the end papers or edges colored or stained in a conventional imitation of marble," 1670s. Related: Marbling .

 It is done in a trough of water covered by a layer of gum tragacanth mixed with a little ox-gall. The fluid colors are sprinkled or spattered over this layer with a brush in the arrangement intended for use or in a manner which will admit of producing the desired figuration by drawing a brass comb over the surface. The dampened paper, held by the ends, is lightly passed in a curve over this surface, taking up the colors, and finished by sizing and burnishing or calendering. [Century Dictionary, 1895]
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to marble 

 marbles (n.) 

 children's game, from plural of marble (n.); the game is recorded by that name by 1709 but is probably older (it was known in 13c. German as tribekugeln ). It originally was played with small balls of polished marble or alabaster, later of clay. Glass marbles with the colored swirl date from the 1840s.

 Meaning "mental faculties, common sense" (as in to lose or not have all one's marbles ) is by 1927, American English slang, perhaps [OED] from earlier slang marbles "furniture, personal effects, 'the goods' " (1864, Hotten), a corrupt translation of French meubles (plural) "furniture" (see furniture ).

 marmoreal (adj.) 

 "of, pertaining to, or resembling marble," 1723, from Latin marmoreus "of marble," from marmor (see marble (n.)) + -al (1).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 marmoset 

 Some French authorities suggest a derivation of marmoset from marmor "marble," as if "little marble figurine."...

 alabaster 

 "translucent, whitish, marble-like mineral used for vases, ornaments, and busts," late 14c., from Old French alabastre (12c...

 mausoleum 

 "magnificent tomb," early 15c., from Latin mausoleum, from Greek Mausoleion, name of the massive marble tomb adorned with...

 aggie 

 type of toy marble, by 1905, American English, colloquial shortening of agate (q.v.)....

 agate 

 Meaning "toy marble made of glass resembling agate" is from 1843 (colloquially called an aggie). Related: Agatine....

 quarry 

 metals, metalliferous ores, and coal are taken ; from quarries are taken all the various materials used for building, as marble...

 write 

 For men use to write an evill turne in marble stone, but a good turne in the dust....

 ball 

 "round object, compact spherical body," also "a ball used in a game," c. 1200, probably from an unrecorded Old English *beal, *beall (evidenced by the diminutive bealluc "testicle"), or from cognate Old Norse bollr "ball," from Proto-Germanic *balluz (source also of Dutch bal, Fl

 rock 

 [stone, mass of mineral matter], Middle English rokke, roche "stone as a substance; large rocky formation, rocky height or outcrop, crag," from Old English rocc (as in stanrocc "stone rock or obelisk") and directly from Old North French roque, variant of Old French roche, which i

 cork 

 c. 1300, "the light, elastic outer bark of a species of oak tree native to Iberia and North Africa, used for many purposes," from Spanish alcorque "cork sole," probably from earlier Spanish corcho, from Latin quercus "oak" (see Quercus) or cortex (genitive corticis) "bark" (see c

 Share marble 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/marble Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/marble">Etymology of marble by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of marble. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/marble Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of marble," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/marble. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of marble." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/marble. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of marble." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/marble (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near marble 
 marasmus 
 Maratha 
 marathon 
 maraud 
 marauder 
 marble 
 marbles 
 marcasite 
 Marcella 
 Marcellus 
 marcescent 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix