URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rust
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rust 

 rust (n.) 

 "red oxide of iron, red coating which forms on the surface of iron exposed to the air," Old English rust "rust," in late Old English also figurative, "anything tending to spiritual corrosion, a moral canker," related to rudu "redness," from Proto-Germanic *rusta- (source also of Frisian rust , Old High German and German rost , Middle Dutch ro(e)st ), from PIE *reudh-s-to- (source also of Lithuanian rustas "brownish," rūdėti "to rust;" Latin robigo , Old Church Slavonic ruzda "rust"), from suffixed form of root *reudh- "red, ruddy."

 As a morbid condition of plants caused by fungal growth, from mid-14c. U.S. colloquial rust-bucket for "old car or boat" is by 1945. Rust Belt "decayed urban industrial areas of mid-central U.S." (1984) was popularized in, if not coined by, Walter Mondale's presidential campaign.

 rust (v.) 

 early 13c., rusten , of metals, "become rusty, gather rust," from rust (n.). The transitive sense of "cause to rust" is from 1590s. The figurative sense in reference to anything deteriorating or spoiling from disuse or idleness is by early 14c. Related: Rusted ; rusting .
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to rust 

 red (adj.1) 

 "of a bright, warm color resembling that of blood or of the highest part of the primery rainbow" [Century Dictionary], Middle English rēd , redde , read , reid , from Old English rēad , used of various shades of purple, crimson, scarlet, pink, etc.; also red clothes, dye, ink, wine, or paint, also "having a ruddy or reddish complexion; red-haired, red-bearded;" from Proto-Germanic *rauthan (source also of Old Norse rauðr , Danish rød , Old Saxon rod , Old Frisian rad , Middle Dutch root , Dutch rood , German rot , Gothic rauþs ).

 This is reconstructed to be from a PIE root *reudh- "red, ruddy," the only color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. It also is the root of native ruddy , rust , and, via Latin, ruby , rubric , russet , etc.

 Along with dead , bread (n.), lead (n.1), its long vowel shortened in or after Middle English. The surname Read , Reid , Reade , etc. represents the old form of the adjective and retains the original Old English long vowel pronunciation. It corresponds to Brown , Black , White ; Red itself being rare as a surname. As the color designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s.

 In fixed comparisons, red as blood (Old English), roses (mid-13c.), cherry (c. 1400). From Old English as the color characteristic of inflammation, blistering, etc. Of the complexion, lips, etc., "ruddy, rosy, red" (c. 1200); also of person with a healthy complexion or skin color; to be red in the face as a result of powerful emotion or agitation is by c. 1200; to see red "get angry" is an American English expression attested by 1898.

 Red as the characteristic color of "British possessions" on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism, from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag, 1852.

 Red rover , the children's game, attested from 1891. Red ball signifying "express" in railroad jargon is by 1904, originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog , type of U.S. football pass rush, is recorded from 1959 (earlier "lowest grade of flour produced in a mill," by 1889). Red meat , that which is ordinarily served or preferred undercooked, is from 1808; the food of wild beasts, hence its figurative use for something that satisfies a basic appetite (by 1792; popular from late 20c.).

 Red shift in spectography is first recorded 1923. Red carpet "sumptuous welcome" is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far back as Aeschylus ("Agamemnon"); it also was the name of a type of English moth. Red ant is from 1660s.

 rust-proof (adj.) 

 "protected or safe against production of rust," 1690s, from rust (n.) + proof (n.). As a verb, "to make rust-proof," by 1910 (implied in rust-proofing ).

 rusty 
 *reudh- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rusty 

 "covered or affected with rust, rusted," Old English rustig; see rust (n.) + -y (2). Cognate with Frisian roastich, Middle Dutch roestich, Dutch roestig, Old High German rostag, German rostig. "In the 16th and 17th centuries frequently used as a term of general disparagement" [OE

 corrode 

 late 14c., "to eat away, diminish or disintegrate (something) by gradually separating small bits of it," from Old French corroder (14c.) and directly from Latin corrodere "to gnaw to bits, wear away," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + r

 roil 

 Perhaps it is from French rouiller "to rust, make muddy," from Old French roil "mud, muck, rust" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin...*robicula, from Latin robigo "rust" (see robust)....

 robust 

 timber, strength," also "a special kind of oak," named for its reddish heartwood, from Latin ruber "red" (related to robigo "rust...

 gold 

 "precious metal noted for its color, luster, malleability, and freedom from rust or tarnish," Old English gold, from Proto-Germanic...

 rest 

 state of quiet or repose," from Proto-Germanic *rasto- (source also of Old Saxon resta "resting place, burial-place," Dutch rust...

 decay 

 late 15c., "to decrease," also "to decline, deteriorate, lose strength or excellence," from Anglo-French decair, Old North French decair (Old French decheoir, 12c., Modern French déchoir) "to fall, set (of the sun), weaken, decline, decay," from Vulgar Latin *decadere "to fall of

 damage 

 c. 1300, "harm, injury; hurt or loss to person, character, or estate," from Old French damage, domage  "loss caused by injury" (12c., Modern French dommage), from dam "damage," from Latin damnum "loss, hurt, damage" (see damn). In law (as damages) "the value in money of what

 fret 

 Old English fretan "devour, feed upon, consume," from Proto-Germanic compound *fra-etan "to eat up," from *fra- "completely" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through") + *etan "to eat" (from PIE root *ed- "to eat"). Cognates include Dutch vreten, Old High German frezzan

 Share rust 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rust Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rust">Etymology of rust by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rust. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rust Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rust," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rust. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rust." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rust. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rust." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rust (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rust 
 Russell 
 russet 
 Russia 
 Russian 
 Russo- 
 rust 
 rustic 
 rusticate 
 rustication 
 rusticity 
 rustle 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix