URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/soy
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:57:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Soy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Soy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of soy 

 soy (n.) 

 1670s, saio "soybean-based Asian fish sauce," from Dutch soya , from Japanese soyu , variant of shoyu "soy," from Chinese shi-yu, from shi "fermented soy beans" + yu "oil." The etymology reflects Dutch presence in Japan before English and American merchants began to trade there. Soy sauce is attested from 1795.
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to soy 

 soya (n.) 

 "soy," 1670s; see soy . Soyaburger is attested from 1953.

 soybean (n.) 

 1795, from soy + bean (n.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ketchup 

 Yet the word, usually spelled ketchup, is also described in early use as something resembling anchovies or soy sauce....  Lockyer's 1711 book "An Account of Trade in India" says: "Soy comes in Tubs from Jappan, and the best Ketchup from...

 bane 

 Middle English bane, from Old English bana "killer, slayer, murderer, a worker of death" (human, animal, or object), also "the devil," from Proto-Germanic *banon, cognate with *banja- "wound" (source also of Old Frisian bona "murderer," Old Norse bani "death; that which causes de

 bean 

 Old English bean "bean, pea, legume," from Proto-Germanic *bauno (source also of Old Norse baun, Middle Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), and related to Latin faba "bean;" Greek phakos "lentil;" Albanian bathë "horse-bean;" Old Prussian babo, Russian bo

 condiment 

 mid-15c., "a pickling fluid, seasoning, sauce, something used to give relish to food," from Old French condiment (13c.), from Latin condimentum "spice, seasoning, sauce," from condire "to preserve, pickle, season, put fruit in vinegar, wine, spices, etc.," a variant of condere "p

 sauce 

 mid-14c., "condiment for meat, fish, etc.; pickling liquid, brine," from Old French sauce, sausse, from Latin salsa "things salted, salt food," noun use of fem. singular or neuter plural of adjective salsus "salted," from past participle of Old Latin sallere "to salt," from sal (

 plant 

 Old English plante "young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, a shoot or strip recently sprouted from seed," from Latin planta "sprout, shoot, cutting" (source of Spanish planta, French plante), which is perhaps from an unattested verb *plantare "to drive in with the feet, push in

 orange 

 late 14c., in reference to the fruit of the orange tree (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), an alteration of Arabic naranj, from P

 specious 

 late 14c., "pleasing to the sight, fair," from Latin speciosus "good-looking, beautiful, fair," also "showy, pretended, plausible, specious" (source also of Old French specieux, specieuse), from species "appearance, form, figure, beauty" (see species). Meaning "seemingly desirabl

 demure 

 late 14c. (early 14c. as an Anglo-French surname), "calm, settled;" of persons, "sober, grave, serious," from an Anglo-French extended form of Old French meur "mature, fully grown, ripe," hence "discreet" (Modern French mûr), from Latin maturus "mature" (see mature (v.)). The de-

 nervous 

 late 14c., "containing nerves; affecting the sinews" (the latter sense now obsolete); from Latin nervosus "sinewy, vigorous," from nervus "sinew, nerve" (see nerve (n.)). The meaning "of or belonging to the nerves" in the modern anatomical sense is from 1660s. From 1630s it was u

 Share soy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/soy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/soy">Etymology of soy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of soy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/soy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of soy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/soy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of soy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/soy. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of soy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/soy (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near soy 
 sow 
 sower 
 Soweto 
 sown 
 sox 
 soy 
 soya 
 soybean 
 sozzled 
 spa 
 space 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close