URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/kidney
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:49:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Kidney - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Kidney - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of kidney 

 kidney (n.) 

 early 14c., kidenere , a word of unknown origin, perhaps a compound of Old English cwið "womb" (see chitterlings ) + ey "egg" (see egg (n.)) in reference to the shape of the organ. Figurative sense of "temperament" is from 1550s. Kidney-bean is from 1540s, so called for its shape.
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to kidney 

 chitterlings (n.) 

 late 13c., cheterlingis "entrails, souse, small intestines of a swine fried for food" (early 13c. in surnames), a word of obscure origin, probably from an unrecorded Old English word having something to do with entrails (related to Old English cwið "womb;" compare German Kutteln "guts, bowels, tripe, chitterlings," Old Norse kviðr "womb," Gothic qiþus "womb"). Variants chitlins (1842) and chitlings (1880) both also had a sense of "shreds, tatters."

 "While I was in this way rollin' in clover, by picturin' what was to be, they wur tarin' my character all to 
 chitlins up at home." [John S. Robb, "Streaks of Squatter Life," Philadelphia, 1843]

 egg (n.) 

 "the body formed in the females of all animals (with the exception of a few of the lowest type) in which by impregnation the development of the fetus takes place," mid-14c., egge , mostly in northern England dialect, from Old Norse egg , from Proto-Germanic *ajja(m) (source also of Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German, German ei , Gothic ada ), probably from PIE *owyo-/*oyyo- "egg" (source also of Old Church Slavonic aja , Russian jajco , Breton ui , Welsh wy , Greek ōon , Latin ovum ); possibly derived from root *awi- "bird."

 This Norse-derived northern word vied in Middle English with native cognates eye , eai , from Old English æg , until finally displacing the others after c. 1500. Caxton (15c.) writes of a merchant (probably a north-country man) in a public house on the Thames who asked for eggs:

 And the goode wyf answerde, that she coude speke no frenshe. And the marchaunt was angry, for he also coude speke no frenshe, but wolde have hadde egges, and she understode hym not. 

 She did, however, recognize another customer's request for "eyren." Used of persons from c. 1600. Bad egg in the figurative sense is from 1855; bad eggs aren't always obvious to outward view (there was an old proverb, "bad bird, bad egg"). To have egg on (one's) face "look foolish" is attested by 1948.

 [Young & Rubincam] realize full well that a crew can sometimes make or break a show. It can do little things to ruin a program or else, by giving it its best, can really get that all-important rating. They are mindful of an emcee of a variety show who already has been tabbed "old egg in your face" because the crew has managed to get him in such awkward positions on the TV screen. [Billboard, March 5, 1949] 

 We don't have egg on our face. We have omelet all over our suits. [NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw, some time past 3 a.m. ET on Nov. 8, 2000, after the U.S. television networks called a winner, then retracted the call, in the Bush-Gore presidential election]

   Eggs Benedict is attested by 1898; various Benedicts are cited as the eponym, and the dish itself is said to have originated in the Waldorf-Astoria or Delmonico's, both in New York. The figure of speech represented in to have (or put) all (one's) eggs in one basket "to venture all one has in one speculation or investment" is attested by 1660s. The conundrum of the chicken (or hen) and the egg is attested from 1875.

 Bumble, bramble, which came first, sir,

 Eggs or chickens? Who can tell?

 I'll never believe that the first egg burst, sir,

 Before its mother was out of her shell.

 [Mary Mapes Dodge, "Rhymes and Jingles," N.Y., 1875]

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 renal 

 kidneys," from Latin ren (plural renes) "kidneys," a word of of uncertain etymology, with possible cognates in Old Irish aru "kidney..., gland," Welsh arenn "kidney, testicle," Hittite hah(ha)ari "lung(s), midriff."...

 calculus 

 In medicine, the word also has been used from 1732 to mean kidney stones, etc., then generally for "concretion occurring...

 banter 

 you, consists in the choice of certain words invented by some pretty fellows; such as banter, bamboozle, country put, and kidney...

 desperate 

 c. 1400, desperat, of persons, "despairing, hopeless" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin desperatus "given up, despaired of," past participle of desperare "to despair, to lose all hope," from de "without" (see de-) + sperare "to hope," from spes "hope" (from PIE root *spes- "pros

 glove 

 Old English glof "glove, covering for the hand having separate sheaths for the fingers," also "palm of the hand," from Proto-Germanic *galofo "covering for the hand" (source also of Old Norse glofi), probably from *ga- collective prefix + *lofi "hand" (source also of Old Norse lo

 kangaroo 

 "large marsupial mammal of Australia," 1770, used by Capt. Cook and botanist Joseph Banks (who first reported the species to Europeans), supposedly representing a native word from northeast Queensland, Australia, but often said to be unknown now in any native language. However, a

 masquerade 

 1590s, "assembly of persons wearing masks and usually other disguises," from French mascarade or Spanish mascarada "masked party or dance," from Italian mascarata "a ball at which masks are worn," variant of mascherata "masquerade," from maschera (see mask (n.)). Extended sense o

 news 

 late 14c., "new things," plural of new (n.) "new thing" (see new (adj.)); after French nouvelles, which was used in Bible translations to render Medieval Latin nova (neuter plural) "news," literally "new things." The English word was construed as singular at least from the 1560s,

 pound 

 [fundamental unit of weight] Old English pund "pound" (in weight or money), also "pint," from Proto-Germanic *punda- "pound" as a measure of weight (source of Gothic pund, Old High German phunt, German Pfund, Middle Dutch pont, Old Frisian and Old Norse pund), an early borrowing 

 Adam 

 masc. proper name, the biblical name of the first man, progenitor of the human race, from Hebrew adam "man," literally "(the one formed from the) ground" (Hebrew adamah "ground"); compare Latin homo "man," humanus "human," humus "earth, ground, soil." Compare homunculus. The name

 Share kidney 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/kidney Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/kidney">Etymology of kidney by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of kidney. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/kidney Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of kidney," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kidney. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of kidney." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kidney. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of kidney." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/kidney (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near kidney 
 kiddo 
 kiddy 
 kidnap 
 kidnapper 
 kidnapping 
 kidney 
 kielbasa 
 Kiev 
 kike 
 Kikuyu 
 kil- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix