URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/friend
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:02:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Friend - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Friend - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of friend 

 friend (n.) 

 Old English freond "one attached to another by feelings of personal regard and preference," from Proto-Germanic *frijōjands "lover, friend" (source also of Old Norse frændi , Old Danish frynt , Old Frisian friund , Dutch vriend , Middle High German friunt , German Freund , Gothic frijonds "friend"), from PIE *priy-ont- , "loving," present-participle form of root *pri- "to love."

 Meaning "a Quaker" (a member of the Society of Friends ) is from 1670s. Feond ("fiend," originally "enemy") and freond often were paired alliteratively in Old English; both are masculine agent nouns derived from present participle of verbs, but they are not directly related to one another (see fiend ). Related: Friends .

 friend (v.) 

 in the Facebook sense, attested from 2005, from the noun. Friend occasionally has been used as a verb in English since c. 1200 ("to be friends"), though the more usual verb for "join in friendship, act as a friend" is befriend . Related: Friended ; friending . Old English had freondsped "an abundance of friends" (see speed (n.)); freondleast "want of friends;" freondspedig "rich in friends."
 also from 2005 

 Entries linking to friend 

 befriend (v.) 

 "act as a friend to," 1550s, from be- + friend (n.). Related: Befriended ; befriending .

 fiend (n.) 

 Old English feond "enemy, foe, adversary," originally present participle of feogan "to hate," from Proto-Germanic *fijand- "hating, hostile" (source also of Old Frisian fiand "enemy," Old Saxon fiond , Middle Dutch viant , Dutch vijand "enemy," Old Norse fjandi , Old High German fiant , Gothic fijands ), from suffixed form of PIE root *pe(i)- "to hurt" (source also of Sanskrit pijati "reviles, scorns;" Avestan paman- , name of a skin disease; Greek pema "disaster, sorrow, misery, woe;" Gothic faian "to blame").

 As spelling suggests, the word originally was the opposite of friend (n.). Both are from the active participles of the Germanic verbs for "to love" and "to hate." Boutkan says the "fiend" word was a Germanic analogical formation from the "friend" word. According to Bammesberger ["English Etymology"], "The long vowel in FIEND is regular. In FRIEND the vowel has been shortened; perhaps the shortening is due to compounds like FRIENDSHIP, in which the consonant group ( -nds- ) regularly caused shortening of the preceeding long vowel."

 Fiend at first described any hostile enemy (male and female, with abstract noun form feondscipe "fiendship"), but it began to be used in late Old English for "the Devil, Satan " (literally "adversary") as the "enemy of mankind," which shifted its sense to "diabolical person" (early 13c.). The old sense of the word devolved to foe , then to the imported word enemy . For spelling with -ie- see field . Meaning "devotee (of whatever is indicated)," as in dope fiend , is from 1865.

 speed 
 boyfriend 
 friendless 
 friendly 
 friendship 
 girlfriend 
 unfriend 
 *pri- 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 speed 

 Middle English spede, from Old English sped "success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck, good fortune; opportunity, advancement," from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (source also of Old Saxon spod "success," Dutch spoed "haste, speed," Old High German spuot "success,"

 friendly 

 Old English freondlic "well-disposed, kindly;" see friend (n.) + -ly (1). Related: Friendlily; friendliness. As an adverb Old English had freondliche, but by 14c. as the inflections wore off in English it had become indistinguishable from the adjective. Probably owing to that it 

 foe 

 Old English gefea, gefa "foe, enemy, adversary in a blood feud" (the prefix denotes "mutuality"), from adjective fah "at feud, hostile," also "guilty, criminal," from Proto-Germanic *faihaz (source also of Old High German fehan "to hate," Gothic faih "deception"), perhaps from th

 droog 

 "gang member, young ruffian," a transliteration of the Russian word for "friend," introduced by English novelist Anthony...The Russian word comes from Old Church Slavonic drugu "companion, friend, other" (source of Bohemian drug "companion," Serbo-Croatian...drugi "other"), which belongs to a group of related Indo-European words (such as Lithuanian draugas "friend, traveling companion...

 familiar 

 that answers one's call" is from 1580s (familiar spirit is attested from 1560s); earlier as a noun it meant "a familiar friend...The Latin plural, used as a noun, meant "the slaves," also "a friend, intimate acquaintance, companion."...

 mentor 

 "wise adviser, intimate friend who also is a sage counselor," especially of one who is young or inexperienced, 1750, from...Greek Mentor, friend of Odysseus and adviser of Telemachus (but often actually Athene in disguise) in the "Odyssey."...

 companion 

 c. 1300, "one who accompanies or associates with another," from Old French compagnon "fellow, mate, friend, partner" (12c...meaning "A person who lives with another in need of society, and who, though receiving remuneration, is treated rather as a friend...

 advocate 

 mid-14c., "one whose profession is to plead cases in a court of justice," a technical term from Roman law, from Old French avocat "barrister, advocate, spokesman," from Latin advocatus "one called to aid (another); a pleader (on one's behalf), advocate," noun use of past particip

 Christian 

 1520s as a noun, "a believer in and follower of Christ;" 1550s as an adjective, "professing the Christian religion, received into the Christian church," 16c. forms replacing Middle English Cristen (adjective and noun), from Old English cristen, from a West Germanic borrowing of C

 much 

 c. 1200, "great in quantity or extent" (also "great in size, big, large," a sense now obsolete), a worn-down form (by loss of unaccented last syllable) of Middle English muchel "large, tall; many, in a large amount; great, formidable," from Old English micel "great in amount or e

 Share friend 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/friend Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/friend">Etymology of friend by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of friend. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/friend Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of friend," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/friend. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of friend." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/friend. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of friend." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/friend (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near friend 
 friction 
 Friday 
 fridge 
 fried 
 Friedrich 
 friend 
 friendless 
 friendly 
 friendship 
 frieze 
 frig 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix