URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarantine
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:40:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Quarantine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Quarantine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of quarantine 

 quarantine (n.) 

 1660s, "period a ship suspected of carrying contagious disease is kept in isolation," from Italian quaranta giorni , literally "space of forty days," from quaranta "forty," from Latin quadraginta "forty" (related to quattuor "four," which is reconstructed to be from PIE root *kwetwer- "four").

 The name is from the Venetian policy (first enforced in 1377) of keeping ships from plague-stricken countries waiting off its port for 40 days to assure that no latent cases were aboard. Also see lazaretto . The extended sense of "any period of forced isolation" is from 1670s.

 Earlier in English the word meant "period of 40 days in which a widow has the right to remain in her dead husband's house" (1520s), and, as quarentyne (15c.), "desert in which Christ fasted for 40 days," from Latin quadraginta "forty."
 also from 1660s 

 quarantine (v.) 

 "put under quarantine" in any sense, also figurative, "to isolate, as by authority," 1804, from quarantine (n.). Related: Quarantined ; quarantining; quarantinable .
 also from 1804 

 Entries linking to quarantine 

 lazaretto (n.) 

 "house for reception of lepers and diseased poor persons," 1540s, from Italian lazareto "place set aside for performance of quarantine" (especially that of Venice, which received many ships from plague-infested districts in the East), from the Biblical proper name Lazarus (q.v.). Meaning "building set apart for quarantine" is c. 1600 in English. The word in Italian was perhaps influenced by the name of another hospital in Venice, that associated with the church of Santa Maria di Nazaret . Sometimes Englished as lazaret ; also known as lazar house (1520s).

 *kwetwer- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "four."

 It might form all or part of: cadre ; cahier ; carillon ; carrefour ; catty-cornered ; diatessaron ; escadrille ; farthing ; firkin ; fortnight ; forty ; four ; fourteen ; fourth ; quadrant ; quadraphonic ; quadratic ; quadri- ; quadrilateral ; quadriliteral ; quadrille ; quadriplegia ; quadrivium ; quadroon ; quadru- ; quadruped ; quadruple ; quadruplicate ; quarantine ; quarrel (n.2) "square-headed bolt for a crossbow;" quarry (n.2) "open place where rocks are excavated;" quart ; quarter ; quarterback ; quartermaster ; quarters ; quartet ; quarto ; quaternary ; quatrain ; quattrocento ; quire (n.1) "set of four folded pages for a book;" squad ; square ; tessellated ; tetra- ; tetracycline ; tetrad ; tetragrammaton ; tetrameter ; tetrarch ; trapezium .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit catvarah , Avestan čathwaro , Persian čatvar , Greek tessares , Latin quattuor , Oscan petora , Old Church Slavonic četyre , Lithuanian keturi , Old Irish cethir , Welsh pedwar .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sequester 

 late 14c., sequestren, transitive, "remove (something), set aside; quarantine, isolate (someone); excommunicate;" also intransitive...

 isolate 

 "to set or place apart, to detach so as to make alone," by 1786, a back-formation from isolated (q.v.). The translation of this work is well performed, excepting that fault from which few translations are wholly exempt, and which is daily tending to corrupt our language, the ado

 insulate 

 1530s, "make into an island," from Late Latin insulatus "made like an island," from insula "island" (see isle). Sense of "place in an isolated situation, cause (someone or something) to be detached from surroundings" is from 1785. Electrical/chemical sense of "block from electric

 ballpark 

 also ball-park, "baseball stadium," 1893, short for baseball (or football) park; see ball (n.1) + park (n.). To be in the ballpark in the figurative sense of "within an acceptable range of approximation" is first recorded 1954, originally in the jargon of atomic weapons scientist

 canteen 

 1744 (in a recollection from c. 1710), "store in a military camp," from French cantine "sutler's shop" (17c.), from Italian cantina "wine cellar, vault," diminutive of canto "a side, corner, angle." Thus it is perhaps another descendant of the many meanings that were attached to 

 reason 

 c. 1200, resoun, "the intellectual faculty that adopts actions to ends," also "statement in an argument, statement of explanation or justification," from Anglo-French resoun, Old French raison "course; matter; subject; language, speech; thought, opinion," from Latin rationem (nom

 conniption 

 "attack of hysteria," 1833, in conniption fit, American English, origin uncertain; perhaps a fanciful formation related to corruption, which was used in a sense of "anger" from 1799, or from English dialectal canapshus "ill-tempered, captious," which probably is a corruption of c

 moonlight 

 "hold a second job, especially at night," 1957 (implied in the verbal noun moonlighting), from moonlighter "one who takes a second job after hours" (1954), from the notion of working by the light of the moon; see moonlight (n.). Earlier the verb had been used to mean "commit crim

 democracy 

 "government by the people, system of government in which the sovereign power is vested in the people as a whole exercising power directly or by elected officials; a state so governed," 1570s, from French démocratie (14c.), from Medieval Latin democratia (13c.), from Greek dēmokra

 alchemy 

 "medieval chemistry; the supposed science of transmutation of base metals into silver or gold" (involving also the quest for the universal solvent, quintessence, etc.), mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic al-kimiya,

 Share quarantine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarantine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarantine">Etymology of quarantine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of quarantine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarantine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of quarantine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarantine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of quarantine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarantine. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of quarantine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarantine (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near quarantine 
 quantitation 
 quantitative 
 quantitive 
 quantity 
 quantum 
 quarantine 
 quark 
 quarrel 
 quarrelsome 
 quarry 
 quarryman 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix