URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/audio-
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:26:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Audio- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Audio- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of audio- 

 audio- 

 word-forming element meaning "sound, hearing," from combining form of Latin audire "to hear" (from PIE root *au- "to perceive"); used in English word formation by 1890s.
 also from 1890s 

 Entries linking to audio- 

 audio (n.) 

 "sound," especially recorded or transmitted sound signals, 1934, abstracted from word-forming element audio- (q.v.), which is from Latin audire "to hear" (from PIE root *au- "to perceive").

 audiology (n.) 

 "science of hearing and treatment of deafness," 1946, from audio- + -ology . Related: Audiologist .

 audiophile 
 audiotape 
 audiovisual 
 *au- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fast 

 Fast-forward is by 1948, originally of audio tape....

 record 

 Record-player is attested from 1919; record-album " audio recordings issued as a collection" is by 1936....

 epithet 

 "descriptive name for a person or thing," 1570s, from French épithète or directly from Latin epitheton (source also of Spanish epíteto, Portuguese epitheto, Italian epiteto), from Greek epitheton "an epithet; something added," noun use of adjective (neuter of epithetos) "attribut

 reefer 

 "marijuana cigarette," 1920s, perhaps an alteration of Mexican Spanish grifo "marijuana, drug addict" [OED]; or perhaps from reef (v.), on resemblance to a rolled sail. It also meant "pickpocket" in criminal slang (by 1935), and Century Dictionary also has it as "oyster that grow

 goosebumps 

 also goose-bumps, "peculiar tingling of the skin produced by cold, fear, etc.; the sensation described as 'cold water down the back'" [Farmer], 1859, from goose (n.) + bump (n.). So called because the rough condition of the skin during the sensation resembles the skin of a plucke

 play 

 Middle English pleien, from Old English plegan, plegian "move lightly and quickly, occupy or busy oneself, amuse oneself; engage in active exercise; frolic; engage in children's play; make sport of, mock; perform music." It is from Proto-West Germanic *plegōjanan "occupy oneself 

 giraffe 

 long-necked ruminant animal of Africa, 1590s, giraffa, from Italian giraffa, from Arabic zarafa, probably from an African language. Earlier Middle English spellings varied wildly, depending on the foreign source, and included jarraf, ziraph, and gerfauntz, some apparently directl

 ofay 

 African-American vernacular, "white person," 1925, of unknown origin. If, as is sometimes claimed, it derives from an African word, none corresponding to it has been found. Perhaps the most plausible speculation is Yoruba ófé "to disappear" (as from a powerful enemy), with the se

 superstition 

 early 13c., supersticioun, "false religious belief or system, worship of pagan gods; ignorant fear of the unknown and mysterious, irrational faith in supernatural powers," from Latin superstitionem (nominative superstitio) "prophecy, soothsaying; dread of the supernatural, excess

 synagogue 

 late 12c., sinagog, "the regular public worship and religious instruction of the Jews," also a place or building for Hebrew worship, from Old French sinagoge "synagogue, mosque, pagan temple" (11c., Modern French synagogue), from Late Latin synagoga "congregation of Jews," from G

 Share audio- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/audio- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/audio-">Etymology of audio- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of audio-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/audio- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of audio-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/audio-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of audio-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/audio-. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of audio-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/audio- (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near audio- 
 auctioneer 
 audacious 
 audacity 
 audible 
 audience 
 audio- 
 audio 
 audiology 
 audiophile 
 audiotape 
 audiovisual 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix