URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/peach
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:43:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Peach - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Peach - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of peach 

 peach (n.) 

 c. 1400 peche, peoche , "fleshy fruit of the peach tree" (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French pesche "peach, peach tree" (Old North French peske , Modern French pêche ), and directly from Medieval Latin pesca , from Late Latin pessica , variant of persica "peach, peach tree," from Latin mālum Persicum , literally "Persian apple," translating Greek Persikon malon , from Persis "Persia" (see Persian ).

 Old English had it as persue, persoe , directly from Latin. In ancient Greek Persikos could mean "Persian" or "the peach." The tree is native to China, but reached Europe via Persia. By 1663 William Penn observed peaches in cultivation on American plantations. Meaning "attractive woman" is attested from 1754; that of "good person" is by 1904. Peaches and cream in reference to a type of complexion is from 1901. Peach blossom as the delicate pink hue of the peach blossom is from 1702. Georgia has been the Peach State since 1939, though it was noted as a leading peach-grower by 1908.
 also from c. 1400 

 peach (v.) 

 "to inform against, betray one's accomplices," 1560s (earlier pechen , "to accuse, indict, bring to trial," c. 1400), a shortening of appeach , empeach , obsolete variants of impeach . For form, compare peal (v.), also Middle English pelour "an accuser," from appellour . Related: Peached ; peaching; peacher .
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to peach 

 impeach (v.) 

 formerly also empeach , late 14c., empechen , "to impede, hinder, prevent;" early 15c., "cause to be stuck, run (a ship) aground," also "prevent (from doing something)," from Anglo-French empecher , Old French empeechier "to hinder, stop, impede; capture, trap, ensnare" (12c., Modern French empêcher ), from Late Latin impedicare "to fetter, catch, entangle," from assimilated form of in- "into, in" (from PIE root *en "in") + Latin pedica "a shackle, fetter," from pes (genitive pedis ) "foot" (from PIE root *ped- "foot").

 In law, at first in a broad sense, "to accuse, bring charges against" from late 14c.; more specifically, of the king or the House of Commons, "to bring formal accusation of treason or other high crime against (someone)" from mid-15c. The sense of "accuse a public officer of misconduct" had emerged from this by 1560s. The sense shift is perhaps via Medieval Latin confusion of impedicare with Latin impetere "attack, accuse" (see impetus ), which is from the Latin verb petere "aim for, rush at" (from PIE root *pet- "to rush, to fly").

 The Middle English verb apechen , probably from an Anglo-French variant of the source of impeach , was used from early 14c. in the sense "to accuse (someone), to charge (someone with an offense)." Related: Impeached ; impeaching .

 peal (v.) 

 1630s, "sound loudly, resound" (intransitive), from peal (n.). Transitive sense of "to utter or cause to ring loudly and sonorously" is by 1714. Related: Pealed ; pealing .

 Persian 
 peachy 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 talk 

 c. 1200, talken, "speak, discourse, say something," probably a diminutive or frequentative form related to Middle English tale "story," and ultimately from the same source as tale (q.v.), with rare English formative -k (compare hark from hear, stalk from steal, smirk from smile) 

 tattle 

 late 15c., in Caxton's translation of "Reynard the Fox," "to stammer, prattle like a baby," senses now obsolete, probably from Middle Flemish tatelen "to stutter," parallel to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German, East Frisian tateren "to chatter, babble," Middle English tatteren "spe

 blab 

 mid-15c., blabben, "to talk idly and foolishly, talk too much," apparently from Middle English noun blabbe "one who does not control his tongue" (late 13c.), which probably is echoic (compare Old Norse blabbra, Danish blabbre "babble," German plappern "to babble"). It is attested

 drupe 

 stone-fruit," one with a fleshy or soft outer part and a hard nut or stone at the center (as a plum, cherry, apricot, or peach...

 apricot 

 Latin praecoquis early-ripe, can probably be attributed to the fact that the fruit was considered a variety of peach that...

 tell 

 Sense of "to reveal or disclose" is from c. 1400; that of "to act as an informer, to 'peach' " is recorded from 1901....

 prude 

 1704, "woman who affects or upholds modesty in conduct and thought in a degree considered rigid and excessive," from French prude "excessively prim or demure woman," first recorded in Molière. Perhaps it is a false back-formation or an ellipsis of preudefemme "a discreet, modest 

 pink 

 1570s, common name of Dianthus, a garden plant of various colors; a word of unknown origin. It is perhaps from pink (v.) via the notion of "perforated" (scalloped) petals. Or perhaps it is from Dutch pink "small, narrow," itself obscure (compare pinkie), via the term pinck oogen 

 sign 

 early 13c., signe, "gesture or motion of the hand," especially one meant to express thought or convey an idea, from Old French signe "sign, mark," from Latin signum "identifying mark, token, indication, symbol; proof; military standard, ensign; a signal, an omen; sign in the heav

 sing 

 Middle English singen, from Old English singan "to chant, sing," especially in joy or merriment; "celebrate, or tell in song" (class III strong verb; past tense sang, past participle sungen), from Proto-Germanic *sengwan (source also of Old Saxon singan, Old Frisian sionga, Middl

 Share peach 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/peach Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/peach">Etymology of peach by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of peach. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/peach Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of peach," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/peach. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of peach." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/peach. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of peach." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/peach (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near peach 
 peaceful 
 peace-keeping 
 peacemaker 
 peacenik 
 peacetime 
 peach 
 peachy 
 peacock 
 peahen 
 peak 
 peaked 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix