URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/letter
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:04:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Letter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Letter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of letter 

 letter (n.1) 

 c. 1200, "graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character conveying information about sound in speech," from Old French letre "character, letter; missive, note," in plural, "literature, writing, learning" (10c., Modern French lettre ), from Latin littera (also litera ) "letter of the alphabet," also "an epistle, writing, document; literature, great books; science, learning;" a word of uncertain origin.

 According to Watkins, perhaps via Etruscan from Greek diphthera "tablet" (with change of d- to l- as in lachrymose ), from a hypothetical root *deph- "to stamp." In this sense it replaced Old English bocstæf , literally "book staff" (compare German Buchstabe "letter, character," from Old High German buohstab , from Proto-Germanic *bok-staba-m ).

 Latin littera also meant "a writing, document, record," and in plural litteræ "a letter, epistle, missive communication in writing," a sense passed through French and attested in English letter since early 13c. (replacing Old English ærendgewrit "written message," literally "errand-writing"). The Latin plural also meant "literature, books," and figuratively "learning, liberal education, schooling" (see letters ).

 The custom of giving the school letter as an achievement award in sports, attested by 1908, is said to have originated with University of Chicago football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg. Earlier in reference to colleges it meant "university degree or honor that adds initials to a name" (1888). Expression to the letter "precisely" is from 1520s (earlier after the letter , mid-14c.). Letter-quality (adj.) "suitable for (business) letters" is from 1977. For letters patent (with French word order) see patent (n.).
 also from c. 1200 

 letter (v.) 

 "write in letters," 1660s, from letter (n.1). Earlier it was used in a now obsolete sense "instruct" (mid-15c.). Related: Lettered ; lettering .
 also from 1660s 

 letter (n.2) 

 "one who lets" in any sense, c. 1400, agent noun from let (v.).
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to letter 

 lachrymose (adj.) 

 also lacrymose , 1660s, "tear-like," from Latin lacrimosus "tearful, sorrowful, weeping," also "causing tears, lamentable," from lacrima , lacryma "a tear," a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma "a tear," from dakryein "to shed tears, weep, lament with tears," from dakry "a tear" (reconstructed in Watkins to be from PIE *dakru- "tear;" see tear (n.1)).

 The meaning "given to tears, tearful" is attested by 1727; the meaning "of a mournful character" is by 1822. Related: Lachrymosely .

 The -d- to -l- alteration in Latin is the so-called "Sabine -L-"; compare Latin olere "smell," from root of odor , and Ulixes , the Latin form of Greek Odysseus .

 The Medieval Latin practice of writing -ch- for -c- before Latin -r- also altered anchor , pulchritude , sepulchre . The -y- is pedantic, from the former belief that the word was pure Greek. Earlier in the same sense was lachrymental (1620s). Middle English had lacrymable "tearful" (mid-15c.).

 let (v.) 

 Old English lætan (Northumbrian leta ) "to allow; to leave behind, depart from; leave undone; bequeath," also "to rent, put to rent or hire" (class VII strong verb; past tense let , leort , past participle gelæten ), from Proto-Germanic *letan (source also of Old Saxon latan , Old Frisian leta , Dutch laten , Old High German lazan , German lassen , Gothic letan "to leave, let"), from PIE *led- , extended form of root *‌‌lē- "to let go, slacken." If that derivation is correct, the etymological sense might be "let go through weariness, neglect."

 The idea of slackening lies at the root of both applications of the term. When we speak of letting one go, letting him do something, we conceive him as previously restrained by a band, the loosening or slackening of which will permit the execution of the act in question. ... At other times the slackness is attributed to the agent himself, when 
 let acquires the sense of being slack in action, delaying or omitting to do. [Hensleigh Wedgwood, "A Dictionary of English Etymology," 1859] 

 He points to similar developments in French laisser "to let" from Latin laxare "to slacken," German lassen "to permit, to let," from dialectal lass "loose."

 "The shortening of the root vowel ... has not been satisfactorily explained" [OED]. Of blood, from late Old English. Other Old and Middle English senses include "regard as, consider; behave toward; allow to escape; pretend;" to let (someone) know and to let fly (arrows, etc.) preserve the otherwise obsolete sense of "to cause to."

 To let (someone) off "allow to go unpunished, excuse from service" is from 1814. To let on is from 1725 as "allow (something) to be known, betray one's knowledge of," 1822 as "pretend" (OED finds a similar use in the phrase never let it on him in a letter from 1637). To let out is late 12c. as "allow to depart" (transitive); intransitive use "be concluded," of schools, meetings, etc., is from 1888, considered by Century Dictionary (1895) to be "Rural, U.S." Of garments, etc., late 14c.

 Let alone "abstain from interfering with" is in Old English; the phrase in the sense "not to mention, to say nothing of" is from 1812. To let (something) be "leave it alone" is from c. 1300; let it be "let it pass, leave it alone" is from early 14c. To let go is from c. 1300 as "allow to escape," 1520s as "cease to restrain," 1530s as "dismiss from one's thoughts." Let it go "let it pass, no matter" is as old as Chaucer's Wife of Bath: "But age allas Hath me biraft my beautee Lat it go, far wel, the deuel go ther with!" [c. 1395]. Let me see "show me" is from c. 1300.

 lettered 
 lettering 
 letters 
 patent 
 alliteration 
 belles-lettres 
 letter-bag 
 letter-box 
 letter-carrier 
 letter-head 
 letter-man 
 letter-opener 
 letter-perfect 
 letter-press 
 letter-rack 
 literal 
 literary 
 literate 
 See All Related Words (30) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 patent 

 late 14c., "open letter or official document from some authority granting permission to do something; a licence granting an office, right, title, etc.," shortened from Anglo-French lettre patent (also in Medieval Latin litteræ patentes), literally "open letter" (late 13c.), from 

 alliteration 

 1650s, "repetition of the same sound or letter at the beginning of words in close succession," from Modern Latin alliterationem (nominative alliteratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of alliterare "to begin with the same letter," from Latin ad "to" (see ad-) + littera

 belles-lettres 

 "elegant literature, literature as fine art," 1710, French, literally "fine letters," from belles, plural of belle, fem. of beau "fine, beautiful" (see beau) + lettres, plural of lettre "letter" (see letter (n.)). The literary equivalent of beaux arts; its boundaries never have b

 brief 

 genitive brevis), noun derivative of adjective brevis "short, little" (from PIE root *mregh-u- "short") which came to mean "letter..., summary," specifically a letter of the pope (less ample and solemn than a bull), and thus came to mean "letter of authority...In German, Brief has become the general word for "an epistle or letter."...

 chi 

 22nd letter of the Greek alphabet, representing a -kh- sound (see ch)....The letter is shaped like an X, and so the Greek letter name was used figuratively to signify such a shape or arrangement...things placed crosswise;" khiastos "arranged diagonally; marked with an X;" khiazein "to mark with an 'X', to write the letter...

 epistle 

 Old English epistol and in part directly from Old French epistle, epistre (Modern French épitre), from Latin epistola "a letter...," from Greek epistole "message, letter, command, commission," whether verbal or in writing, from epistellein "send to, send...as a message or letter," from epi "to" (see epi-) + stellein in its secondary sense of "to dispatch, send," from PIE *stel-yo...Specific sense of "letter from an apostle forming part of canonical scripture" is c. 1200....

 cedilla 

 "mark placed under the letter -c- in certain situations," 1590s, from Spanish cedilla, zedilla, literally "little z," from...a Latin-like diminutive of Greek zēta "the letter 'z'" (see zed)....The mark, mainly used in French and Portuguese (formerly also used in Spanish), was derived from that letter and indicates...

 a 

 indefinite article, the form of an used before consonants, mid-12c., a weakened form of Old English an "one" (see an). The disappearance of the -n- before consonants was mostly complete by mid-14c. After c. 1600 the -n- also began to vanish before words beginning with a sounded -

 A-1 

 also A1, A-one, "first-rate," 1837 (in Dickens); a figurative use from Lloyd's of London marine insurance company's system for selective rating of merchant vessels ("Register of British and Foreign Shipping"), where it is the designation for ships in first-class condition. The le

 alpha 

 c. 1300, from Latin alpha, from Greek alpha, from Hebrew or Phoenician aleph (see aleph). The Greeks added -a because Greek words cannot end in most consonants. The sense of "beginning" of anything is from late 14c., and in this it is often paired with omega (the last letter in t

 Share letter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/letter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/letter">Etymology of letter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of letter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/letter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of letter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/letter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of letter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/letter. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of letter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/letter (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near letter 
 lethargy 
 Lethe 
 Letitia 
 Leto 
 Lett 
 letter 
 letter-bag 
 letter-box 
 letter-carrier 
 lettered 
 letter-head 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close