URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/while
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:40:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: While - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

While - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of while 

 while (n.) 

 "span of time," especially "short space of time during which something is to happen or be done or certain conditions prevail;" Old English hwile , accusative of hwil "a space of time," from Proto-Germanic *hwilo , which is reconstructed to be from PIE *kwi-lo- , suffixed form of root *kweie- "to rest, be quiet." The notion of "period of rest" became in Germanic "period of time."

 Now largely superseded by time (n.) but preserved in formulaic constructions (such as all the while ). The sense of "time spent in doing something, expenditure of time" is in worthwhile and phrases such as worth (one's) while .

 As a conjunction, "at the same time that; as long as" (late Old English), it represents Old English þa hwile þe , literally "the while that."

 The form whiles (with adverbial genitive) is recorded from early 13c.; whilst is from late 14c., with unetymological ending as in amongst , amidst . Service while-you-wait is attested from 1911. Wycliffe (1384) translates Latin vicissitudo with whileness .

 Germanic cognates include Old Saxon hwil , Old Frisian hwile , Old High German hwila , German Weile , Gothic hveila "space of time, while"), originally "rest" (compare Old Norse hvila "bed," hvild "rest."

 while (v.) 

 "to cause (time) to pass (without dullness)," 1630s, earlier "to occupy or engage (someone or something) for a period of time," c. 1600. This is considered to be a formation from while (n.) rather than from Middle English hwulen "to have leisure," which is from a Germanic verb form of while (n.) (compare German weilen "to stay, linger").

 An association with phrases such as Shakespearean beguile the day , Latin diem decipere , French tromper le temps "has led to the substitution of WILE v by some modern writers" [OED, 1989]; compare see wile (v.).
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to while 

 amidst (prep.) 

 a variant of amid (q.v.) with adverbial genitive -s and unetymological -t . Amidde became amyddes (13c.) and acquired the -t from mid-15c., probably by association with superlatives in -st ; the pattern also yielded amongst , against , betwixt , whilst , also archaic alongst (13c.-17c.).

 There is a tendency to use 
 amidst more distributively than 
 amid, e.g. of things scattered about, or a thing moving, in the midst of others. [OED]

 time (n.) 

 Old English tima "temporal duration, limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *tima- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), reconstructed to be from PIE *di-mon- , suffixed form of root *da- "to divide" (compare tide ).

 The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" is recorded from late 14c. Personified as an aged bald man (but with a forelock) carrying a scythe and an hour-glass.

 In English, a single word encompasses time as "extent" and "point" (French temps / fois , German zeit / mal ) as well as "hour" (as in what time is it? ; compare French heure , German Uhr ).

 It is attested from mid-14c. as "one of a number of repeated instances" ( how many times? ). Extended senses such as "occasion," "the right time," "leisure," or times (v.) "multiplied by" developed in Old and Middle English, probably as a natural outgrowth of such phrases as "He commends her a hundred times to God" (Old French La comande a Deu cent foiz ).

 to have a good time ( = a time of enjoyment) was common in Eng. from c 1520 to c 1688; it was app. retained in America, whence readopted in Britain in 19th c. [OED, 1989]

 Time of day was a popular 17c. salutation ("Good time of day vnto your Royall Grace," "Richard III," I.iii.18), hence give (one) the time of day "greet socially" (1590s; earlier give good day , mid-14c.). It is preserved in negation, as what is withheld or denied in disdain or as a snub.

 As "a period considered with reference to prevailing conditions," late 15c. [Men say comynly that after that the tyme goth, so must folke go]. Also in Hamlet's "The time is out of joint," etc. The times "the current age" is attested by 1590s. Times as the name of a newspaper dates from 1788. To be behind the times "old-fashioned" is from 1831; to be ahead of (one's) time is by 1837.

 Time warp is attested by 1954; time-traveling in the science fiction sense is by 1895 in H.G. Wells' "The Time Machine."

 Time after time "repeatedly" is by 1630s; time and again "repeatedly" is by 1864. From time to time "at intervals" is late 14c.

 As the signal for the end of service in a public house, 1912, hence "closing time" in a general sense. The meaning "duration of a sentence of imprisonment" is by 1837; to do time "serve a prison sentence" is by 1865. 

 To be in time "not too late" is by late 15c. Adverbial on time "punctually" is by 1821. To be on time "punctual" (adj.) is by 1854 in railroading. To have no time for "lack respect or admiration for" is by 1911.

 About time , ironically for "long past due time," is recorded from 1920. Next time "next occasion" is late 14c. Time off (n.) "a break from one's occupation" is by 1930.

 wile 
 worthwhile 
 awhile 
 erstwhile 
 meanwhile 
 somewhile 
 whilom 
 whilst 
 *kweie- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 piece 

 c. 1200, pece, "fixed amount, measure, portion;" c. 1300, "fragment of an object, bit of a whole, slice of meat; separate fragment, section, or part," from Old French piece "piece, bit portion; item; coin" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *pettia, probably from Gaulish *pettsi (compare 

 spell 

 early 14c., spellen, "read letter by letter, write or say the letters of;" c. 1400, "form words by means of letters," said in most etymology sources to be from Anglo-French espeller, Old French espelir "to mean, signify; explain, interpret," also "spell out letters, pronounce, re

 patch 

 "piece of cloth used to mend another material," late 14c., pacche, of obscure origin, perhaps a variant of pece, pieche, from Old North French pieche (see piece (n.1)), or from an unrecorded Old English word (Old English had claðflyhte for "a patch"). Meaning "portion of any surf

 bib 

 linen worn over the breast, especially by children, to keep the front of the dress clean while eating, 1570s, from verb bibben...If the latter, it is difficult now to say whether this is because it was worn while drinking or because it "soaked up" spills...

 Septembrist 

 Hence also septembrize "assassinate while in custody" (1793)....Pétion goes in tricolor scarf; speaks "the austere language of the law:" the killers give up, while he is there; when his...

 industrious 

 It retains the etymological sense of the Latin word while industrial serves in the modern senses....

 sniffle 

 Sniffly (1897) tends to refer to physical symptoms, "characterized by sniffling;" while sniffy (1858) means "inclined to...

 snap 

 1550s, perhaps late 15c., "a quick, sudden bite or cut; an eager seizing," from snap (v.), or, if the earlier date, a noun from Dutch or Low German snappen "to snap," which are probably related to Middle Low German or Middle Dutch snavel "bill, beak," which Watkins traced to a hy

 span 

 [distance between two objects] Middle English spanne, a unit of length, from Old English span "distance between the thumb and the middle or little finger of an extended hand" (as a measure of length, roughly nine inches), probably related to Middle Dutch spannen "to join, fasten,

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 Share while 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/while Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/while">Etymology of while by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of while. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/while Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of while," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/while. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of while." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/while. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of while." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/while (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near while 
 whiff 
 whiffle 
 Whig 
 Whiggery 
 Whiggish 
 while 
 whilom 
 whilst 
 whim 
 whimper 
 whimsical 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix