URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/noise
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:44:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Noise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Noise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of noise 

 noise (n.) 

 c. 1200, "sound of a musical instrument;" mid-13c., "loud speech, outcry, clamor, shouting;" c. 1300, "a sound of any kind from any source," especially a loud and disagreeable sound, from Old French noise "din, disturbance, uproar, brawl" (11c., in modern French only in phrase chercher noise "to pick a quarrel"), also "rumor, report, news," a word of uncertain origin, replacing Replaced native gedyn (see din ).

 According to some, it is from Latin nausea "disgust, annoyance, discomfort," literally "seasickness" (see nausea ). According to others, it is from Latin noxia "hurting, injury, damage." OED considers that "the sense of the word is against both suggestions," but nausea could have developed a sense in Vulgar Latin of "unpleasant situation, noise, quarrel" (compare Old Provençal nauza "noise, quarrel"). Confusion with annoy , noisome , and other similar words seems to have occurred.

 From c. 1300 as "a disturbance; report, rumor, scandal." In Middle English sometimes also "a pleasant sound." In 16c.-17c. "a band or company of musicians." Noises off , as a stage instruction in theater, "sound effects, usually loud and confused, made off stage but to be heard by the audience as part of the play," is by 1908.
 also from c. 1200 

 noise (v.) 

 late 14c., noisen , "to praise; to talk loudly about, spread by rumor or report," from noise (n.) or from Old French noisier , from the noun in French. Related: Noised ; noising .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to noise 

 annoy (v.) 

 late 13c., anoien , annuien , "to harm, hurt, injure; be troublesome or vexatious to, disquiet, upset," from Anglo-French anuier , Old French enoiier "to weary, vex, anger," anuier "be troublesome or irksome to;" according to French sources these are from Late Latin inodiare "make loathsome," from Latin (esse) in odio "(it is to me) hateful," from ablative of odium "hatred," from PIE root *od- (2) "to hate" (see odium ).

 Also in Middle English as a noun, "feeling of irritation, displeasure, distaste" (c. 1200, still in Shakespeare), from Old French enoi , anoi "annoyance;" the same French word was borrowed into English later in a different sense as ennui . And compare Spanish enojo "offense, injury, anger;" enojar "to molest, trouble, vex." Middle English also had annoyful and annoyous (both late 14c.).

 din (n.) 

 "loud noise of some duration, a resonant sound long continued," Old English dyne (n.), related to dynian (v.), from Proto-Germanic *duniz (source also of Old Norse dynr , Danish don , Middle Low German don "noise"), from PIE root *dwen- "to make noise" (source also of Sanskrit dhuni "roaring, a torrent").

 nausea 
 noisome 
 noiseless 
 noise-maker 
 noisy 
 white noise 
 *nau- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nausea 

 early 15c., "vomiting," from Latin nausea "seasickness," from Ionic Greek nausia (Attic nautia) "seasickness, nausea, disgust," literally "ship-sickness," from naus "ship" (from PIE root *nau- "boat"). Despite its etymology, the word in English seems never to have been restricted

 resound 

 late 14c., resownen, resounen, of a place, "re-echo, sound back, return an echo; reverberate with," from Anglo-French resuner, Old French resoner "reverberate" (12c., Modern French résonner), from Latin resonare "sound again, resound, echo" (source also of Spanish resonar, Italia

 dissonance 

 early 15c., dissonaunce, "disagreement, discrepancy, incongruity, inconsistency" (between things), from Old French dissonance and directly from Medieval Latin dissonantia, from Latin dissonantem, present participle of dissonare "differ in sound," from dis- "apart" (see dis-) + so

 obstreperous 

 noisy, boisterous, especially in opposition," c. 1600, from Latin obstreperus "clamorous," from obstrepere "drown with noise..., make a noise against, oppose noisily," from ob "against" (see ob-) + strepere "make a noise," from PIE *strep-, said to...

 racket 

 "loud, disorderly, confusing noise," 1560s, probably imitative....Klein and Century Dictionary compare Gaelic racaid "noise, disturbance," but OED says this "is no doubt from Eng."...Meaning "dishonest activity" (1785) is perhaps an extended sense, from the notion of "something going on" or "noise or disturbance...

 explosion 

 1620s, "action of driving out with violence and noise," from French explosion, from Latin explosionem (nominative explosio...Meaning "a going off with violence and noise" is from 1660s....

 crow 

 Old English crawan "make a loud noise like a crow," probably imitative (see crow (n.))....From mid-13c. as "make a loud noise like a cock," which oddly has become the main sense, the use of the word in reference...

 fizzle 

 1530s, "to break wind without noise," probably altered from obsolete fist, from Middle English fisten "break wind" (see feisty) + frequentative suffix -le. Related: Fizzled; fizzling. Meaning "make a noise as of a liquid or gas forced out a narrow aperture" is from 1859, "usually

 alms 

 "charitable relief of the poor," especially as a religious duty, also "that which is given to relieve the poor or needy," Old English ælmesse "almsgiving, act of relieving the needy," from Proto-Germanic *alemosna (source also of Old Saxon alamosna, Old High German alamuosan, Old

 slam 

 "a severe blow," 1670s, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian slamre, Swedish slemma "to slam, bang") of imitative origin. The meaning "a violent closing of a door" is from 1817. The meaning "an insult, put-down" is from 1884. Slam-bang (adv.) "suddenly, violentl

 Share noise 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/noise Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/noise">Etymology of noise by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of noise. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/noise Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of noise," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/noise. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of noise." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/noise. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of noise." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/noise (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near noise 
 no-go 
 no-good 
 Noh 
 no-hitter 
 nohow 
 noise 
 noiseless 
 noise-maker 
 noisome 
 noisy 
 nolens volens 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix