URL: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/hunch
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:52:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: hunch - Wiktionary, the free dictionary

hunch - Wiktionary, the free dictionary 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Community portal 
 Requested entries 
 Recent changes 
 Random entry 
 Help 
 Glossary 
 Contact us 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Beginning

 1 
 English 

 Toggle English subsection 

 1.1 
 Etymology 

 1.2 
 Pronunciation 

 1.3 
 Noun 

 1.3.1 
 Synonyms 

 1.3.2 
 Derived terms 

 1.3.3 
 Translations 

 1.4 
 Verb 

 1.4.1 
 Derived terms 

 1.4.2 
 Translations 

 1.5 
 Derived terms 

 1.6 
 Anagrams 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 hunch 

 26 languages 

 বাংলা 
 Ελληνικά 
 Eesti 
 فارسی 
 Suomi 
 Français 
 Magyar 
 Հայերեն 
 Ido 
 ಕನ್ನಡ 
 한국어 
 Kurdî 
 Malagasy 
 മലയാളം 
 Oromoo 
 Polski 
 Português 
 Русский 
 Svenska 
 Kiswahili 
 தமிழ் 
 తెలుగు 
 Українська 
 اردو 
 Tiếng Việt 
 中文 

 Entry 

 Discussion 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 

 Print/export

 Create a book 
 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wiktionary, the free dictionary

 English
 [ edit ] 

 Etymology
 [ edit ] 

 Assibilated variant of hunk , of uncertain origin.

 Alternatively, a derivative of hump , via an earlier Middle English *hunche , *humpchin , from *hump +‎ -chin, -chen ( diminutive suffix ) , equivalent to hump +‎ -kin . In the sense of an intuitive impression, said to be from the old gambling superstition that it brings luck to touch the hump of a hunchback.

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 IPA ( key ) : /hʌnt͡ʃ/ , /hʌnʃ/ 

 Audio ( US ) : ( file ) 

 Rhymes: -ʌntʃ 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 hunch ( plural hunches ) 

 A hump ; a protuberance .

 A stooped or curled posture ; a slouch .
 The old man walked with a hunch . 

 A theory , idea , or guess ; an intuitive impression that something will happen.
 Synonym: inkling 
 I have a hunch they'll find a way to solve the problem. 

 I've learned to trust my hunches . 

 A hunk ; a lump; a thick piece.
 a hunch of bread 

 1925 July – 1926 May , A[rthur] Conan Doyle , “ (please specify the chapter number) ”, in The Land of Mist (eBook no. 0601351h.html), Australia: Project Gutenberg Australia , published April 2019: "The greedy little bastards! They had a ' unch of bread each when I 'ad my dinner." 

 A push or thrust, as with the elbow.

 Synonyms
 [ edit ] 

 ( guess ) : hint , clue , inkling 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 hunchbacked 
 hunch cuddy hunch 
 hunchless 
 hunch over 
 unhunch 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 hump; protuberance

 Azerbaijani: donqa 

 Bulgarian: гърбица   f ( gărbica ) 

 Catalan: gep   (ca) 

 Czech: hrb   (cs)   m 

 Dutch: bochel   (nl)   m , bult   (nl)   m 

 Esperanto: ĝibo 

 Finnish: kyttyrä   (fi) 

 French: bosse   (fr)   f 

 Galician: chepa   (gl) 

 German: Hügel   (de)   m , Protuberanz   (de)   f , Buckel   (de)   m 

 Greek: καμπούρα   (el)   f ( kampoúra ) , όγκος   (el)   m ( ógkos ) 

 Italian: gibbo 

 Latin: gibbus   m , gibber   m 

 Macedonian: гр́пка   f ( gŕpka ) 

 Portuguese: corcunda   (pt)   f , corcova   (pt)   f , protuberância   (pt)   f 

 Sicilian: jimmu   (scn) 

 Spanish: joroba   (es)   f , corcova   (es)   f , giba   (es)   f , chepa   (es)   f ( colloquial ) , gibosidad   f 

 Turkish: tümsek   (tr) , hörgüç   (tr) , kambur   (tr) 

 stooped or curled posture

 Bulgarian: изгърбване   n ( izgărbvane ) 

 Dutch: gekromde houding   f , kromme rug   m 

 Finnish: kumara   (fi) 

 German: gekrümmte Haltung   f , krummer Rücken   m 

 Greek: καμπούρα   (el)   f ( kampoúra ) 

 Hungarian: púp   (hu) , kinövés   (hu) , dudor   (hu) 

 Icelandic: hokinn 

 Macedonian: подгрбу́вање   n ( podgrbúvanje ) 

 Russian: сутулая поза   f ( sutulaja poza ) 

 Uzbek: bukri   (uz) 

 idea, theory — see also guess 

 Bulgarian: предчувствие   (bg)   n ( predčuvstvie ) 

 Catalan: pressentiment   (ca)   m 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 预感   (zh) ( yùgǎn ) 

 Czech: tušení   n , předtucha   f , pocit   (cs)   m 

 Dutch: ingeving   (nl)   f , idee   (nl)   f 

 Esperanto: intuicio 

 Finnish: aavistus   (fi) 

 French: intuition   (fr) , pressentiment   (fr) 

 German: Ahnung   (de)   f , Gefühl   (de)   n 

 Greek: προαίσθημα   (el)   n ( proaísthima ) 

 Hebrew: תְּחוּשַׁת בֶּטֶן   f ( tẖushát béten ) 

 Hungarian: gyanú   (hu) , sejtelem   (hu) , megérzés   (hu) 

 Irish: tuaileas   m 

 Italian: intuizione   (it)   f , presentimento   (it)   m 

 Macedonian: пре́тчувство   n ( prétčuvstvo ) 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: forutanelse   (no)   m , hunch   m 

 Portuguese: palpite   (pt)   m , pressentimento   (pt)   m , intuição   (pt)   f 

 Russian: иде́я   (ru)   f ( idéja ) , дога́дка   (ru)   f ( dogádka ) 

 Spanish: corazonada   (es)   f , pálpito   (es)   m , intuición   (es)   f , tinca   (es)   f , presentimiento   (es)   m 

 Swedish: aning   (sv)   c , hum   (sv)   n 

 Tagalog: kutob 

 Turkish: his   (tr) , önsezi   (tr) , sezgi   (tr) 

 Uzbek: taxmin   (uz) 

 hunk; lump; thick piece

 Bulgarian: бу́ца   (bg)   f ( búca ) , кома́т   (bg)   m ( komát ) ( of bread ) 

 Finnish: kimpale   (fi) 

 German: dickes Stück   n 

 Macedonian: па́рче   n ( párče ) 

 push or thrust

 Finnish: tönäisy   (fi) 

 Verb
 [ edit ] 

 hunch ( third-person singular simple present hunches , present participle hunching , simple past and past participle hunched ) 

 ( intransitive ) To bend the top of one's body forward while raising one's shoulders.
 Synonyms: slouch , stoop , lean 
 Don't hunch over your computer if you want to avoid neck problems. 

 1961 , Muriel Spark , chapter 5, in The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie ‎ [1] , New York: HarperPerenniel, published 1994 , page 156 : Sandy, you will never get anywhere by hunching over your putter , hold your shoulders back and bend from the waist. 

 1978 , Armistead Maupin , “… and many happy returns”, in Tales of the City ‎ [2] , New York: Ballantine Books, page 76 : She rolled over and hunched into a fetal position . 

 ( transitive ) To raise (one's shoulders) (while lowering one's head or bending the top of one's body forward); to curve (one's body) forward ( sometimes followed by up ).
 They stood outside the door hunching themselves against the rain and puffing on their cigarettes. 

 He hunched up his shoulders and stared down at the ground. 

 1672 , Edward Ravenscroft , The Citizen Turn’d Gentleman ‎ [3] , London: Thomas Dring, act I, scene 1, page 4: Danc[ing] Mast[er]. [ … ] not too fast [ … ] keep you[r] leg[s] straight, [ … ] don’t hunch up your shoulders so; 

 1924 , Ford Madox Ford , Some Do Not ... ‎ [4] , New York: Grosset & Dunlap, Part 2, Chapter 2: If you hunch your shoulders too long against a storm your shoulders will grow bowed.... 

 1938 , Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings , New York: Scribner, Chapter 17, [5] 
 He would hunch his twisted body close and put out his gentle and crooked hand and touch the fawn. 

 1939 , John Steinbeck , chapter 10, in The Grapes of Wrath ‎ [6] , New York: Viking, published 1958 , page 142 : They sat looking out at the dark, at the square of light the kitchen lantern threw on the ground outside the door, with a hunched shadow of Grampa in the middle of it. 

 ( intransitive ) To walk (somewhere) while hunching one's shoulders.
 Synonym: slouch 
 1955 , J. P. Donleavy , chapter 2, in The Ginger Man ‎ [7] , New York: Dell, page 9: [ … ] the figure hunched up the road. 

 1969 , Ray Bradbury , “The Inspired Chicken Motel”, in I Sing the Body Electric ‎ [8] , New York: Knopf, page 57 : [ … ] once we had hunched in out of the sun and slunk through a cold pork-and-beans-on-bread lunch [ … ] my brother and I found a desert creek nearby and heaved rocks at each other to cool off. 

 1983 , Jack Vance , Suldrun’s Garden , Spatterlight Press, 2012, Chapter 18, [9] 
 [ … ] wheezing and grunting he hunched across the room. 

 ( transitive ) To thrust a hump or protuberance out of (something); to crook , as the back.
 1679 , John Dryden , Nathaniel Lee , Oedipus ‎ [10] , London: R. Bentley and M. Magnes, act I, page 6: [ … ] thou art all one errour; soul and body.
The first young tryal of some unskill’d Pow’r;
Rude in the making Art, and Ape of Jove.
Thy crooked mind within hunch’d out thy back;
And wander’d in thy limbs: 

 ( transitive ) To push or jostle with the elbow ; to push or thrust against (someone).
 Synonyms: elbow , nudge 
 1667 , “The Sixth Vision of Hell”, in Roger L’Estrange , transl., The Visions of Dom Francisco de Quevedo Villegas ‎ [11] , London: H. Herringman, pages 182–183 : After this, we saw a great Troop of Women upon the High-way to Hell, with their Bags; and their fellows, at their Heels, ever, and anon, hunching , and Justling one Another. 

 1748 , Samuel Richardson , Clarissa ‎ [12] , London, Volume 2, Letter 1, p. 8: Hickman, a great over-grown, lank-hair’d, chubby boy, who would be hunch’d and punch’d by every-body; and go home, with his finger in his eye, and tell his mother. 

 1899 , Sutton E. Griggs , chapter 6, in Imperium in Imperio ‎ [13] : He let his eyes scan the faces of all the white teachers, male and female, but would end up with a stare at the colored man sitting there. Finally, he hunched his seat-mate with his elbow and asked what man that was. 

 1974 , Maya Angelou , chapter 12, in Gather Together in My Name ‎ [14] , New York: Bantam, published 1975 , page 40 : She hunched me and winked. 

 1986 , Billy Roche , chapter 6, in Tumbling Down ‎ [15] , Dublin: Wolfhound Press, published 1994 , pages 102–103 : [ … ] Crunch burst through, pretending to be in Croke Park or somewhere, hunching me away with his shoulder and holding the ghost of other players at bay as he picked up the football. 

 ( intransitive , colloquial ) To have a hunch, or make an intuitive guess.
 2010 , Max Gunther, The Luck Factor : People who are instinctive hunchers go through some such process at every decision-making point of their lives. It is likely that children often make decisions and discern truths by hunching . 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 huncher 

 hunch over 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 to slouch, stoop

 Bulgarian: прегърбвам се ( pregărbvam se ) 

 Czech: ohnout se   pf , hrbit se   impf , shrbit se   pf , nahrbit se   n 

 Finnish: kyyristellä   (fi) , olla kumarassa 

 French: se voûter   (fr) 

 Greek: καμπουριάζω   (el) ( kampouriázo ) 

 Kazakh: бүкірею ( bükireyüw ) 

 Macedonian: се на́ведне ( se návedne ) , се подгр́бави ( se podgŕbavi ) , грба́вее ( grbávee ) 

 Māori: whakahake 

 Portuguese: curvar   (pt) 

 Russian: суту́литься   (ru) ( sutúlitʹsja ) , го́рбиться   (ru) ( górbitʹsja ) , сгиба́ться   (ru) ( sgibátʹsja ) 

 Swedish: huka   (sv) 

 to push or thrust suddenly

 Finnish: tönäistä   (fi) 

 to thrust out a hump or protuberance; to crook, as the back

 Bulgarian: извивам   (bg) ( izvivam ) 

 Finnish: köyristää   (fi) ( to crook ) 

 Macedonian: подгр́бави ( podgŕbavi ) , и́скриви ( ískrivi ) 

 to have a hunch, or make an intuitive guess

 Czech: mít tušení   impf , mít předtuchu   impf , tušit   (cs)   impf 

 Finnish: aavistaa   (fi) , uumoilla   (fi) , ounastella   (fi) , vaistota   (fi) 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 hunchback ( noun ) 

 play a hunch , play one's hunch , follow one's hunch 

 Anagrams
 [ edit ] 

 Chhun 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=hunch&oldid=92463222 "

 Categories : English 1-syllable words 
 English terms with IPA pronunciation 
 English terms with audio pronunciation 
 Rhymes:English/ʌntʃ 
 Rhymes:English/ʌntʃ/1 syllable 
 English lemmas 
 English nouns 
 English countable nouns 
 English terms with usage examples 
 English terms with quotations 
 English verbs 
 English intransitive verbs 
 English transitive verbs 
 English colloquialisms 

 Hidden categories: Pages with entries 
 Pages with 1 entry 
 Entries with translation boxes 
 Terms with Azerbaijani translations 
 Terms with Bulgarian translations 
 Terms with Catalan translations 
 Terms with Czech translations 
 Terms with Dutch translations 
 Terms with Esperanto translations 
 Terms with Finnish translations 
 Terms with French translations 
 Terms with Galician translations 
 Terms with German translations 
 Terms with Greek translations 
 Terms with Italian translations 
 Terms with Latin translations 
 Terms with Macedonian translations 
 Terms with Portuguese translations 
 Terms with Sicilian translations 
 Terms with Spanish translations 
 Terms with Turkish translations 
 Terms with Hungarian translations 
 Terms with Icelandic translations 
 Terms with Russian translations 
 Terms with Uzbek translations 
 Terms with Mandarin translations 
 Terms with Hebrew translations 
 Terms with Irish translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Bokmål translations 
 Terms with Swedish translations 
 Terms with Tagalog translations 
 Quotation templates to be cleaned 
 Terms with Kazakh translations 
 Terms with Māori translations 

 This page was last edited on 3 September 2026, at 22:55.

 Definitions and other text are available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 

 Privacy policy 

 About Wiktionary 

 Disclaimers 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 hunch 

 26 languages 

 Add topic