URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/annex
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:25:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Annex - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Annex - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of annex 

 annex (v.) 

 late 14c., "connect with," from Old French annexer "to join, attach" (13c.), from Medieval Latin annexare , frequentative of Latin annecetere "to bind to," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + nectere "to tie, bind" (from PIE root *ned- "to bind, tie"). Usually meaning "to join in a subordinate capacity," but that notion is not in the etymology. Of nations or territories, c. 1400. Related: Annexed ; annexing .
 also from late 14c. 

 annex (n.) 

 1540s, "an adjunct, accessory," from French annexe "that which is joined" (13c.), from annexer "to join" (see annex (v.)). Meaning "supplementary building" is from 1861.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to annex 

 ad- 

 word-forming element expressing direction toward or in addition to, from Latin ad "to, toward" in space or time; "with regard to, in relation to," as a prefix, sometimes merely emphatic, from PIE root *ad- "to, near, at."

 Simplified to a- before sc- , sp- and st- ; modified to ac- before many consonants and then re-spelled af- , ag- , al- , etc., in conformity with the following consonant (as in affection , aggression ). Also compare ap- (1).

 In Old French, reduced to a- in all cases (an evolution already underway in Merovingian Latin), but French refashioned its written forms on the Latin model in 14c., and English did likewise 15c. in words it had picked up from Old French. In many cases pronunciation followed the shift.

 Over-correction at the end of the Middle Ages in French and then English "restored" the -d- or a doubled consonant to some words that never had it ( accursed , afford ). The process went further in England than in France (where the vernacular sometimes resisted the pedantic), resulting in English adjourn , advance , address , advertisement (Modern French ajourner , avancer , adresser , avertissement ). In modern word-formation sometimes ad- and ab- are regarded as opposites, but this was not in classical Latin.

 *ned- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to bind, tie."

 It might form all or part of: annex ; annexation ; connect ; connection ; denouement ; net (n.) "netting, network, mesh used for capturing;" nettle ; nexus ; node ; nodule ; noose .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit nahyati "binds, ties;" Latin nodus "knot;" Old Irish nascim "I bind, oblige;" Old English net "netting, network."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wing 

 late 12c., wenge, "forelimb fitted for flight of a bird or bat," also the part of some insects resembling a wing in form or function, from Old Norse vængr "wing of a bird, aisle, etc." (cognate with Danish and Swedish vinge "wing"), of unknown origin, perhaps from a Proto-Germani

 anneal 

 The -n- was doubled after c. 1600 by analogy of Latinate words (annex, etc.; compare accursed, afford, allay)....

 ell 

 unit of measure, Old English eln, originally "forearm, length of the arm" (as a measure, anywhere from a foot and a half to two feet), from PIE root *el- "elbow, forearm." The exact distance varied, in part depending on whose arm was used as the base and whether it was measured f

 overtake 

 "to come up to, catch up with, catch in pursuit," early 13c., from over- + take (v.). According to OED (1989), originally "the running down and catching of a fugitive or beast of chase"; the editors find the sense of over- in this word "not so clear." The meaning "take by surpris

 assume 

 early 15c., "to arrogate, take upon oneself," from Latin assumere, adsumere "to take up, take to oneself, take besides, obtain in addition," from ad "to, toward, up to" (see ad-) + sumere "to take," from sub "under" (see sub-) + emere "to take" (from PIE root *em- "to take, distr

 edifice 

 late 14c., from Old French edifice "building" (12c.), from Latin aedificium "building," from aedificare "to erect a building," from aedis, variant of aedes "temple, sanctuary," usually a single edifice without partitions, also, in the plural, "dwelling house, building," originall

 building 

 c. 1300, "a structure;" late 14c., "act or process of constructing;" verbal noun from build (v.). Building-block is attested from 1846 as "one of a set of children's play blocks;" 1849 as "temporary support on which a ship's keel rests while the ship is being constructed;" 1856 a

 colonize 

 1620s, "to settle with colonists, plant or establish a colony in," from stem of Latin colonus "tiller of the soil, farmer" (see colony). From 1630s as "to migrate to and settle in." It is attested by 1790s in the sense of "to make another place into a national dependency" without

 seize 

 mid-13c., seisen, "take possession, take possession of" (land, goods, etc.) by force or authority, from Old French seisir "to take possession of, take by force; put in possession of, bestow upon" (Modern French saisir), from Late Latin sacire (8c.), which generally is held to be 

 affix 

 "fasten, join, attach," 1530s, from Medieval Latin affixare, frequentative of Latin affigere (past participle affixus) "fasten to, attach," from ad "to" (see ad-) + figere "to fasten" (from PIE root *dheigw- "to stick, fix"). According to OED first used by Scottish writers and th

 Share annex 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/annex Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/annex">Etymology of annex by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of annex. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/annex Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of annex," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/annex. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of annex." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/annex. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of annex." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/annex (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near annex 
 annals 
 Annam 
 Anne 
 anneal 
 annelid 
 annex 
 annexation 
 Annie 
 annihilate 
 annihilation 
 anniversary 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix