URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/scorpion
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:14:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Scorpion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Scorpion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of scorpion 

 scorpion (n.) 

 type of arachnid inhabiting warm regions, notable for its large "nippers" and the painful sting in its tail, c. 1200, scorpioun , perhaps late Old English, from Old French scorpion (12c.), from Latin scorpionem (nominative scorpio ), extended form of scorpius , from Greek skorpios "a scorpion" (from PIE root *sker- (1) "to cut"). The Spanish alacran "scorpion" is from Arabic al-'aqrab . It was symbolic in Middle English of a treacherous person. As the zodiac sign by late 14c. Related: Scorpioid .

 Centipeds and tarantulas are often confounded in the popular mind with scorpions, as are also various small lizards, in the latter case probably from the habit some of them have of carrying their tails up. Thus, in the United States, some harmless lizards or skinks, as of the genera 
 Sceloporus and 
 Eumeces , are commonly called scorpions. [Century Dictionary, 1895]
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to scorpion 

 Scorpio (n.) 

 zodiacal constellation, late 14c., from Latin scorpio (poetic scorpius ) "scorpion," also the zodiac constellation (see scorpion ). The meaning "person born under or ruled by the sign of Scorpio" is recorded from 1908. Since 1922 the official (International Astronomical Union) scientific designation of the constellation has been Scorpius , leaving Scorpio to astrology.

 *sker- (1) 

 also *ker- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to cut."

 It might form all or part of: bias ; carnage ; carnal ; carnation ; carnival ; carnivorous ; carrion ; cenacle ; charcuterie ; charnel ; corium ; cortex ; crone ; cuirass ; currier ; curt ; decorticate ; excoriate ; incarnadine ; incarnate ; incarnation ; kirtle ; scabbard ; scar (n.2) "bare and broken rocky face of a cliff or mountain;" scaramouche ; scarf (n.2) "connecting joint;" scarp ; score ; scrabble ; scrap (n.1) "small piece;" scrape ; screen ; screw ; scrimmage ; scrofula ; scrub (n.1) "low, stunted tree;" scurf ; shard ; share (n.1) "portion;" share (n.2) "iron blade of a plow;" sharp ; shear ; shears ; sheer (adj.) "absolute, utter;" shirt ; shore (n.) "land bordering a large body of water;" short ; shrub ; skerry ; skirmish ; skirt .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit krnati "hurts, wounds, kills," krntati "cuts;" Hittite karsh- "to cut off;" Greek keirein "to cut, shear;" Latin curtus "short," caro (genitive carnis ) "flesh" (originally "piece of flesh"); Lithuanian skiriu, skirti "to separate;" Old English sceran , scieran "to cleave, hew, cut with a sharp instrument;" Old Irish scaraim "I separate;" Welsh ysgar "to separate," ysgyr "fragment."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 chelicerae 

 piercing appendages in the proboscis of a scorpion or spider, 1831, plural of Modern Latin chelicera, from Greek khēlē "crab...

 sting 

 Old English stincg, steng "act of stinging, puncture, thrust, snakebite, sting of a scorpion," from the root of sting (v....

 manticore 

 fabulous monster mentioned by Ctesias with the body of a lion, head of a man, porcupine quills, and tail or sting of a scorpion...

 reptile 

 lagged, and reptile still was used late 18c. with sense "An animal that creeps upon many feet" [Johnson, who calls the scorpion...

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 person 

 c. 1200, persoun, "an individual, a human being," from Old French persone "human being, anyone, person" (12c., Modern French personne) and directly from Latin persona "human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character," originally "a mask, a false face," such a

 arachnid 

 1854, "a spider," from French arachnide (1806) or Modern Latin Arachnida (plural), the zoological name for the class of arthropods including spiders, scorpions, and mites, introduced as a class-name 1815 by French biologist Jean Baptiste Pierre Antoine de Monet de Lamarck, from L

 soul 

 "A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks, and wills" [Century Dictionary], Middle English soule, from Old English sawol "spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence; life, living being," from Proto-Germanic *saiwalō (sour

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 somebody 

 c. 1300 as two words, from 16c. as one word, "indeterminate person, person unnamed or unknown," from some + body. Used in place of the name of a person whose name is to be unspoken, by c. 1600. The meaning "important person, person of consequence" is from 1560s. Related: Somebodi

 Share scorpion 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/scorpion Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/scorpion">Etymology of scorpion by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of scorpion. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/scorpion Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of scorpion," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scorpion. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of scorpion." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scorpion. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of scorpion." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/scorpion (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near scorpion 
 scorer 
 scorn 
 scorner 
 scornful 
 Scorpio 
 scorpion 
 Scot 
 Scotch 
 Scotchman 
 scot-free 
 Scotland 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix