URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mar
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:32:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mar 

 mar (v.) 

 Middle English merren "to deface, disfigure; impair in form or substance" (early 13c.), from Old English merran (Anglian), mierran (West Saxon) "to waste, spoil," from Proto-Germanic *marzjan (source also of Old Frisian meria , Old High German marren "to hinder, obstruct," Gothic marzjan "to hinder, offend"), from PIE root *mers- "to trouble, confuse" (source also of Sanskrit mrsyate "forgets, neglects," Lithuanian miršti "to forget"). For vowel change, see marsh . Related: Marred ; marring .
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to mar 

 marsh (n.) 

 "tract of water-soaked or partially flooded land; wet, swampy ground; piece of low ground, usually more or less wet but often nearly dry at certain seasons," Middle English mersh , from Old English mersc , merisc "marsh, swamp," from Proto-Germanic *marisko (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon marsk "marsh," Middle Dutch mersch , Dutch mars , German Marsch , Danish marsk ), probably from Proto-Germanic *mari- "sea" (from PIE root *mori- "body of water").

 The vowel shift from -e- to -a- began in 15c. and is usual for -er- followed by a consonant: Compare darling (Middle English dereling , Old English deorling ), far (Middle English fer , Old English feorr ), mar (Middle English merren ), hart (Middle English hert , Old English heorot ). Marsh gas "methane generated by decaying matter in marshes" is attested by 1819.

 marplot (n.) 

 "one who by officious interference defeats a design," 1708, the name of a character in Susanna Centlivre's comedy "The busie body;" from mar (v.) + plot (n.).

 unmarred (adj.) 

 "unharmed, not injured, undefiled," c. 1200, unmerred , from un- (1) "not" + past participle of mar (v.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 impair 

 late 14c., a re-Latinizing of earlier ampayre, apeyre "make worse, cause to deteriorate" (c. 1300), from Old French empeirier "make worse" (Modern French empirer), from Vulgar Latin *impeiorare "make worse," from assimilated form of in- "into, in" (from PIE root *en "in") + Late 

 spoil 

 c. 1300, spoilen, "strip (someone) violently of clothes, strip a slain enemy," from Anglo-French espoiller, Old French espoillier, espillier "strip, plunder, pillage" and directly from Latin spoliare "strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder, pillage," a verb fro

 deflower 

 late 14c., deflouren, "deprive (a maiden) of her virginity," also "excerpt the best parts of (a book)," from Old French desflorer (13c., Modern French déflorer) "to deflower (a garden); to take the virginity of" and directly from Late Latin deflorare, from de- (see de-) + flos "f

 manticore 

 scorpion, c. 1300, from Latin manticora, from Greek mantikhoras, corruption of martikhoras, perhaps from Iranian compound *mar-tiya-khvara...The first element is represented by Old Persian maritya- "man," from PIE *mar-t-yo-, from *mer- "to die," thus "mortal, human...

 disfigure 

 late 14c., "mar the external figure of, impair the beauty, symmetry, or excellence of," also "transform the appearance of...

 blemish 

 From mid-15c. as "mar the beauty or soundness of."...

 mare 

 mare "incubus, nightmare, monster," from mera, mære, from Proto-Germanic *maron "goblin" (source also of Middle Low German mar...

 scratch 

 c. 1400, scracchen, transitive, "mark or wound slightly on the surface by a scraping or tearing action with something rough, sharp, or pointed," probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning "to scratch," both of uncertain origin. Also compare scr-. Relat

 blot 

 late 14c., "a spot or stain of ink;" also "a moral stain or blemish, a disgrace, a sin;" a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Old Norse blettr "blot, stain," or from Old French blot, variant of bloc "block." The Middle English Compendium compares, hesitantly, Old French blo(s

 bolt 

 Old English bolt "short, stout arrow with a heavy head;" also "crossbow for throwing bolts," from Proto-Germanic *bultas (source also of Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps originally "arrow, missile," and from PIE *bheld- "to knock, strike" (source 

 Share mar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mar">Etymology of mar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mar. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mar (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mar 
 map 
 maple 
 MapQuest 
 maquette 
 maquis 
 mar 
 maraca 
 Maranatha 
 maraschino 
 marasmus 
 Maratha 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix