URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/moss
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Moss - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Moss - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of moss 

 moss (n.) 

 the meanings "mass of small, cryptogamous, herbaceous plants growing together" and "bog, peat-bog" are the same word: Old English meos "moss plant" and mos "bog;" both are from Proto-Germanic *musan (source also of Old High German mios , Danish mos , German Moos ), also in part from Old Norse mosi "moss, bog," and Medieval Latin mossa "moss," from the same Germanic source.

 These are from PIE *meus- "damp," with derivatives referring to swamps and swamp vegetation (source also of Latin muscus "moss," Lithuanian mūsai "mold, mildew," Old Church Slavonic muchu "moss"). The Germanic languages have the word in both senses, which is natural because moss is the characteristic plant of boggy places. It is impossible to say which sense is original. The proverb that a rolling stone gathers no moss is suggested from 14c.:

 Selden Moseþ þe Marbelston þat men ofte treden. ["Piers Plowman," 1362]

 Moss-agate "agate stone with moss-like dendrite forms (caused by metallic oxides)" is from 1790. Scott (1805) revived 17c. moss-trooper "freebooter infesting Scottish border marshes" (compare bog-trotter ).

 Entries linking to moss 

 club-moss (n.) 

 1590s, from club (n.) + moss . So called for the club shape of its upright spore-cases.

 litmus (n.) 

 "blue dye-stuff obtained from certain lichens," early 14c., lit-mose , probably from an Old Norse word related to Norwegian dialectal litmose , from Old Norse lita "to dye, to stain" (from litr "color, dye;" see lit (n.1)) + mos "moss." Said to be also in part from Middle Dutch lijkmoes (Dutch lakmoes ), from lac (see lac ) + moes "pulp." Another idea [Watkins] connects the first element to Middle Dutch leken "to drip, leak" (see leak (v.)). The second element is in any case the common Germanic word for "moss, lichen" (see moss ).

 The dye is obtained from certain lichens. It is naturally blue but turns red in acid and is restored to blue by alkalis. Figurative use of litmus test is first attested 1957, from scientific use of litmus-treated paper as a chemical indicator. Litmus paper with this meaning is from 1803.

 mire 
 mossback 
 mossy 
 must 
 mysophobia 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mossback 

 "extreme conservative, one attached to antiquated notions," 1874, American English, used especially of poor rural whites; earlier (1872) in reference to those from the Carolinas who had hid out to avoid service in the Confederate army (and would have stayed out "till the moss gre

 must 

 auxiliary of prediction, "be obliged, be necessarily impelled," from Old English moste, past tense of motan "have to, be able to," from Proto-Germanic *motanan (source also of Old Saxon motan "to be obliged to, have to," Old Frisian mota, Middle Low German moten, Dutch moeten, Ge

 peat 

 Peat-bog is by 1775; peat-moss (mid-13c.) originally was "a peat bog;" the meaning "sphagnum moss" (the type that grows in...

 Spanish 

 Spanish moss (also long-moss) is attested from 1823....

 barbiturate 

 woman's name Barbara, others that it is perhaps from Latin barbata, in Medieval Latin usnea barbata, literally "bearded moss...

 mushroom 

 word of pre-Latin origin, used in the North of France;" OED says it usually is held to be a derivative of French mousse "moss..." (from Germanic), and Weekley agrees, saying it is properly "applied to variety which grows in moss," but Klein says they...

 waif 

 Connotations of "fashionable, small, slender woman" began 1991 with application to childishly slim supermodels such as Kate Moss...

 posh 

 by 1914 (1903 as push), a word of uncertain origin, but there is no evidence for the common derivation from an acronym of port outward, starboard home, supposedly the shipboard accommodations of wealthy British traveling to India on the P & O Lines (to keep their cabins out o

 handicap 

 1650s, from hand in cap, a game whereby two bettors would engage a neutral umpire to determine the odds in an unequal contest. The bettors would put their hands holding forfeit money into a hat or cap. The umpire would announce the odds and the bettors would withdraw their hands 

 hormone 

 "organic compound produced in animal bodies to regulate activity and behavior," 1905, from Greek hormon "that which sets in motion," present participle of horman "impel, urge on," from horme "onset, impulse," from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- (1) "to move, set in motion." Used by

 Share moss 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/moss Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/moss">Etymology of moss by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of moss. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/moss Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of moss," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/moss. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of moss." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/moss. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of moss." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/moss (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near moss 
 mosey 
 mosh 
 Moslem 
 mosque 
 mosquito 
 moss 
 mossback 
 mossy 
 most 
 -most 
 Mosul 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix