URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/basin
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:29:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Basin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Basin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of basin 

 basin (n.) 

 "large shallow vessel or dish used chiefly to hold water or other liquid," c. 1200, from Old French bacin (11c., Modern French bassin ), from Vulgar Latin *baccinum (source also of Spanish bacin , Italian bacino ), from *bacca "water vessel," perhaps originally Gaulish (but OED dismisses the proposed Celtic cognates on sense grounds). The meaning "large-scale artificial water-holding landscape feature" is from 1712. The geological sense of "tract of country drained by one river or draining into one sea" is from 1830.
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to basin 

 basinet (n.) 

 "small, light, rounded steel headpiece," c. 1300, from Old French bacinet , bassinet , diminutive of bacin (see basin ).

 bassinet (n.) 

 "wicker cradle," 1854, from French bassinet "a little basin," diminutive of bassin (see basin ), or, as per Klein, the English word is from French bercelonette , double diminutive of berceau "cradle," altered by bassin "basin." Middle English had bacinet "hemispherical helmet" (c. 1300).

 baste (v.2) 

 "to soak (cooking meat) in gravy or molten fat, moisten," late 14c., of unknown origin, possibly from Old French basser "to moisten, soak," from bassin "basin" (see basin ). Related: Basted ; basting .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lavatory 

 late 14c., "washbasin," from Late Latin lavatorium "place for washing," noun use of neuter of Latin adjective lavatorius "pertaining to washing," from lavat-, past participle stem of lavare "to wash," from PIE root *leue- "to wash." Sense of "washroom" is first attested 1650s; as

 watershed 

 "line separating waters flowing into different rivers," 1803, from water (n.1) + shed in a topographical sense of "ridge of high ground between two valleys or lower ground, a divide," for which see shed (n.2). Perhaps a loan-translation of German Wasser-scheide. Figurative sense 

 lake 

 "body of water surrounded by land and filling a depression or basin," early 12c., from Old French lack (12c., Modern French...lac) and directly from Latin lacus "pond, pool, lake," also "basin, tank, reservoir" (related to lacuna "hole, pit"), from...The common notion is "basin."...

 cottabus 

 The simplest mode was when each threw the wine left in his cup, so as to strike smartly in a metal basin, at the same time...invoking his mistress' name; if the whole fell with a distinct sound into the basin, it was a sign he stood well with her...

 Indies 

 Commonly applied to Asia and the East generally; later in a time of geographical confusion, it was applied to the Caribbean basin...

 piscine 

 The ecclesiastical sense (also piscina) "stone basin in a church placed close to the altar and used to receive the water...

 pickelhaube 

 cap or coif[;] more correctly written Biekelhaube, [it] is for Beckelhaube, a word most probably derived from becken, a basin...

 vessel 

 c. 1300, "container," from Old French vessel "container, receptacle, barrel; ship" (12c., Modern French vaisseau) from Late Latin vascellum "small vase or urn," also "a ship," alteration of Latin vasculum, diminutive of vas "vessel." Sense of "ship, boat" is found in English from

 depression 

 c. 1400 as a term in astronomy, "angular distance of a star below the horizon," from Old French depression (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin deprimere "to press down, depress" (see depres

 font 

 "water basin," especially used in baptism, late Old English, from Latin fons (genitive fontis) "fountain" (see fountain), especially in Medieval Latin fons baptismalis "baptismal font." The word is sometimes used poetically for "a fountain; a source."..."complete set of character

 Share basin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/basin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/basin">Etymology of basin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of basin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/basin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of basin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/basin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of basin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/basin. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of basin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/basin (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near basin 
 basically 
 basics 
 basil 
 basilica 
 basilisk 
 basin 
 basinet 
 basis 
 bask 
 Baskerville 
 basket 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix