URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/smuggle
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Smuggle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Smuggle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of smuggle 

 smuggle (v.) 

 "import or export secretly and contrary to law," 1680s, of Low German or Dutch origin (see smuggler ). The figurative sense of "convey in a clandestine way" is by 1783. Related: Smuggled ; smuggling .
 also from 1680s 

 Entries linking to smuggle 

 smuggler (n.) 

 "one who imports and exports secretly and contrary to law," 1660s, from Low German smuggeln or Dutch smokkelen "to transport (goods) illegally," apparently a frequentative formation of a word meaning "to sneak" (from Proto-Germanic *smuganan ; source also of Dutch smuigen "to eat secretly;" Swedish smyg "a lurking-hole," Danish smughandel "contraband trade," Norwegian smjuga , Old English smeogan "to creep"), perhaps literally "to slip (contraband through)," from Proto-Germanic *(s)muk- (see smock ).

 smuggling (n.) 

 "the offense of importing and exporting secretly and contrary to law," 1728, verbal noun from smuggle (v.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 export 

 by 1610s, "carrying out of a place;" perhaps from late 15c., from Latin exportare "to carry out, bring out; send away, export," from ex "out, away" (see ex-) + portare "to carry," from PIE root *per- (2) "to lead, pass over." The sense of "send out (commodities) from one country 

 import 

 early 15c., "signify, show, bear or convey in meaning," from Latin importare "bring in, convey, bring in from abroad," from assimilated form of in- "into, in" (from PIE root *en "in") + portare "to carry," from PIE root *per- (2) "to lead, pass over." In English, the sense of "br

 crumb 

 Middle English crome, crumme, from Old English cruma "fragment of bread or other food, a morsel, small fragment," from a West Germanic root of obscure origin (compare Middle Dutch crume, Dutch kruim, German Krume); perhaps from a PIE word for "small particle of bread" and cognate

 cell 

 early 12c., "small monastery, subordinate monastery" (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later "small room for a monk or a nun in a monastic establishment; a hermit's dwelling" (c. 1300), from Latin cella "small room, store room, hut," related to Latin celare "to hide, conceal" 

 will 

 Old English *willan, wyllan "to wish, desire; be willing; be used to; be about to" (past tense wolde), from Proto-Germanic *willjan (source also of Old Saxon willian, Old Norse vilja, Old Frisian willa, Dutch willen, Old High German wellan, German wollen, Gothic wiljan "to will, 

 exploit 

 late 14c., "outcome of an action," from Old French esploit "a carrying out; achievement, result; gain, advantage" (12c., Modern French exploit), a very common word, used in senses of "action, deed, profit, achievement," from Latin explicitum "a thing settled, ended, or displayed,

 disheveled 

 also dishevelled, early 15c., "without dressed hair," parallel form of dishevel, dischevele (adj.) "bare-headed," late 14c., from Old French deschevele "bare-headed, with shaven head," past-participle adjective from descheveler "to disarrange the hair," from des- "apart" (see dis

 architect 

 "person skilled in the art of building, one who plans and designs buildings and supervises their construction," 1560s, from French architecte, from Latin architectus, from Greek arkhitekton "master builder, director of works," from arkhi- "chief" (see archon) + tekton "builder, c

 class 

 c. 1600, "group of students," in U.S. especially "number of pupils in a school or college of the same grade," from French classe (14c.), from Latin classis "a class, a division; army, fleet," especially "any one of the six orders into which Servius Tullius divided the Roman peopl

 compassion 

 "feeling of sorrow or deep tenderness for one who is suffering or experiencing misfortune," mid-14c., compassioun, literally "a suffering with another," from Old French compassion "sympathy, pity" (12c.), from Late Latin compassionem (nominative compassio) "sympathy," noun of sta

 Share smuggle 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/smuggle Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/smuggle">Etymology of smuggle by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of smuggle. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/smuggle Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of smuggle," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/smuggle. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of smuggle." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/smuggle. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of smuggle." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/smuggle (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near smuggle 
 smother 
 smoulder 
 smudge 
 smudgy 
 smug 
 smuggle 
 smuggler 
 smuggling 
 Smurf 
 smush 
 smut 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix