URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/prince
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:58:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Prince - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Prince - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of prince 

 prince (n.) 

 c. 1200, "governor, overseer, magistrate; leader; great man, chief; preeminent representative of a group or class" (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French prince "prince, noble lord" (12c.), from Latin princeps (genitive principis ) "first person, chief leader; ruler, sovereign," noun use of adjective meaning "that takes first," from primus "first" (see prime (adj.)) + root of capere "to take" (from PIE root *kap- "to grasp").

 German cognate Fürst, from Old High German furist "first," is apparently an imitation of the Latin formation.

 As "heir apparent to a throne," mid-14c. ( Prince of Wales ). The meaning "king's son, scion of a royal family" is by mid-15c. From c. 1600 as a courtesy title given to non-regnant members of royal families, often confined to the younger sons of sovereigns. Prince Regent was the title of George, Prince of Wales (later George IV) during the mental incapacity of George III (1811-1820).

 By mid-14c. prince was used as the type of a handsome, worthy, wealthy, or proud man. The modern colloquial meaning "admirable or generous person" is from 1911, American English.
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to prince 

 prime (adj.) 

 late 14c., "first, original, first in order of time," from Old French prime and directly from Latin primus "first, the first, first part," figuratively "chief, principal; excellent, distinguished, noble" (source also of Italian and Spanish primo ), from Proto-Italic *prismos , superlative of PIE *preis- "before," from root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, before, first, chief."

 The meaning "of fine quality, of the first excellence" is from c. 1400. The meaning "first in rank, degree, or importance" is from 1610s in English. Arithmetical sense (as in prime number , one indivisible without a remainder except by 1) is from 1560s; prime meridian "the meridian of the earth from which longitude is measured, that of Greenwich, England," is from 1878. Prime time originally (c. 1500) meant "spring time;" the broadcasting sense of "peak tuning-in period" is attested by 1961.

 crown-prince (n.) 

 "eldest son or other heir-apparent of a monarch," 1791, a translation of German kronprinz ; see crown (n.) + prince . 

 facile princeps 
 princeling 
 princely 
 princess 
 Princeton 
 *kap- 
 *per- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 princess 

 late 14c., "woman of royal or noble birth; daughter or wife of a ruler or prince; female ruler," a native formation; in some later instances from Old French princesse, fem. of prince (see prince). Compare Medieval Latin principissa, Italian principessa. As a colloquial form of ad

 principality 

 c. 1300, principalite, "position of a prince," from Old French principalite "principal matter; power, sovereignty" (12c.,...Mid-14c. as "government by a prince." Meaning "region or state ruled by a prince or monarch" is attested from late 14c....

 consort 

 A prince consort (1837) is a prince who is the husband of a queen but himself has no royal authority (the most notable being...Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, husband of Queen Victoria; the initial proposal in Parliament in 1840 was to call...Philip of Spain, Mary's husband, bore the title of king, Anne's husband was simply Prince George of Denmark....of Prince Consort....

 rajah 

 also raja, "king or prince in India," ruling either independently or as a feudatory, 1550s, from Hindi, from Sanskrit rajan...Related: Rajput, "member of the ruling caste in northern India" (1590s), from Sanskrit rajaputrah "prince," literally "king's...

 duke 

 early 12c., "a sovereign prince," from Old French duc (12c.) and directly from Latin dux (genitive ducis) "leader, commander...Also used to translate various European titles (such as Russian knyaz), usually of nobles ranking below a prince, but it...

 regency 

 Notable instances were: France 1715-1723 (under Philip, Duke of Orleans), Britain 1811-1820 (under George, Prince of Wales..., Prince Regent), "in each case with suggestion of debauchery" [Weekley]....

 potentate 

 c. 1400, potentat, "a ruler, lord, prince, monarch; person who possesses independent power or sway," from Old French potentat...

 blue-blood 

 1809 in reference to the blood that flows in the veins of the old and aristocratic families of Spain, translating Spanish sangre azul, claimed by certain families of Castile that held themselves uncontaminated by Moorish or Jewish admixture; the term probably is from the notion o

 patrician 

 early 15c., patricion, "member of the ancient Roman noble order," reputed descendants of the original citizens, from Old French patricien, from Latin patricius "of the rank of the nobles, of the senators; of fatherly dignity," from patres conscripti "Roman senators," from plural 

 dauphin 

 title of the eldest son of the king of France (in use from 1349-1830), early 15c., from Old French dauphin, literally "dolphin" (see dolphin). Originally it was the title attached to "the Dauphin of Viennois," whose province (in the French Alps north of Provence) came to be known

 Share prince 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/prince Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/prince">Etymology of prince by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of prince. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/prince Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of prince," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/prince. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of prince." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/prince. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of prince." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/prince (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near prince 
 primordial 
 primp 
 primrose 
 primum mobile 
 primus 
 prince 
 Prince Albert 
 Prince Charming 
 princeling 
 princely 
 princess 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix