URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/elixir
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Elixir - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Elixir - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of elixir 

 elixir (n.) 

 mid-13c., from Medieval Latin elixir "philosopher's stone," believed by alchemists to transmute baser metals into gold and/or to cure diseases and prolong life, from Arabic al-iksir "the philosopher's stone," probably from late Greek xerion "powder for drying wounds," from xeros "dry" (see xerasia ). Later in medical use for "a tincture with more than one base." General sense of "strong tonic" is 1590s; used for quack medicines from at least 1630s.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to elixir 

 xerasia (n.) 

 "excessive dryness of hair," 1706, medical Latin, from Greek xerasia "dryness," from xeros "dry, withered" (see xero- ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 philosopher 

 , a reputed solid substance supposed by alchemists to change baser metals into gold or silver; also identified with the elixir...

 nostrum 

 c. 1600, "a medicine made of secret ingredients by secret methods," but commonly "quack medicine," from Latin nostrum remedium "our remedy" (or some similar phrase), presumably indicating "prepared by the person offering it," from Latin nostrum, neuter of noster "our," from nos "

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 liquid 

 late 14c., "flowing, capable of flowing; neither solid nor gaseous," from Old French liquide "liquid, running" (13c.), from Latin liquidus "fluid, liquid, moist," figuratively "flowing, continuing," also of sounds and voices, from liquere "be fluid," related to liqui "to melt, fl

 option 

 c. 1600, "action of choosing;" 1630s, "power or liberty of choosing," from French option (Old French opcion), from Latin optionem (nominative optio) "choice, free choice, liberty to choose," from optare "to desire, pray for, choose," which is of uncertain origin. De Vaan derives 

 potion 

 c. 1300, pocioun "medicinal drink, dose of liquid medicine or poison," from Old French pocion "potion, draught, medicine" (12c.), from Latin potionem (nominative potio) "a potion, a drinking," also "poisonous draught, magic potion" (source also of Spanish pocion "potion," ponzoña

 stone 

 "discrete piece of rock," especially not a large one, Old English stan, which was used of common rocks, precious gems, concretions in the body, memorial stones, from Proto-Germanic *stainaz (source also of Old Norse steinn, Danish steen, Old Saxon sten, Old Frisian sten, Dutch st

 avarice 

 c. 1300, "inordinate desire of gaining and possessing wealth," fifth of the seven deadly sins, from Old French avarice "greed, covetousness" (12c.), from Latin avaritia "greed, inordinate desire," from avarus "greedy, grasping," adjectival form of avere "crave, long for, be eager

 privilege 

 mid-12c. "grant, commission" (recorded earlier in Old English, but as a Latin word), from Old French privilege "right, priority, privilege" (12c.) and directly from Latin privilegium "law applying to one person, bill of law in favor of or against an individual;" in the post-Augus

 Share elixir 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/elixir Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/elixir">Etymology of elixir by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of elixir. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/elixir Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of elixir," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/elixir. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of elixir." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/elixir. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of elixir." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/elixir (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near elixir 
 Elisha 
 elision 
 elite 
 elitism 
 elitist 
 elixir 
 Elizabeth 
 Elizabethan 
 elk 
 ell 
 Ella 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix