URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/durable
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:19:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Durable - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Durable - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of durable 

 durable (adj.) 

 late 14c., "having the quality of continuing long in being," from Old French durable (11c.) and directly from Latin durabilis "lasting, permanent," from durare "to harden," from durus "hard," from PIE *dru-ro- , suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast." From late 13c. as a surname (probably meaning "steadfast"). Related: Durably . Durable goods attested from 1930.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to durable 

 *deru- 

 also *dreu- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "be firm, solid, steadfast," with specialized senses "wood," "tree" and derivatives referring to objects made of wood.

 It might form all or part of: betroth ; Dante ; dendrite ; dendro- ; dendrochronology ; dour ; Druid ; drupe ; dryad ; dura mater ; durable ; durance ; duration ; duress ; during ; durum ; endure ; hamadryad ; indurate ; obdurate ; perdurable ; philodendron ; rhododendron ; shelter ; tar (n.1) "viscous liquid;" tray ; tree ; trig (adj.) "smart, trim;" trim ; troth ; trough ; trow ; truce ; true ; trust ; truth ; tryst .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dru "tree, wood," daru "wood, log, timber;" Greek drys "oak," drymos "copse, thicket," doru "beam, shaft of a spear;" Old Church Slavonic drievo "tree, wood," Serbian drvo "tree," drva "wood," Russian drevo "tree, wood," Czech drva , Polish drwa "wood;" Lithuanian drūtas "firm," derva "pine, wood;" Welsh drud , Old Irish dron "strong," Welsh derw "true," Old Irish derb "sure," Old Irish daur , Welsh derwen "oak;" Albanian drusk "oak;" Old English treo , treow "tree," triewe "faithful, trustworthy, honest."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 perdurable 

 "long-lasting; permanent, imperishable," mid-13c. (implied in perdurably), from Old French pardurable "eternal, everlasting, perpetual" (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin perdurabilis "lasting," from Latin perdurare "to last, hold out," from per-, intensive prefix, + durare 

 transient 

 c. 1600, "transitory, not durable," from Latin transientem (nominative transiens) "passing over or away," present participle...

 bionic 

 The popular sense of "superhumanly gifted or durable" is from 1976, from U.S. television program "The Six Million Dollar...

 stable 

 stable, estable "constant, steadfast, unchanging," from Latin stabilis "firm, steadfast, stable, fixed," figuratively "durable...

 serge 

 In later use of a kind of strong, durable fabric, originally woven of silk, later of worsted....

 cypress 

 popular name of a type of evergreen tree noted for its dense, dark foliage and durable, fragrant wood, native to southern...

 wool 

 as opposed to dyed in the piece) is to be so before spinning, while the material is in its raw state, which has a more durable...

 plagiarism 

 "the purloining or wrongful appropriation of another's ideas, writing, artistic designs, etc., and giving these forth as one's own" [Century Dictionary], 1620s, from -ism + plagiary (n.) "plagiarist, literary thief" (c. 1600), from Latin plagiarius "kidnapper, seducer, plunderer,

 contentment 

 mid-15c., contentement, "satisfactory payment" (of a debt; a sense now obsolete), from Old French contentment, from contenter (see content (v.)). Meaning "That happiness which consists in being satisfied with present conditions" is from 1590s. Contentment is passive; satisfactio

 preposition 

 late 14c., preposicioun, in grammar, "indeclinable part of speech regularly placed before and governing a noun in an oblique case and showing its relation to a verb, adjective, or other noun," from Latin praepositionem (nominative praepositio) "a putting before, a prefixing," nou

 Share durable 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/durable Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/durable">Etymology of durable by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of durable. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/durable Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of durable," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/durable. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of durable." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/durable. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of durable." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/durable (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near durable 
 duplicative 
 duplicitous 
 duplicity 
 dura mater 
 durability 
 durable 
 durance 
 duration 
 duress 
 Durham 
 durian 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix