URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/oscillate
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:29:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Oscillate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Oscillate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of oscillate 

 oscillate (v.) 

 1726, intransitive, "to vibrate, move backward and forward," as a pendulum does, a back-formation from oscillation , or else from Latin oscillatus , past participle of oscillare "to swing." Transitive sense of "cause to swing backward and forward" is by 1766. From 1917 in electronics, "cause oscillation in an electric current." Related: Oscillated ; oscillating .
 also from 1726 

 Entries linking to oscillate 

 oscillation (n.) 

 "kind of vibration in which a body swings backward and forward," 1650s, from French oscillation and directly from Latin oscillationem (nominative oscillatio ), noun of action from past-participle stem of oscillare "to swing," from oscillum "a swing," which usually is identified with the oscillum that meant "little face" (literally "little mouth"), a mask of open-mouthed Bacchus hung up in vineyards as a charm (the sense evolution would be via the notion of "swinging in the breeze"); from PIE *os- "mouth" (see oral ). Figurative use, in reference to a swinging back and forth (in opinion, attitude, etc.) is by 1798.

 oscillator (n.) 

 "one who or that which oscillates," agent noun in Latin form from oscillate ; by 1835 of persons, figuratively; by 1889 in reference to electric currents. Related: Oscillatory .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 swing 

 swengwanan (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German swingan, Old Frisian swinga, German schwingen "to swing, swingle, oscillate...Transitive sense "cause to oscillate" is from 1550s. Sense of "bring about, make happen" is from 1934....

 dingbat 

 gilderfluke had come into contact with the dudad which operates the dingus on the diaphason, thereby letting the Johnson bar oscillate...

 shilly-shally 

 "to vacillate, hesitate, act in an irresolute manner," 1782, from the adverbial expression to stand shilly-shally (1703), earlier shill I, shall I (1700), a fanciful reduplication of shall I? (compare wishy-washy, dilly-dally, etc.). From 1734 as an adjective, by 1755 as a colloq

 waffle 

 "kind of batter-cake, baked crisp in irons and served hot," 1744, from Dutch wafel "waffle," from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German wafel, from Proto-Germanic *wabila- "web, honeycomb" (source also of Old High German waba "honeycomb," German Wabe), related to Old High German weba

 hunt 

 Old English huntian "chase game" (transitive and intransitive), perhaps developed from hunta "hunter," and related to hentan "to seize," from Proto-Germanic *huntojan (source also of Gothic hinþan "to seize, capture," Old High German hunda "booty"), which is of uncertain origin. 

 waver 

 late 13c., weyveren, "to show indecision," probably related to Old English wæfre "restless, wavering," from Proto-Germanic *wæbraz (source also of Middle High German wabern "to waver," Old Norse vafra "to hover about"), a frequentative form from the root of wave (v.), with German

 sway 

 early 14c., sweien, "move, go, go quickly;" also transitive, "move (something) along, carry," probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse sveigja "to bend, swing, give way," Old Danish svegja) and perhaps merged with an unrecorded Old English cognate. The whole group m

 tablet 

 c. 1300, "small, portable slab of durable material, often covered in wax in which writing was incised; flat surface for an inscription" (originally especially the two Mosaic tables of stone), from Old French tablete "small table, merchant's display counter" (13c., Modern French t

 autumn 

 season after summer and before winter, late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus "increase"), which is of unknown origin. Perhaps it is from Etruscan, but Tucker suggest

 inventory 

 early 15c., from Old French inventoire "detailed list of goods, a catalogue" (15c., Modern French inventaire), from Medieval Latin inventorium, alteration of Late Latin inventarium "list of what is found," from Latin inventus, past participle of invenire "to find, discover, ascer

 Share oscillate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/oscillate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/oscillate">Etymology of oscillate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of oscillate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/oscillate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of oscillate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oscillate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of oscillate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oscillate. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of oscillate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/oscillate (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near oscillate 
 os- 
 Osage 
 Osborn 
 Oscan 
 Oscar 
 oscillate 
 oscillation 
 oscillator 
 oscilloscope 
 oscine 
 oscitant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix