URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/star
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Star - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Star - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of star 

 star (n.) 

 "celestial body appearing as a luminous point," Middle English sterre , from Old English steorra "star," from Proto-Germanic *sternan- (source also of Old Saxon sterro , Old Frisian stera , Dutch ster , Old High German sterro , German Stern , Old Norse stjarna , Swedish stjerna , Danish stierne , Gothic stairno ). This is from PIE root *ster- (2) "star."

 Used originally of the apparently fixed celestial bodies, which is the restricted modern sense. But it also was used of planets and comets, as preserved in falling star (late 15c.) "meteor;" morning star "Venus at dawn" (Old English), etc.

 The astrological sense of "influence of planets and zodiac on human affairs" is recorded from mid-13c., hence "person's fate as figured in the stars" (c. 1600; star-crossed "ill-fated," literally "born under a malignant star," here meaning "planet," is from "Romeo and Juliet," 1592; star-struck is by 1787). The astrological sense also is in expressions such as My stars! , thank (one's) stars , both 1590s.

 The meaning "leading performer" is from 1824, originally of actors and singers; the sense of "outstanding performer in a sport" is by 1916; star turn "principal act or song in a show" is by 1898.

 Stars as a ranking of quality for hotels, restaurants, etc. are attested by 1886, originally in Baedecker guides. Sticker stars as rewards for good students are recorded by 1977. A brass star as a police badge is recorded from 1859 (New York City).

 The astronomical star-cluster is from 1870. Star-shower "meteor shower" is by 1818. To see stars when one is hit hard on the head is from 1839.

 star (v.) 

 1590s, "mark with a star," from star (n.). By 1718 as "set with stars, adorn with star-like ornaments." By 1827 as "mark with an asterisk."

 In reference to actors, singers, etc., "perform the lead part," by 1824, in reference to actors in ensembles who performed only in plays where they had leading roles.

 This abominable American habit of "starring it" is the very suicide of "stock" excellence. Those who can do well in the leading, can certainly excel in the minor characters; and though individual merit is ever appreciated and applauded, ye "of the buskin" ought to remember that it is the good performance of the whole play alone that can support the drama and the manager. ["Semi-Weekly Mississippi Free Trader," reviewing theater in New Orleans, Jan. 16, 1839]

 The similar sense in sports is by 1916. Related: Starred ; starring . Chaucer has stellify for "turn (someone) into a constellation."
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to star 

 all-star (adj.) 

 1893, originally of theatrical casts, from all + star (n.) in the "celebrated person" sense. From 1898 in reference to sports teams.

 co-star 

 also costar , 1915 as a noun; 1916 as a verb; from co- + star (v.).

 ill-starred 
 lodestar 
 pole-star 
 protostar 
 stardom 
 stardust 
 starfish 
 star-fruit 
 star-gazer 
 starless 
 starlet 
 starlight 
 starlit 
 starry 
 starscape 
 star-shine 
 starship 
 star-spangled 
 See All Related Words (27) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lodestar 

 late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), "a star that leads or serves to guide," an old name for the pole star as the star that "leads the way" in navigation; from lode (n.) "a way, a course, something to be followed" (a Middle English variant spelling of load (n.) that preserved the 

 star-spangled 

 "spotted or spangled with stars," 1590s, from star (n.) + past participle spangle (v.); Star-Spangled Banner for "United States flag" is attested from 1814, in Francis Scott Key's poem (printed in the "Baltimore Patriot" Sept. 20), in reference to the bombardment of Fort McHenry 

 ace 

 c. 1300, "one at dice," from Old French as "one at dice" (12c.), from Latin as "a unit, one, a whole, unity;" also the name of a small Roman coin (originally a rectangular bronze plaque weighing one pound, it eventually was reduced by depreciation to half an ounce; in imperial ti

 nova 

 "star that suddenly increases in brightness then slowly fades," 1877, from Latin nova, fem. singular adjective of novus "...new" (see new), used with stella "star" (a feminine noun in Latin) to describe a new star not previously known (Tycho Brahe's...Not distinguished from supernovae until 1930s (Tycho's star was a supernova). The classical plural is novae....

 disaster 

 disastro, literally "ill-starred," from dis-, here merely pejorative, equivalent to English mis- "ill" (see dis-) + astro "star..., planet," from Latin astrum, from Greek astron "star" (from PIE root *ster- (2) "star")....The sense is astrological, of a calamity blamed on an unfavorable position of a planet, and "star" here is probably meant...Compare Medieval Latin astrum sinistrum "misfortune," literally "unlucky star," and English ill-starred....

 Sirius 

 brightest star by magnitude, late 14c., from Latin Sirius "the Dog Star," from Greek Seirios, said to mean literally "scorching...The connection of the star with scorching heat is due to its ancient heliacal rising at the summer solstice (see dog days...The constellation Canis Major seems to have grown from the star....[Richard Hinckley Allen, Canis Major in "Star Names and Their Meanings," London: 1899]...

 Bellatrix 

 bright star in the left shoulder of Orion, from Latin bellatrix "female warrior," frequently used as an adjective, "warlike...The Latin name, from the Alfonsine Tables (mid-13c.), very loosely translates the Arabic name for the star, Al Najid "the...In astrology it was the natal star of all destined to great civil or military honors, and rendered women born under its influence...[Richard Hinckley Allen, "Star Names and Their Meanings," 1899]...

 sun 

 "the sun as a heavenly body or planet; daylight; the rays of the sun, sunlight," also the sun as a god or object of worship; Middle English sonne, from Old English sunne "the sun," from Proto-Germanic *sunno (source also of Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old High German sunna, Middle Dutc

 replay 

 by 1862, in sporting jargon (curling), "to play (a match) again," from re- "again" + play (v.). Of sound recordings (later video, etc.), "reproduce what has been recorded," by 1912. Related: Replayed; replaying. The noun is from 1895 as "a replayed match" in sports. The meaning "

 player 

 Middle English pleiere, from Old English plegere "one who takes part in pastimes or amusements," an agent noun from play (v.). The stage senses of "performer of plays, professional actor," also "one who performs on a musical instrument" are from c. 1400. The meaning "contestant i

 Share star 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/star Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/star">Etymology of star by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of star. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/star Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of star," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/star. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of star." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/star. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of star." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/star (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near star 
 stapes 
 staph 
 staphylococcus 
 staple 
 stapler 
 star 
 Star Chamber 
 Star Wars 
 starboard 
 starch 
 starchy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close