URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/quiver
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T14:56:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Quiver - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Quiver - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of quiver 

 quiver (v.) 

 "to tremble, shake tremulously, shudder," late 15c., perhaps imitative, or possibly an alteration of quaveren (see quaver ), or from quiver (adj.) "active, agile, lively, brisk" (mid-13c.), from Old English cwifer- (in cwiferlice "zealously"), which is perhaps related to cwic "alive" (see quick (adj.)). Compare Middle Dutch kuyveren "to tremble." Related: Quivered ; quivering . As a noun, "act or state of quivering," by 1715, from the verb.
 also from late 15c. 

 quiver (n.) 

 "case for holding arrows," early 14c., from Anglo-French quiveir , Old French quivre , cuivre , probably of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *kukur "container" (source also of Old High German kohhari , German Köcher , Old Saxon kokar , Old Frisian koker , Old English cocur "quiver"); "said to be from the language of the Huns" [Barnhart]. Related: Quiverful .
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to quiver 

 quaver (v.) 

 early 15c., quaveren , "to vibrate, tremble, have a tremulous motion," probably a frequentative of cwavien "to tremble, shake, be afraid" (early 13c.), which probably is related to Low German quabbeln "tremble," and possibly of imitative origin. With Germanic verbal suffix indicating repeated or diminutive action (see -er (4)). The meaning "sing in trills or quavers, sing with a tremulous tone" is recorded by 1530s. Related: Quavered ; quavering .

 quick (adj.) 

 Middle English quik , from Old English cwic "living, alive, animate, characterized by the presence of life" (now archaic), and figuratively, of mental qualities, "rapid, ready," from Proto-Germanic *kwikwaz (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian quik , Old Norse kvikr "living, alive," Dutch kwik "lively, bright, sprightly," Old High German quec "lively," German keck "bold"), from PIE root *gwei- "to live." Sense of "lively, active, swift, speedy, hasty," developed by c. 1300, on notion of "full of life."

 NE 
 swift or the now more common 
 fast may apply to rapid motion of any duration, while in 
 quick (in accordance with its original sense of 'live, lively') there is a notion of 'sudden' or 'soon over.' We speak of a 
 fast horse or runner in a race, a 
 quick starter but not a 
 quick horse. A somewhat similar feeling may distinguish NHG 
 schnell and 
 rasch or it may be more a matter of local preference. [Carl Darling Buck, "A Dictionary of Selected Synonyms in the Principal Indo-European Languages," 1949]

 Of persons, "mentally active, prompt to perceive or respond to impressions" from late 15c. Of an action, process, etc., "done in little time," 1540s. Also in Middle English used of soft soils, gravel pits, etc. where the ground is shifting and yielding (mid-14c., compare quicksand ). Also in Middle English "with child, in an advanced state of pregnancy" (when the woman can feel the child move within). Also formerly of bright flowers or colors (c. 1200).

 As an adverb, "quickly, in a quick manner," from c. 1300. To be quick about something is from 1937. Quick buck is from 1946, American English. Quick-change artist (1886) originally was an actor expert in playing different roles in the same performance of a show. Quick-witted is from 1520s.

 aquiver 
 quake 
 *gwei- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 quake 

 Middle English quaken, from Old English cwacian "quake (of the earth), tremble, shudder (of persons, from cold, emotion, fear, fever, etc.), chatter (of teeth)," related to cweccan "to shake, swing, move, vibrate," words of unknown origin with no certain cognates outside English.

 pulsate 

 "to beat or throb (as the heart or a blood vessel); contract and dilate in alternation or rhythmically," 1741, a back-formation from pulsation, or else from Latin pulsatus, past participle of pulsare "to beat against, strike upon," frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus

 beat 

 Old English beatan "inflict blows on, strike repeatedly, thrash" (class VII strong verb; past tense beot, past participle beaten), from Proto-Germanic *bautan (source also of Old Norse bauta, Old High German bozan "to beat"), from PIE root *bhau- "to strike." Past tense form beat

 shiver 

 "to tremble or quiver, shake suddenly," especially with cold, c. 1400, an alteration of chiveren "to shiver" (with cold,...To quiver is to have a slight tremulous or fluttering motion. [Century Dictionary]...

 palpitation 

 palpitationem (nominative palpitatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of palpitare "to throb, to flutter, to tremble, to quiver...

 sheaf 

 Also used for "a handful or quiver-ful of arrows" (late 14c.), sometimes specifically as "two dozen arrows."...

 post-modern 

 Vested Interests and the Common Man," 1919] So much for the misapplied theory which has helped set the artist's nerves a-quiver...

 flutter 

 Old English floterian "to flutter (of birds), to fly before, flicker, float to and fro, be tossed by waves," frequentative of flotian "to float" (see float (v.)). Meaning "throw (someone) into confusion" is from 1660s. Related: Fluttered; fluttering. As a noun, "quick, irregular 

 tremble 

 c. 1300, "shake from fear, cold, etc.," from Old French trembler "tremble, fear" (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *tremulare (source also of Italian tremolare, Spanish temblar), from Latin tremulus "trembling, shaking, quaking," from tremere "to tremble, shiver, quake," from PIE *trem- 

 motion 

 late 14c., mocioun, "process of moving; change of place, continuous variation of position;" also "suggestion, proposal or proposition formally made," from Old French mocion "movement, motion; change, alteration" (13c., Modern French motion) and directly from Latin motionem (nomin

 Share quiver 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/quiver Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/quiver">Etymology of quiver by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of quiver. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/quiver Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of quiver," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/quiver. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of quiver." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/quiver. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of quiver." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/quiver (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near quiver 
 quite 
 quit-rent 
 quits 
 quittance 
 quitter 
 quiver 
 quixotic 
 quiz 
 quizzical 
 quo warranto 
 quod 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix