URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/camel
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:29:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Camel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Camel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of camel 

 camel (n.) 

 "large ruminant quadruped used in Asia and Africa as a beast of burden," Old English camel , perhaps via Old North French camel (Old French chamel , Modern French chameau ), from Latin camelus , from Greek kamelos , from Hebrew or Phoenician gamal , perhaps related to Arabic jamala "to bear."

 Another Old English word for the beast was olfend , apparently based on confusion of camels and elephants in a place and time when both were unknown but for travelers' vague descriptions. The confusion was general in the older Germanic languages (Gothic ulbandus , Old High German olbenta , Old Saxon olbhunt , Old Norse ulfaldi ). Also compare camelopard . Of the two distinct species, the Arabian has one hump (the lighter, thoroughbred variety is the dromedary ); the Bactrian has two. The camel-walk dance style is recorded from 1919.

 Entries linking to camel 

 camelopard (n.) 

 an old name for "giraffe," late 14c., from Late Latin camelopardus , shortened from Latin camelopardalis , from Greek kamelopardalis "a giraffe," a compound of kamelos "camel" (see camel ), for the long neck, and pardos "leopard, panther" (see pard (n.1)), for the spots.

 dromedary (n.) 

 "thoroughbred Arabian camel," late 13c., from Old French dromedaire and directly from Late Latin dromedarius "kind of camel," from Latin dromas (genitive dromados ), from Greek dromas kamelos "running camel," from dromos "a race course," from dramein "to run," from PIE *drem- "to run" (source also of Sanskrit dramati "runs, goes," perhaps also Old English trem "footstep").

 A variety of the one-humped Arabian camel bred and trained for use as a saddle-animal, "and comparing with the heavier and slower varieties as a race-horse does with a cart-horse; it is not a different animal zoologically speaking" [Century Dictionary]. An early variant in English was drumbledairy (1560s).

 gamma 
 oliphant 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 holiday 

 As a Christmastime greeting, by 1937, American English, in Camel cigarette ads....

 colt 

 Old English colt "a young horse," also "young ass," in Biblical translations also used for "young camel," perhaps from Proto-Germanic...

 caravan 

 Crusades, via Arabic qairawan from Persian karwan "group of desert travelers" (which Klein connects to Sanskrit karabhah "camel...

 pray 

 The Gardener's Monthly of July 1861 lists other names for it as camel cricket, soothsayer, and rear horse....

 possession 

 a graphic account of the courage with which that saint confronted, and the success with which he relieved, a possessed camel...

 strain 

 echoes Matthew xxiii.24 (strain at a gnat; Tyndale has the line as Ye blind guides, which strain out a gnat, and swallow a camel...

 ostrich 

 The Greeks also knew the bird as strouthokamelos "camel-sparrow," for its long neck....

 offend 

 early 14c., offenden, "to disobey or sin against (a person, human or divine)," a sense now obsolete, from Old French ofendre "hit, attack, injure; sin against; antagonize, excite to anger" and directly from Latin offendere "to hit, thrust, or strike against," figuratively "to stu

 fail 

 c. 1200, "be unsuccessful in accomplishing a purpose;" also "cease to exist or to function, come to an end;" early 13c. as "fail in expectation or performance," from Old French falir "be lacking, miss, not succeed; run out, come to an end; err, make a mistake; be dying; let down,

 prayer 

 c. 1300, preiere, "earnest request, entreaty, petition," also "the practice of praying or of communing with God," from Old French prier "prayer, petition, request" (12c., Modern French prière), from Medieval Latin precaria "petition, prayer," noun use of Latin adjective precaria,

 Share camel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/camel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/camel">Etymology of camel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of camel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/camel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of camel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/camel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of camel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/camel. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of camel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/camel (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near camel 
 cambric 
 Cambridge 
 camcorder 
 Camden 
 came 
 camel 
 cameleon 
 camellia 
 camelopard 
 Camelot 
 Camembert 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix