URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazelle
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:20:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gazelle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gazelle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gazelle 

 gazelle 

 c. 1600, from French gazelle , Old French gazel (14c.), probably via Spanish, ultimately from North African pronunciation of Arabic ghazal .
 also from c. 1600 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Ariel 

 [OED] As the name of a species of gazelle found in the Middle East, 1832, from Arabic aryil, variant of ayyil "stag."...

 oryx 

 (genitive orygos), an old name of some sort of Libyan and Egyptian antelope with pointed horns, perhaps originally the gazelle...

 antelope 

 early 15c., from Old French antelop, from Medieval Latin antalopus, anthalopus (11c.), from Late Greek antholops (Eusebius of Antioch, c. 336 C.E.), in reference to a fabulous animal haunting the banks of the Euphrates, very savage, hard to catch and having long saw-like horns ca

 haunt 

 early 13c., "to practice habitually, busy oneself with, take part in," from Old French hanter "to frequent, visit regularly; have to do with, be familiar with; indulge in, cultivate" (12c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse heimta "bring home," from Proto-Germanic *hai

 steward 

 Middle English steuard, steward, "official in charge of the domestic affairs of a (large) household," from Old English stiward, stigweard "one who has charge of the affairs of the household or estate of another," from stig "hall, pen for cattle, part of a house" (see sty (n.1)) +

 impact 

 c. 1600, "press closely into something," from Latin impactus, past participle of impingere "to push into, drive into, strike against," from assimilated form of in- "into, in, on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + pangere "to fix, fasten" (from PIE root *pag- "to fasten"). Original

 idol 

 mid-13c., "image of a deity as an object of (pagan) worship," from Old French idole "idol, graven image, pagan god" (11c.), from Latin idolum "image (mental or physical), form," especially "apparition, ghost," but used in Church Latin for "false god, image of a pagan deity as an 

 poverty 

 late 12c., poverte, "destitution, want, need or insufficiency of money or goods," from Old French poverte, povrete "poverty, misery, wretched condition" (Modern French pauvreté), from Latin paupertatem (nominative paupertas) "poverty," from pauper "poor" (see poor (adj.)). From e

 fanny 

 "buttocks," 1920, American English, from earlier British meaning "vulva" (1879), perhaps from the name of John Cleland's heroine in the scandalous novel "Fanny Hill or Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure" (1748). The fem. proper name is a diminutive of Frances. The genital sense is st

 offend 

 early 14c., offenden, "to disobey or sin against (a person, human or divine)," a sense now obsolete, from Old French ofendre "hit, attack, injure; sin against; antagonize, excite to anger" and directly from Latin offendere "to hit, thrust, or strike against," figuratively "to stu

 Share gazelle 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazelle Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazelle">Etymology of gazelle by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gazelle. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazelle Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gazelle," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazelle. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gazelle." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazelle. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gazelle." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazelle (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gazelle 
 gayety 
 Gaylord 
 Gaza 
 gaze 
 gazebo 
 gazelle 
 gazette 
 gazetteer 
 gazillion 
 gazpacho 
 gear 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix