URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/vapor
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:57:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Vapor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Vapor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of vapor 

 vapor (n.) 

 "exhalation of moisture; any visible diffused substance; the stuff of mists and clouds;" late 14c., vapour , "steam, moisture arising from heated matter; fumes from incense," from Anglo-French vapour , Old French vapor "moisture, vapor" (13c., Modern French vapeur ) and directly from Latin vaporem (nominative vapor ) "a warm exhalation, steam, heat," which is of unknown origin.

 Figurative of anything unsubstantial. The scientific sense of "gaseous form of a substance" is from mid-17c. Also see vapors .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to vapor 

 vapors 

 "fit of fainting, hysteria, etc.," 1660s, as a disease of nervous disability supposedly caused by a vapor (n.) or combination of them, in that word's sense in old physiology and medicine, "gas or exhalation generated in the stomach or other organs and affecting the brain" (late 14c.). Hence, by early 18c. "depression of spirits." Century Dictionary (1895) describes it as "a term much affected in the eighteenth century, but now rarely used." Also, in early 17c., "a hectoring, bullying style of language."

 dumps (n.) 

 "low spirits; dull, gloomy state of mind," 1520s, plural of dumpe "a fit of musing," of uncertain origin, possibly from Dutch domp "haze, mist," from Middle Dutch damp "vapor" (see damp (n.)). Compare vapors under vapor .

 The application of this term to an affection of the mind is a part of the medical theory which attributed all disorders of the frame to a humour falling on the part affected, and regarded mental disorders especially as produced by a vapour rising from the stomach into the brain. [Hensleigh Wedgwood, "A Dictionary of English Etymology," 1859]

 evaporation 
 vaporetto 
 vaporize 
 vaporous 
 vapour 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fume 

 late 14c., "vapor, odorous vapor; exhalation," from Old French fum "smoke, steam, vapor, breath, aroma, scent" (12c.), from...Latin fumus "smoke, steam, fume, old flavor" (source also of Italian fumo, Spanish humo), from PIE root *dheu- (1) "dust, vapor...

 damp 

 early 14c., "noxious vapor in a coal mine, fire-damp, stifling poisonous gas," perhaps in Old English but there is no record...German damp; ultimately in either case from Proto-Germanic *dampaz (source also of Old High German damph, German Dampf "vapor...

 dust 

 Old English dust, from Proto-Germanic *dunstaz (source also of Old High German tunst "storm, breath," German Dunst "mist, vapor...," Danish dyst "milldust," Dutch duist), from PIE *dheu- (1) "dust, smoke, vapor" (source also of Sanskrit dhu- "shake,"...

 qualm 

 The other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is that the "fit of uneasiness" sense is from Dutch kwalm "steam, vapor,...mist" (cognate with German Qualm "smoke, vapor, stupor"), which also might be ultimately from the same Germanic root as quell...

 enthymeme 

 mind, take to heart," from en "in" (see en- (2)) + thymos "spirit, courage, anger, sense" (from PIE root *dheu- (1) "dust, vapor...

 rainbow 

 "arc of prismatic colors formed by the refraction of light rays by drops of rain or vapor," Middle English rein-bowe, from...

 steam 

 Middle English stēm, from Old English steam "vapor from a body, fumes, a scent or odor given off from a heated or burned...Especially "vapor of boiling water used to drive an engine" from 1690s....

 smoke 

 late Old English smoca, smocca (rare) "visible fumes and volatile material given off by burning or smoldering substances," related to smeocan "give off smoke," from Proto-Germanic *smuk- (source also of Middle Dutch smooc, Dutch smook, Middle High German smouch, German Schmauch),

 smoking 

 late 14c., smokyng, "emission of fumes or smoke," verbal noun from smoke (v.). By 1690s as "act of puffing a lighted cigar, pipe, etc." Also a past-participle adjective. The railway smoking car is attested from 1844. Smoking jacket, one worn while smoking, is by 1849. Smoking gun

 suspension 

 early 15c., suspensioun, "a temporary halting or deprivation" (of office, privilege, etc.), from Latin suspensionem (nominative suspensio) "the act or state of hanging up, a vaulting," noun of action from past-participle stem of suspendere "to hang up, cause to hang, suspend." Th

 Share vapor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/vapor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/vapor">Etymology of vapor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of vapor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/vapor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of vapor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vapor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of vapor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vapor. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of vapor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/vapor (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near vapor 
 vanquish 
 vantage 
 vape 
 vapid 
 vapidity 
 vapor 
 vaporetto 
 vaporization 
 vaporize 
 vaporizer 
 vaporous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix