URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchestra
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:36:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Orchestra - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Orchestra - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of orchestra 

 orchestra (n.) 

 c. 1600, "area in an ancient theater for the chorus," from Latin orchestra , from Greek orkhēstra , semicircular space where the chorus of dancers performed, with suffix -tra denoting place + orkheisthai "to dance," perhaps an intensive of erkhesthai "to go, come," but not all experts accept that (see Beekes).

 In ancient Rome, orchestra referred to the place in the theater reserved for senators and other dignitaries. Meaning "group of musicians performing at a concert, opera, etc." is recorded by 1720, so called because they occupy the position of the orchestra relative to the stage ; that of "part of theater in front of the stage" is from 1768 in English.

 Some related words still retain the "dancing" sense: Orchestic "of or pertaining to dancing" (1712), also orchestric (1740).
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to orchestra 

 karaoke (n.) 

 1979, Japanese, from kara "empty" + oke "orchestra," the latter a shortened form of okesutora , which is English orchestra rendered into Japanese.

 orchestral (adj.) 

 "pertaining to an orchestra; suitable for performance by an orchestra," 1811, from orchestra + -al (1).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 symphony 

 "It was only after the advent of Haydn that this word began to mean a sonata for full orchestra....Elliptical for "symphony orchestra" from 1926. Diminutive symphonette is recorded from 1947....

 proscenium 

 Modern sense of "space between the curtain and the orchestra" (often including the curtain and its framework) is attested...

 sit-in 

 The verbal phrase is attested by 1936 in reference to session musicians, "join in" with a band or orchestra....

 A 

 natural scale; it is the note given by a fixed-tone instrument (usually oboe or organ) to which all the instruments of an orchestra...

 Denver 

 illegally parked vehicles, supposedly was invented 1953 by Frank Marugg, pattern-maker and violinist with the Denver Symphony Orchestra...

 conductor 

 Meaning "a director or manager" is from 1630s; specific sense of "leader of an orchestra or chorus" is from 1784....

 section 

 [Blount, "Glossigraphia," 1656] In music, "a group of similar instruments in a band or orchestra" (1880)....

 house 

 Old English hus "dwelling, shelter, building designed to be used as a residence," from Proto-Germanic *hūsan (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian hus, Dutch huis, German Haus), of unknown origin, perhaps connected to the root of hide (v.) [OED]. In Gothic only in gudhus "temple

 philharmonic 

 "loving harmony or music," 1813 (in the name of a society founded in London for the promotion of instrumental music), from French philharmonique (1739), from Italian filarmonico, literally "loving harmony," from Greek philos "loving" (see philo-) + ta harmonika "theory of harmony

 theater 

 late 14c., "open air place in ancient times for viewing spectacles and plays," from Old French theatre (12c., Modern French théâtre, improperly accented) and directly from Latin theatrum "play-house, theater; stage; spectators in a theater" (source also of Spanish, Italian teatro

 Share orchestra 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchestra Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchestra">Etymology of orchestra by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of orchestra. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchestra Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of orchestra," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchestra. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of orchestra." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchestra. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of orchestra." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchestra (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near orchestra 
 orbital 
 orbiter 
 orc 
 Orca 
 orchard 
 orchestra 
 orchestral 
 orchestrate 
 orchestration 
 orchid 
 orchidectomy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix