URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sort
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:02:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sort - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sort - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sort 

 sort (n.) 

 late 14c., sorte , "group of people, animals, etc.; kind or variety of person or animal," from Old French sorte "class, kind," from Latin sortem (nominative sors ) "lot; fate, destiny; share, portion; rank, category; sex, class, oracular response, prophecy," from PIE root *ser- (2) "to line up."

 The sense evolution in Vulgar Latin is from "what is allotted to one by fate," to "fortune, condition," to "rank, class, order." Later (mid-15c.) also "group, class, or category of items; kind or variety of thing; pattern, design." The classical sense of "fate or lot of a particular person" was in Middle English but is now obsolete. The computing sense of "act of arranging (data) in sequence" is by 1958, from the verb. Related to assort , consort , sorcery , but not resort .

 Colloquial sort of as a qualifier expressing hesitation or "to some extent" is attested by 1790; sometimes contracted to sorta , sorter . Out of sorts "not in usual good condition" is attested from 1620s, perhaps with a literal sense of "out of stock, out of equipment." In the original citation it is paired with out of tune . The type-setting sort is attested only from 1660s.
 also from late 14c. 

 sort (v.) 

 mid-14c., sorten , "to arrange according to type or quality," c. 1400, "to classify by category," from Old French sortir "allot, sort, assort," from Latin sortiri "draw lots, divide, choose," from sors "lot, what is allotted; fate, destiny; share, portion" (see sort (n.)). In some senses, the verb is from the noun, or it is a shortened form of assort . Often with out (adv.). By 1948 as "resolve (a problem), clear up (a confusion)." Related: Sorted ; sorter ; sorting .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to sort 

 assort (v.) 

 late 15c., "to distribute into groups or classes," from Old French assorter "to assort, match" (15c., Modern French assortir ), from a- "to" (see ad- ) + sorte "kind, category," from Latin sortem (nominative sors ) "lot; fate, destiny; share, portion; rank, category; sex, class, oracular response, prophecy" (from PIE root *ser- (2) "to line up"). Related: Assorted ; assorting .

 consort (n.1) 

 early 15c., "partner" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French consort "colleague, partner," consorte "wife" (14c.), from Latin consortem (nominative consors ) "partner, comrade; brother, sister," in Medieval Latin, "a wife," noun use of adjective meaning "having the same lot, of the same fortune," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con- ) + sors "a share, lot" (from PIE root *ser- (2) "to line up").

 Sense of "husband or wife" ("partner in marriage") is from 1630s in English. A prince consort (1837) is a prince who is the husband of a queen but himself has no royal authority (the most notable being Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, husband of Queen Victoria; the initial proposal in Parliament in 1840 was to call him king-consort ); queen consort is attested from 1667. Related: Consortial .

 The husband of a reigning queen has no powers, he is not king unless an act of parliament makes him so. Philip of Spain, Mary's husband, bore the title of king, Anne's husband was simply Prince George of Denmark. Queen Victoria's husband was simply Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha until 1857 when the queen conferred on him the title of Prince Consort. [F.W. Maitland, "The Constitutional History of England," 1908]

 resort 
 sorcery 
 all-sorts 
 re-sort 
 sortilege 
 unsorted 
 *ser- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 resort 

 late 14c., "that to which one has recourse for aid or assistance, source of comfort and solace," from Old French resort "resource, a help, an aid, a remedy," back-formation from resortir "to resort," literally "to go out again," from re- "again" (see re-) + sortir "go out" (see s

 sorcery 

 c. 1300, sorcerie, "witchcraft, magic, enchantment; act or instance of sorcery; supernatural state of affairs; seemingly magical works," from Old French sorcerie, from sorcier "sorcerer, wizard," from Medieval Latin sortiarius "teller of fortunes by lot; sorcerer," literally "one

 kind 

 "class, sort, variety," from Old English gecynd "kind, nature, race," related to cynn "family" (see kin), from Proto-Germanic *kundjaz "family, race," from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget," with derivatives referring to procreation and familial and tribal groups. Ælfric's rend

 specific 

 1630s, "having a special quality," from French spécifique and directly from Late Latin specificus "constituting a kind or sort..." (in Medieval Latin "specific, particular"), from Latin species "kind, sort" (see species) + -ficus "making, doing,...

 suffragette 

 A more regrettable formation than others such as leaderette & flannelette, in that it does not even mean a sort of suffrage...as they mean a sort of leader & of flannel, & therefore tends to vitiate the popular conception of the termination's...

 sargasso 

 attested by 1819 for the large section of the Atlantic in the interior of the great loop of the Gulf Stream, where this sort...Hence figurative for any sort of stagnant mass....

 ear-ring 

 Now including any sort of ornament in the ear; the pendant sort originally were ear-drops (1720)....

 count 

 late 14c., "to enumerate, assign numerals to successively and in order; repeat the numerals in order," also "to reckon among, include," from Old French conter "to count, add up," also "tell a story," from Latin computare "to count, sum up, reckon together," from com "with, togeth

 flavor 

 c. 1300, "a smell, odor" (usually a pleasing one), from Old French flaor "smell, odor; action of smelling, sense of smell," probably from Vulgar Latin flator "odor," literally "that which blows," in classical Latin "blower," from flare "to blow, puff," which according to Watkins 

 make 

 Old English macian "to give being to, give form or character to, bring into existence; construct, do, be the author of, produce; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform," from West Germanic *makōjanan "to fashion, fit" (source also of Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia "

 Share sort 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sort Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sort">Etymology of sort by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sort. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sort Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sort," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sort. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sort." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sort. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sort." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sort (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sort 
 sorrel 
 sorrow 
 sorrowful 
 sorry 
 sorryish 
 sort 
 sortie 
 sortilege 
 sortition 
 SOS 
 so-so 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix