URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/parchment
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:43:45Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Parchment - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Parchment - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of parchment 

 parchment (n.) 

 c. 1300, parchemin (c. 1200 as a surname), "the skin of sheep or goats prepared for use as writing material," from Old French parchemin (11c., Old North French parcamin ) and directly from Medieval Latin pergamentum, percamentum , from Late Latin pergamena "parchment," a noun use of an adjective (as in pergamena charta , attested in Pliny), from Late Greek pergamenon "of Pergamon," from Pergamon "Pergamum" (modern Bergama), the city in Mysia in Asia Minor where parchment supposedly first was adopted as a substitute for papyrus in 2c. B.C.E.

 The form of the word was possibly influenced in Vulgar Latin by Latin parthica (pellis) "Parthian (leather)." The unetymological Middle English -t probably is by influence of words in -ent (compare ancient ) and by influence of Medieval Latin collateral form pergamentum .

 Technological advances in the production of cheap paper eventually restricted parchment's use largely to formal documents, hence parchment in the sense of "a certificate" (by 1888).
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to parchment 

 ancient (adj.) 

 late 14c., auncyen , of persons, "very old;" c. 1400, of things, "having lasted from a remote period," from Old French ancien "old, long-standing, ancient," from Vulgar Latin *anteanus , literally "from before," adjectivization of Latin ante "before, in front of, against" (from PIE *anti "against," locative singular of root *ant- "front, forehead").

 From early 15c. as "existing or occurring in times long past." Specifically, in history, "belonging to the period before the fall of the Western Roman Empire" (c. 1600, contrasted with medieval and modern ). In English law, "from before the Norman Conquest."

 As a noun, "very old person," late 14c.; "one who lived in former ages," 1530s. Ancient of Days "supreme being" is from Daniel vii.9. Related: Anciently .

 *

 The unetymological -t dates from 15c. and probably is from confusion with or by influence of words in -ent, -ant (suffix of nouns formed from present participles of verbs in first Latin conjugation).

 The same process affected cormorant , parchment , pageant , peasant (in French), pheasant , tyrant (in French), also talaunt , former Middle English variant of talon , etc.and perhaps also currant , truant , pennant , allowing them to "simulate Latin endings to which, etymologically, they have no right." [Fitzedward Hall, "Modern English," 1873]

 -ent 

 word-forming element making adjectives from nouns or verbs, from French -ent and directly from Latin -entem (nominative -ens ), present-participle ending of verbs in -ere / -ire . Old French changed it in many words to -ant , but after c. 1500 some of these in English were changed back to what was supposed to be correct Latin. See -ant .

 biblio- 

 word-forming element meaning "book" or sometimes "Bible," from Greek biblion "paper, scroll," also the ordinary word for "a book as a division of a larger work;" originally a diminutive of byblos "Egyptian papyrus." This is perhaps from Byblos , the Phoenician port from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (modern Jebeil, in Lebanon; for sense evolution compare parchment ). Or the place name might be from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. Compare Bible . Latin liber (see library ) and English book also are ultimately from plant-words.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scroll 

 c. 1400, scroule, scrowell, "roll of parchment or paper" used for writing, an altered (by association with rolle "roll")...of scrowe (c. 1200), from Anglo-French escrowe, Old French escroe, escroele "scrap, strip or roll of parchment," from Frankish...

 roll 

 c. 1200, rolle, "rolled-up piece of parchment or paper, scroll" (especially one inscribed with an official record), from...Old French rolle "document, parchment scroll, decree" (12c.), Medieval Latin rotulus "a roll of paper" (source also of Spanish...

 palimpsest 

 "parchment from which earlier writing has been removed to clear it for new writing," 1660s, from Latin palimpsestus, from...

 indenture 

 Such contracts (especially between master craftsmen and apprentices) were written in full identical versions on a sheet of parchment...

 quire 

 quaier, caier "sheet of paper folded in four" (Modern French cahier), from Medieval Latin quaternum, "set of four sheets of parchment...

 tambourine 

 1782, in the modern sense of "parchment-covered hoop with pieces of metal attached;" earlier "a small drum" (1570s), from...

 volume 

 late 14c., "roll of parchment containing writing; a bound book," from Old French volume "scroll, book; work, volume; girth...

 paper 

 mid-14c., "material consisting of a compacted web or felting of vegetable fibers, commonly as a thin, flexible sheet for writing, printing, etc.," from Anglo-French paper, Old French papier "paper, document," and directly from Latin papyrus "paper, paper made of papyrus stalks," 

 desultory 

 1580s, "skipping about, jumping, flitting" in a figurative sense, from Latin desultorius "hasty, casual, superficial," adjective form of desultor (n.) "a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop," from desul-, stem of desilire "jump down," 

 quarrel 

 [angry dispute] mid-14c., querele, "dispute, altercation," also "ground for complaint," from Old French querele "matter, concern, business; dispute, controversy" (Modern French querelle) and directly from Latin querella "complaint, accusation; lamentation," from queri "to complai

 Share parchment 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/parchment Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/parchment">Etymology of parchment by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of parchment. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/parchment Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of parchment," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parchment. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of parchment." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parchment. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of parchment." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/parchment (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near parchment 
 paratroops 
 parboil 
 parcel 
 parch 
 parcheesi 
 parchment 
 pard 
 pardon 
 pardonable 
 pardoner 
 pare 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix