URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/azimuth
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Azimuth - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Azimuth - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of azimuth 

 azimuth (n.) 

 "arc marking the distance of a star from the north or south point of the meridian," late 14c., from Old French azimut , from Arabic as-sumut "the ways," plural of as-samt "the way, direction" (see zenith ). Related: Azimuthal .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to azimuth 

 zenith (n.) 

 "point of the heavens directly overhead at any place," late 14c., zineth , from Old French cenith (Anglo-French zenith , Modern French zénith ) and directly from Medieval Latin zyneth , zymeth , cenit , senit , bungled scribal transliterations of Arabic samt "road, path," abbreviation of samt ar-ras , literally "the way over the head." Letter -m- misread as -ni- .

 The Medieval Latin word could as well be influenced by the rough agreement of the Arabic term with classical Latin semita "sidetrack, side path" (notion of "thing going off to the side"), from se- "apart" + *mi-ta- , a suffixed form of PIE root *mei- (1) "to change, go, move."

 The figurative sense of "highest point or state" of anything capable of having one is from c. 1600. Related: Zenithal .

 *mei- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to change, go, move," "with derivatives referring to the exchange of goods and services within a society as regulated by custom or law" [Watkins].

 It might form all or part of: amiss ; amoeba ; azimuth ; common ; commune ; communicate ; communication ; communism ; commute ; congee ; demean ; emigrate ; emigration ; excommunicate ; excommunication ; immune ; immutable ; incommunicado ; mad ; mean (adj.1) "low-quality;" mew (n.2) "cage;" mews ; migrate ; migration ; mis- (1) "bad, wrong;" mistake ; Mithras ; molt ; Mstislav ; municipal ; munificent ; mutable ; mutant ; mutate ; mutation ; mutatis mutandis ; mutual ; permeable ; permeate ; permutation ; permute ; remunerate ; remuneration ; transmutation ; transmute ; zenith .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit methati "changes, alternates, joins, meets;" Avestan mitho "perverted, false;" Hittite mutai- "be changed into;" Latin mutare "to change," meare "to go, pass," migrare "to move from one place to another," mutuus "done in exchange;" Old Church Slavonic mite "alternately;" Czech mijim "to go by, pass by," Polish mijać "avoid;" Gothic maidjan "to change."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 glean 

 early 14c., "to gather by acquisition, scrape together," especially grains left in the field after harvesting, but the earliest use in English is figurative, from Old French glener "to glean" (14c., Modern French glaner) "to glean," from Late Latin glennare "make a collection," o

 angel 

 "one of a class of spiritual beings, attendants and messengers of God," a c. 1300 fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele. Both are from Late Latin angelus, from Greek angelos, literally "messenger, envoy, one that announces," in the New Testament "divin

 angle 

 "to fish with a hook," mid-15c., from Old English angel (n.) "angle, hook, fish-hook," related to anga "hook," from Proto-Germanic *angul-, from PIE *ankulo-, suffixed form of root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (see angle (n.)). Compare Old English angul, Old Norse öngull, Old High Germa

 coordinate 

 1640s, "of the same order, belonging to the same rank or degree," from Medieval Latin coordinatus, past participle of coordinare "to set in order, arrange," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see com-) + ordinatio "arrangement," from ordo "row, rank, series, arrangeme

 liberty 

 late 14c., "free choice, freedom to do as one chooses," also "freedom from the bondage of sin," from Old French liberte "freedom, liberty, free will" (14c., Modern French liberté), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) "civil or political freedom, condition of a free man; a

 coincidence 

 c. 1600, "exact correspondence in substance or nature," from French coincidence, from coincider, from Medieval Latin coincidere, literally "to fall upon together," from assimilated form of  Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + incidere "to fall upon" (from in- "upon" + co

 energy 

 1590s, "force of expression," from French énergie (16c.), from Late Latin energia, from Greek energeia "activity, action, operation," from energos "active, working," from en "at" (see en- (2)) + -ergos "that works," from ergon "work, that which is wrought; business; action" (from

 brown-nose 

 also brownnose, "try excessively to make a good impression on one with authority," 1939, American English colloquial, said to be military slang originally, from brown (adj.) + nose (n.), "from the implication that servility is tantamount to having one's nose in the anus of the pe

 delta 

 c. 1200, name of the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet (equivalent to our D), which was shaped like a triangle. The name is from Phoenician daleth "tent door." Sense of "triangular island or alluvial tract between the diverging branches of the mouth of a great river" is because

 contrast 

 1690s, "to set in opposition with a view to show the differences; to stand in opposition or contrast; to set off (each other) by contrast," from French contraster (Old French contrester), modified by or from Italian contrastare "stand out against, strive, contend," from Vulgar La

 Share azimuth 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/azimuth Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/azimuth">Etymology of azimuth by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of azimuth. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/azimuth Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of azimuth," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/azimuth. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of azimuth." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/azimuth. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of azimuth." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/azimuth (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near azimuth 
 ayatollah 
 aye 
 Ayurvedic 
 azalea 
 Azerbaijan 
 azimuth 
 azo- 
 azoic 
 Azores 
 azotemia 
 Aztec 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix