URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/loan
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:15:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Loan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Loan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of loan 

 loan (n.) 

 late 12c., "that which is lent or owning, a thing furnished on promise of future return," also "a gift or reward from a superior, a gift of God," from Old Norse lan "loan," from Proto-Germanic *laikhwniz (source also of Old Frisian len "thing lent," Middle Dutch lene , Dutch leen "loan, fief," Old High German lehan , German Lehn "fief, feudal tenure"), originally "to let have, to leave (to someone)," from PIE *loikw-nes- , suffixed form of root *leikw- "to leave."

 The Norse word also is cognate with Old English læn "gift," which according to OED did not survive into Middle English, but its derived verb lænan is the source of lend (v.). From early 15c. as "a contribution to public finances" (ostensibly voluntary but often coerced; sometimes repaid, sometimes not). As a verb, loan is attested from 1540s, perhaps earlier, and formerly was current, but it has now been supplanted in England by lend , though it survives in American English. Slang loan shark first attested 1900 (see shark (n.)).
 also from late 12c. 

 Entries linking to loan 

 lend (v.) 

 "grant temporary possession of," late 14c., from past tense of Old English lænan "to grant temporarily, lease out, make loans, lend money at interest," from Proto-Germanic *laihwnjan , verb derived from *loikw-nes- , the prehistoric source of Old English læn "gift" (see loan (n.)). Compare Dutch lenen , Old High German lehanon , German lehnen , all verbs derived from nouns. In Middle English the past tense form, with terminal -d , became the principal form on analogy of bend , send , etc. To lend an ear "listen" is from late 14c.

 shark (n.1) 

 "large, voracious fish," by 1560s, perhaps mid-15c., if an isolated instance in a diary quoted in Middle English Compendium is the same word, of uncertain origin.

 The meaning "dishonest person who preys on others," though attested from 1599 ( sharker "artful swindler" in this sense is from 1594), may be the original sense, later transferred to the large, voracious marine fish. If so, it is possibly from German Schorck , a variant of Schurke "scoundrel, villain," agent noun of Middle High German schürgen (German schüren ) "to poke, stir."

 On an old theory, the English word is from a Mayan word, xoc , which might have meant "shark." Northern Europeans seem not to have been familiar with the larger sort of sharks before voyages to the tropics began. A slightly earlier name for it in English was tiburon , from Spanish tiburón (1520s), which probably is from a native word from South America, such as Tupi uperu "shark" (source also of Portuguese tubarão , Catalan tauró ).

 Middle English had hound-fish (early 14c.), which probably was used of dogfish and other small sharks. The general Germanic word seems to be represented by Old Norse har (Norwegian hai , Danis haj , Dutch haai , German Hai , also borrowed in Finnish, Latvian), which is of unknown origin. French requin is literally "grimacer," from Norman requin , from Old French reschignier "to bare the teeth, grimace."

 An ancient Greek word for a shark was karkharias , from karkharos "sharp, jagged, biting," but the old theory that traces the English word to this has been dropped. Other Greek words for large selachians were aetos , bous , lamia , narkē ; skylion was "dogfish." Latin used squalus , from the root of English whale (n.); Lithuanian ryklys is literally "swallower."

 The English word was applied (or re-applied) to voracious or predatory persons, on the image of the fish, from 1707 (originally of pick-pockets); loan shark is attested from 1905.

 There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called by sailors; a grasping, rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our steering oar. [Herman Melville, "Mardi"] 

 loaner 
 wage 
 *leikw- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wage 

 c. 1300, "a payment for services rendered, reward, just deserts;" mid-14c., "salary paid to a provider of service," from Anglo-French and Old North French wage (Old French gage) "pledge, pay, reward," from Frankish *wadja- or another Germanic source (compare Old English wedd "ple

 wisdom 

 Wisdom teeth are so called by 1848 (earlier teeth of wisdom, 1660s), a loan-translation of Latin dentes sapientiae, itself...a loan-translation of Greek sophronisteres (used by Hippocrates, from sophron "prudent, self-controlled"), so called because...

 preposition 

 In grammatical use, a loan-translation of Greek prothesis, literally "a setting before."...Old English used foresetnys as a loan-translation of Latin praepositio....

 compassion 

 Latin compassio is an ecclesiastical loan-translation of Greek sympatheia (see sympathy)....An Old English loan-translation of compassion was efenðrowung....

 Sunday 

 A Germanic loan-translation of Latin dies solis "day of the sun," which is itself a loan-translation of Greek hēmera heliou...

 potash 

 evaporating the solution obtained in a large iron pot or pan; one of the fixed alkalis," 1751, earlier pot-ash (1640s), a loan-translation...French potasse (1570s), Italian potassa are Germanic loan-words. The original plural was pot-ashes....

 Thursday 

 donresdach, Dutch donderdag, Old High German Donares tag, German Donnerstag, Danish and Swedish Torsdag "Thursday"), a loan-translation...The Latin word is the source of Italian giovedi, Old French juesdi, French jeudi, Spanish jueves, and is itself a loan-translation...

 debt 

 c. 1300, dette, "anything owed or due from one person to another, a liability or obligation to pay or render something to another," from Old French dete, from Latin debitum "thing owed," neuter past participle of debere "to owe," originally, "keep something away from someone," fr

 borrow 

 Old English borgian "to lend, be surety for," from Proto-Germanic *burg- "pledge" (source also of Old English borg "pledge, security, bail, debt," Old Frisian borgia "borrow, take up money," Old Norse borga "to become bail for, guarantee," Middle Dutch borghen "to protect, guaran

 pinot 

 type of grape vine used in wine-making, 1912, American English variant spelling of French pineau (attested in English from 1763), name of a family of wine grapes, from pin "pine tree" (see pine (n.)) + diminutive suffix -eau. So called from the shape of the grape clusters. Varian

 Share loan 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/loan Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/loan">Etymology of loan by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of loan. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/loan Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of loan," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/loan. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of loan." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/loan. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of loan." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/loan (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near loan 
 loadstone 
 loaf 
 loafer 
 loam 
 loamy 
 loan 
 loaner 
 loan-translation 
 loan-word 
 loath 
 loathe 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix