URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/charade
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:59:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Charade - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Charade - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of charade 

 charade (n.) 

 1776, from French charade (18c.), probably from Provençal charrado "long talk, chatter," which is of obscure origin, perhaps from charrar "to chatter, gossip," of echoic origin. Compare Italian ciarlare , Spanish charlar "to talk, prattle."

 An enigma whose solution is a word of two or more syllables, each of which separately significant in sound, and which, as well as the whole word, must be discovered from a dialogue or description in which it is used, or from dramatic representation. [Century Dictionary] 

  The thing itself was originally a verse word-play based on enigmatic descriptions of the words or syllables according to particular rules.

 As we have ever made it a Rule to shew our Attention to the Reader, by 'catching the Manners living, as they rise,' as Mr. Pope expresses it, we think ourselves obliged to give Place to the following Specimens of a new Kind of SMALL WIT, which, for some Weeks past, has been the Subject of Conversation in almost every Society, from the Court to the Cottage. The CHARADE is, in fact, a near Relation of the old Rebus. It is usually formed from a Word of two Syllables; the first Syllable is described by the Writer; then the second; they are afterwards united and the whole Word marked out .... [supplement to The Universal Magazine of Knowledge and Pleasure, volumes 58-59, 1776]  

 Among the examples given are:

 My first makes all nature appear of one face; 

 At the next we find music, and beauty and grace; 

 And, if this Charade is most easily read, 

 I think that the third shou'd be thrown at my head. 

 The answer is "snow-ball." The silent charade, the main modern form of the game, was at first a variant known as dumb charades  that adhered to the old pattern, and the performing team acted out all the parts in order before the audience team began to guess.

 There is one species of charade which is performed solely by "dumb motions," somewhat resembling the child's game of "trades and professions"; but the acting charade is a much more amusing, and more difficult matter. ["Goldoni, and Modern Italian Comedy," in The Foreign And Colonial Quarterly Review, vol. vi, 1846]  

 An 1850 book, "Acting Charades," reports that Charades en Action  were all the rage in French society, and that "Lately, the game has been introduced into the drawing-rooms of a few mirth-loving Englishmen. Its success has been tremendous." Welsh siarad obviously is a loan-word.
 also from 1776 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 masquerade 

 1590s, "assembly of persons wearing masks and usually other disguises," from French mascarade or Spanish mascarada "masked party or dance," from Italian mascarata "a ball at which masks are worn," variant of mascherata "masquerade," from maschera (see mask (n.)). Extended sense o

 put-on 

 "ruse, deception," 1937, from earlier adjectival meaning "assumed, feigned" (1620s), a figurative extension of the verbal phrase on the notion of putting on costumes or disguises. To put on (v.), of clothes, garments, etc., is by early 15c.; see from put (v.) + on (adv.). Hence "

 word 

 Old English word "speech, talk, utterance, sentence, statement, news, report, word," from Proto-Germanic *wurda- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian word, Dutch woord, Old High German, German wort, Old Norse orð, Gothic waurd), from PIE *were- (3) "speak, say" (see verb). The 

 send-up 

 "a spoof; action of mocking or teasing," by 1958, slang, from the verbal phrase send up "to mock, make fun of" (1931); see send (v.) + up (adv.). This is perhaps a transferred use of the public school colloquial phrase for "to send a boy to the headmaster" (usually for punishment

 parody 

 1590s (first recorded use in English is in Ben Jonson), "literary work in which the form and expression of dignified writing are closely imitated but are made ridiculous by the ludicrously inappropriate subject or methods; a travesty that follows closely the form and expression o

 lampoon 

 "A personal satire; abuse; censure written not to reform but to vex" [Johnson], 1640s, from French lampon (17c.), a word of unknown origin, said by French etymologists to be from lampons "let us drink," which is said to have been a popular refrain for scurrilous songs, in which c

 takeoff 

 also take-off, "caricature, act of mimicking," 1846, colloquial, from the verbal phrase take off "mimic, ridicule" (1750), earlier "reproduce, copy" (1650s), hence "personate, imitate;" see take (v.) + off (adv.). Also compare take off (n.) "thing that detracts from something, dr

 burlesque 

 1660s, "piece composed in burlesque style, derisive imitation, grotesque parody," earlier as an adjective, "odd, grotesque" (1650s), from French burlesque (16c.), from Italian burlesco "ludicrous," from burla "joke, fun, mockery," possibly ultimately from Late Latin burra "trifle

 caricature 

 "grotesque or ludicrous representation of persons or things by an absurd exaggeration of what is characteristic," 1748 (figurative), 1750 (literal), from French caricature (18c.), from Italian caricatura "satirical picture; an exaggeration," literally "an overloading," from caric

 pasquinade 

 also Pasquin, "a libelous public lampoon," 1650s, from French, from Italian pasquinata (c. 1500), from Pasquino, name given to a mutilated ancient statue (now known to represent Menelaus dragging the dead Patroclus) set up by Cardinal Caraffa in his palace in Rome in 1501; the lo

 Share charade 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/charade Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/charade">Etymology of charade by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of charade. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/charade Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of charade," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/charade. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of charade." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/charade. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of charade." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/charade (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near charade 
 characterisation 
 characterise 
 characteristic 
 characterization 
 characterize 
 charade 
 charcoal 
 charcuterie 
 chard 
 Chardonnay 
 charette 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix