URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tariff
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:12:45Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tariff - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tariff - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tariff 

 tariff (n.) 

 1590s, "arithmetical table," also "official list or table of customs duties on goods for import or export;" also "a law regulating import duties," from Italian tariffa "tariff, price, assessment," Medieval Latin tarifa "list of prices, book of rates," ultimately from Arabic ta'rif "information, notification, a making known; inventory of fees to be paid," verbal noun from arafa "he made known, he taught." A word passed to English from the commercial jargon of the medieval Mediterranean (compare garble , jar (n.), average (perhaps), orange , tabby , etc.).
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to tariff 

 average (n.) 

 late 15c., "any small charge over freight cost, payable by owners of goods to the master of a ship for his care of the goods," also "financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit," from French avarie "damage to ship," and Italian avaria . A word from 12c. Mediterranean maritime trade (compare Spanish averia ), of uncertain origin; sometimes traced to Arabic 'awariya "damaged merchandise" but OED asserts this is a modern word derived from the western use. Dutch avarij , German haferei , etc., also are from Romanic languages. "Few words have received more etymological investigation" [OED].

 Thus, when for the safety of a ship in distress any destruction of property is incurred, either by cutting away the masts, throwing goods overboard, or in other ways, all persons who have goods on board or property in the ship (or the insurers) contribute to the loss according to their average, that is, according to the proportionate value of the goods of each on board. [Century Dictionary]

 The meaning developed to "equal sharing of loss by the interested parties." The transferred sense of "statement of a medial estimate, proportionate distribution of inequality among all," is attested by 1735. The mathematical sense of "a mean proportion arrived at by arithmetical calculation" is from 1755. The sports sense, in reference to batting, is attested by 1845 in cricket.

 garble (v.) 

 early 15c., "to inspect and remove the dirt and dross from (spices)," from Anglo-French garbeler "to sift" (late 14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin, Catalan, and Italian garbellare , from Arabic gharbal "to sift," related to kirbal "sieve," which perhaps is from Late Latin cribellum , diminutive of Latin cribrum "sieve" (from PIE root *krei- "to sieve"). Apparently the word was widespread among Mediterranean traders (compare Italian garbellare , Spanish garbillare "to sift grain").

 In later-medieval Europe, pepper and ginger and some other spices were always imports from the Arabic-speaking Eastern Mediterranean, and the same goes for many botanical drugs, and a few expensive colorants. The spices, drugs and colorants had variable amounts of natural chaff residuals and occasionally had unnatural added chaff. ["English Words of Arabic Ancestry"]

 From late 15c. in a general sense of "sort out the finer parts" of anything, "removal of what is objectionable," then "distort for some devious purpose or to give false impression;" especially "mix up, confuse or distort language" (1680s). Related: Garbled ; garbling . In Middle English garbeler (Anglo-French garbelour ) meant "official who garbles spices and sometimes also other dry goods" (early 15c.); it is attested from 1690s as "one who mixes up or mutilates words or language."

 jar 
 orange 
 tabby 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 jar 

 1520s, "to make a brief, harsh, grating sound," often in reference to bird screeches; the word often is said to be echoic or imitative; compare jargon (n.), jay (n.), garrulous. Figurative sense of "have an unpleasant effect on" is from 1530s; that of "cause to vibrate or shake" 

 orange 

 late 14c., in reference to the fruit of the orange tree (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), an alteration of Arabic naranj, from P

 tabby 

 1630s, "silken stuff; striped silk taffeta" (tabbies was a general name for watered silk), from French tabis "a rich, watered silk" (originally striped), earlier atabis (14c.), via Mediterranean languages from Arabic 'attabi, from 'Attabiyah, a neighborhood of Baghdad where such 

 duty 

 late 14c., duete, "obligatory service, that which ought to be done," also "the force of that which is morally right," from Anglo-French duete, from Old French deu "due, owed," hence "proper, just" (on the notion of "that which one is bound by natural, moral, or legal obligation t

 tax 

 c. 1300, "impose a tax on," from Old French taxer "impose a tax" (13c.) and directly from Latin taxare "evaluate, estimate, assess, handle," also "censure, charge," probably a frequentative form of tangere "to touch," from PIE root *tag- "to touch, handle." Sense of "to burden, p

 impost 

 "tax, duty," 1560s, from French impost (15c., Modern French impôt), from Medieval Latin impostum "a tax imposed," noun use of neuter of Latin impostus, contracted form of impositus, past participle of imponere "to place upon, impose upon" (see impostor). Compare depot. As an arch

 custom 

 c. 1200, custume, "habitual practice," either of an individual or a nation or community, from Old French costume "custom, habit, practice; clothes, dress" (12c., Modern French coutume), from Vulgar Latin *consuetumen, from Latin consuetudinem (nominative consuetudo) "habit, usage

 Balaclava 

 "woolen head covering," especially worn by soldiers, evidently named for village near Sebastopol, site of a battle Oct. 25, 1854, in the Crimean War. But the term (originally Balaclava helmet) does not appear before 1881 and seems to have come into widespread use in the Boer War.

 loo 

 "lavatory," 1940, but perhaps 1922 (based on a pun of Joyce's); perhaps [Dictionary of American Slang] from French lieux d'aisances "lavatory," literally "place of ease," picked up by British servicemen in France during World War I. Or possibly a pun on Waterloo, based on water c

 smorgasbord 

 1893, from Swedish smörgåsbord, literally "butter-goose table," from smörgås, "slice of bread and butter," compounded from smör "butter" (see smear (n.)) and gås, literally "goose" (and from the same Germanic root that yielded English goose (n.)). [Smörgås] properly signifies "a

 Share tariff 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tariff Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tariff">Etymology of tariff by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tariff. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tariff Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tariff," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tariff. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tariff." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tariff. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tariff." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tariff (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tariff 
 tardy 
 tare 
 targe 
 target 
 Tarheel 
 tariff 
 tarmac 
 tarmacadam 
 tarn 
 tarnal 
 tarnation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix