URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenic
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Arsenic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Arsenic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of arsenic 

 arsenic (n.) 

 late 14c., "yellow arsenic, arsenic trisulphide," from Old French arsenic , from Latin arsenicum , from late Greek arsenikon "arsenic" (Dioscorides; Aristotle has it as sandarakē ), adapted from Syriac (al) zarniqa "arsenic," from Middle Persian zarnik "gold-colored" (arsenic trisulphide has a lemon-yellow color), from Old Iranian *zarna- "golden" (from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold).

 The form of the Greek word is folk etymology, literally "masculine," from arsen "male, strong, virile" (compare arseno-koites "lying with men" in New Testament) supposedly in reference to the powerful properties of the substance. As an element, from 1812. The mineral (as opposed to the element) is properly orpiment , from Latin auri pigmentum , so called because it was used to make golden dyes. Related: Arsenical .

 ... se lo pueden comer las hormigas o le puede caer en la cabeza una gran langosta de arsenico ... [Lorca, on the poet overmastered by intellect]
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to arsenic 

 *ghel- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine;" it forms words for "gold" (the "bright" metal), words denoting colors, especially "yellow" and "green," also "bile, gall," for its color, and a large group of Germanic gl- words having to do with shining and glittering and, perhaps, sliding. Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is "perhaps because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to yellow."

 It might form all or part of: arsenic ; Chloe ; chloral ; chloride ; chlorinate ; chlorine ; chloro- ; chloroform ; chlorophyll ; chloroplast ; cholecyst ; choler ; cholera ; choleric ; cholesterol ; cholinergic ; Cloris ; gall (n.1) "bile, liver secretion;" gild ; glad ; glance ; glare ; glass ; glaze ; glazier ; gleam ; glee ; glib ; glide ; glimmer ; glimpse ; glint ; glissade ; glisten ; glister ; glitch ; glitter ; glitzy ; gloaming ; gloat ; gloss (n.1) "glistening smoothness, luster;" glow ; glower ; gold ; guilder ; jaundice ; melancholic ; melancholy ; yellow ; zloty .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit harih "yellow, tawny yellow," hiranyam "gold;" Avestan zari "yellow;" Old Persian daraniya- , Avestan zaranya- "gold;" Greek khlōros "greenish-yellow color," kholos "bile, gall, wrath;" Latin helvus "yellowish, bay," Gallo-Latin gilvus "light bay;" Lithuanian geltonas "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlutu , Polish żółty , Russian zeltyj "yellow;" Latin galbus "greenish-yellow," fellis "bile, gall;" Lithuanian žalias "green," želvas "greenish," tulžis "bile;" Old Church Slavonic zelenu , Polish zielony , Russian zelenyj "green;" Old Irish glass , Welsh and Breton glas "green," also "gray, blue;" Old English galla "gall, bile," geolu , geolwe , German gelb , Old Norse gulr "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlato , Russian zoloto , Old English gold , Gothic gulþ "gold;" Old English glæs "glass; a glass vessel."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 orpiment 

 "arsenic trisulphide," a bright yellow mineral substance used in dyeing as a pigment and also medicinally and for destroying...lice, late 13c., orpyment, from Old French orpiment "arsenic trisulphide, yellow color," from Latin auripigmentum, from...

 cobalt 

 from German kobold "household goblin" (13c.), which became also a Harz Mountains silver miners' term for rock laced with arsenic...

 as 

 c. 1200, worn-down form of Old English alswa "quite so, wholly so," literally "all so" (see also), fully established by c. 1400. Equivalent to so; any distinction in use is purely idiomatic. Related to German als "as, than," from Middle High German also. Phrase as well "just as m

 element 

 c. 1300, "earth, air, fire, or water; one of the four things regarded by the ancients as the constituents of all things," from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementum "rudiment, first principle, matter in its most basic form" (translating Greek stoikheion), origin and ori

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 white 

 Old English hwit "bright, radiant; clear, fair," also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-Germanic *hweit- (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit, Old Norse hvitr, Dutch wit, Old High German hwiz, German weiß, Gothic hveits), from PIE *kweid-o-, suffixed form of ro

 Caesar 

 "an emperor, a ruler, a dictator," late 14c., cesar, from Cæsar, originally a surname of the Julian gens in Rome, elevated to a title after Caius Julius Caesar (100 B.C.E.-44 B.C.E.) became dictator; it was used as a title of emperors down to Hadrian (138 C.E.). The name is of un

 ecumenical 

 late 16c., "representing the entire (Christian) world," formed in English as an ecclesiastical word, from Late Latin oecumenicus "general, universal," from Greek oikoumenikos "from the whole world," from he oikoumene ge "the inhabited world (as known to the ancient Greeks); the G

 capacity 

 early 15c., capacite, "ability to contain; size, extent;" also "ability" in a legal, moral, or intellectual sense, from Old French capacité "ability to hold" (15c.), from Latin capacitatem (nominative capacitas) "breadth, capacity, capability of holding much," noun of state from 

 Share arsenic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenic">Etymology of arsenic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of arsenic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of arsenic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of arsenic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenic. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of arsenic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenic (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near arsenic 
 arrow-root 
 arroyo 
 arse 
 arsehole 
 arsenal 
 arsenic 
 arse-smart 
 arseward 
 arson 
 arsonist 
 arsy-versy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close