URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nest
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:45:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nest 

 nest (n.) 

 "structure built by a bird or domestic fowl for the insulation and rearing of its young," Old English nest "bird's nest; snug retreat," also "young bird, brood," from Proto-Germanic *nistaz (source also of Middle Low German, Middle Dutch nest , German Nest ; not found in Scandinavian or Gothic), from PIE *nizdo- (source also of Sanskrit nidah "resting place, nest," Latin nidus "nest," Old Church Slavonic gnezdo , Old Irish net , Welsh nyth , Breton nez "nest"), probably from *ni "down" + from PIE root *sed- (1) "to sit."

 From c. 1200 of an animal or insect. Used since Middle English in reference to various accumulations of things, especially of diminishing sizes, each fitting within the next (such as a nest of drawers , early 18c.). Nest egg "retirement savings" is from 1700; it was originally "a real or artificial egg left in a nest to induce the hen to go on laying there" ( nest ei , early 14c.), hence "something laid up as the beginning of a continued growth."

 nest (v.) 

 Middle English nesten , from Old English nistan "to build (a bird's) nests, to make or live in a nest," from Proto-Germanic *nistijanan , from the source of nest (n.). The modern verb is perhaps a new formation in Middle English from the noun. Related: Nested ; nesting .

 Entries linking to nest 

 nesting (adj.) 

 1650s, "making or using a nest," present-participle adjective from nest (v.). Of objects, "fitted into one another," from 1934.

 crows-nest (n.) 

 "box fitted up the maintopmast or maintopgallant on arctic and whaling vessels for the shelter of the lookout man," 1818; see crow (n.) + nest (n.).

 nestle 
 nestling 
 nidicolous 
 nidification 
 nidus 
 *sed- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cuddle 

 "hug, embrace so as to keep warm; lie close or snug," 1520s (implied in cudlyng), of uncertain origin. OED calls it "A dialectal or nursery word." Perhaps a variant or frequentative form of obsolete cull, coll "to embrace" (see collar (n.)); or perhaps from Middle English *couthe

 nuzzle 

 early 15c., "to bring the nose to the ground," back-formation from noselyng "face-downward, on the nose, in a prostrate position" (c. 1400), frequentative of nose (v.). The meaning "burrow with the nose, thrust the nose into" is attested from 1520s; that of "lie snug" is from 159

 niche 

 Watkins suggests that the word is from an Old French noun derived from nichier "to nestle, nest, build a nest," via Gallo-Roman...*nidicare from Latin nidus "nest" (see nidus), but that, too, has difficulties....

 brood 

 Old English brod "offspring of egg-laying animals, hatchlings, young birds hatched in one nest," from Proto-Germanic *brod...

 hurrah 

 American English hurra's nest "state of confusion" is from 1829....

 forsake 

 duty should or might have led us to remain: as, to forsake one's home, friends, country, or cause; a bird forsakes its nest...

 lapwing 

 [Barnhart], but the lapwing also flaps on the ground pretending to have a broken wing to lure egg-hunters away from its nest...

 grin 

 Old English grennian "show the teeth" (in pain or anger), common Germanic (cognates: Old Norse grenja "to howl," grina "to grin;" Dutch grienen "to whine;" German greinen "to cry"), from PIE root *ghrei- "be open." Sense of "bare the teeth in a broad smile" is late 15c., perhaps 

 ring 

 [circular band] Old English hring "circlet of metal, especially one of a precious metal for wearing on the finger ornamentally, also a part of a mail coat; anything circular," from Proto-Germanic *hringaz "something curved, circle" (source also of Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hr

 implant 

 1540s, "to plant in" (abstractly, of ideas, emotions, etc.), from French implanter "to insert, engraft" (alongside Old French emplanter "to plant"), literally "plant in," from assimilated form of in- "into, in, on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + planter "to plant" (see plant (n

 Share nest 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nest Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nest">Etymology of nest by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nest. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nest Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nest," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nest. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nest." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nest. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nest." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nest (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nest 
 nescient 
 nesh 
 ness 
 -ness 
 Nessie 
 nest 
 nesting 
 nestle 
 nestling 
 Nestor 
 Nestorian 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix