URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollute
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:21:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pollute - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pollute - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pollute 

 pollute (v.) 

 late 14c., polluten , "to defile, violate the sanctity of, render ceremonially unclean," a back formation from pollution , or else from Latin pollutus , past participle of polluere "to defile, pollute, contaminate." Related: Polluted ; polluting . Meaning "make physically foul" is from 1540s; specific sense "contaminate the environment" emerged by 1860, but was not yet in the 1895 Century Dictionary.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to pollute 

 polluted (adj.) 

 late 14c., "ceremonially unclean, profane;" c. 1400, "rendered impure or unclean," past-participle adjective from pollute (v.). Meaning "drunk" is from 1912, American English slang; ecological sense is by 1888.

 pollution (n.) 

 mid-14c., pollucioun , "discharge of semen other than during sex," later, "desecration, profanation, defilement, legal or ceremonial uncleanness" (late 14c.), from Late Latin pollutionem (nominative pollutio ) "defilement," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin polluere "to soil, defile, contaminate," probably from * por- "before" (a variation of pro "before, for;" see pro- ) + -luere "smear," from PIE root *leu- "dirt; make dirty" (see lutose ). Sense of "contamination of the environment" is recorded from c. 1860, but not common until c. 1955.

 pollutant 
 polluter 
 unpolluted 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 contaminate 

 early 15c., "infect with a disease, defile," from Latin contaminatus, past participle of contaminare "to defile, to corrupt, to deteriorate by mingling," originally "to bring into contact," from contamen "contact; pollution," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con

 infect 

 late 14c., "fill with disease, render pestilential; pollute, contaminate; to corrupt morally," from Latin infectus, past...

 soil 

 early 13c., "to defile or pollute with sin," from Old French soillier "to splatter with mud, to foul or make dirty," originally...

 miasma 

 vapors," from Greek miasma (genitive miasmatos) "stain, pollution, defilement, taint of guilt," from stem of miainein "to pollute...

 smite 

 a stick, etc.," late 12c., smiten, from Old English smitan, which however is attested only as "to daub, smear on; soil, pollute...

 silo 

 1835, "a pit in the ground or a cavity in rock for storage of green crops," often in reference to other countries, and the word in English is explained at first, from Spanish silo, traditionally derived from Latin sirum (nominative sirus), from Greek siros "a pit to keep corn in.

 grime 

 1580s, of uncertain origin, probably alteration of Middle English grim "dirt, filth" (early 14c.), from Middle Low German greme "dirt" or another Low German source, from Proto-Germanic *grim- "to smear" (source also of Flemish grijm, Middle Dutch grime "soot, mask"), from PIE roo

 taint 

 two distinct words of different origin overlap in the modern verb. From late 14c. as "to dye, impart color," from Anglo-French teinter, Old French teindre "to dye, color," from Latin tingere (see tincture, tint). Teintour as an English surname, meaning probably "one who dyes clot

 titan 

 early 15c., from Latin titan, from Greek titan, "a member of a mythological race of giants" (originally six sons and six daughters of Gaia and Uranus) who were overthrown by Zeus and the other gods. The war was a popular theme for Greek artists and writers. The name is perhaps fr

 peremptory 

 mid-15c., peremptorie, "absolute, allowing no refusal," a legal term, from Anglo-French peremptorie, from Late Latin peremptorius "destructive, decisive, final," from peremptor "destroyer," agent noun from past-participle stem of Latin perimpere "destroy, cut off," from per "away

 Share pollute 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollute Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollute">Etymology of pollute by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pollute. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollute Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pollute," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollute. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pollute." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollute. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pollute." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollute (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pollute 
 pollinate 
 pollination 
 polliwog 
 pollster 
 pollutant 
 pollute 
 polluted 
 polluter 
 pollution 
 Pollux 
 Polly 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix