URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/parallel
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:27:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Parallel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Parallel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of parallel 

 parallel (adj.) 

 1540s, in geometry, of lines, "lying in the same plane but never meeting in either direction;" of planes, "never meeting, however far extended;" from French parallèle (16c.) and directly from Latin parallelus , from Greek parallēlos "parallel," from para allēlois "beside one another," from para- "beside" (see para- (1)) + allēlois "each other," from allos "other" (from PIE root *al- "beyond"). Figurative sense of "having the same direction, tendency, or course" is from c. 1600.

 As a noun from 1550s, "a line parallel to another line." Meanings "a comparison made by placing things side by side" and "thing equal to or resembling another in all particulars" are from 1590s. Parallel bars as gymnastics apparatus is recorded from 1868.
 also from 1540s 

 parallel (v.) 

 1590s, transitive, "place in position parallel to something else," from parallel (n.). Meaning "make closely similar to something else" is from 1620s; intransitive sense of "be like or equal, agree" is from 1620s.
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to parallel 

 imparalleled (adj.) 

 "unparalleled," c. 1600; see in- (1) "not" + parallel .

 parallelism (n.) 

 c. 1600, " parallel position," from Greek parallelismos , from parallelizein (see parallel ). In literature, "correspondence resulting from repetition of the same sentiment, imagery, or construction" is from 1778.

 parallelogram 
 unequaled 
 unparalleled 
 *al- 
 para- 
 *al- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 perpendicular 

 late 15c., perpendiculer, of a line, "lying at right angles to the horizon" (in astronomy, navigation, etc.), from an earlier adverb (late 14c.), "at right angles to the horizon," from Old French perpendiculer, from Late Latin perpendicularis "vertical, as a plumb line," from Lat

 oblique 

 early 15c., "slanting, sloping, sideways; crooked, not straight or direct," originally of muscles or eyes, from Old French oblique (14c.) and directly from Latin obliquus "slanting, sidelong, indirect," which is perhaps from ob "against" (see ob-) + root of licinus "bent upward,"

 twin 

 Old English twinn "consisting of two, twofold, double, two-by-two," from Proto-Germanic *twisnjaz "double" (source also of Old Norse tvinnr "double, twin," Old Danish tvinling, Dutch tweeling, German zwillung), from PIE *dwisno- (source also of Latin bini "two each," Lithuanian d

 trapezoid 

 Technically, a plane four-sided figure with no two sides parallel....But in English since c. 1800, often confused with trapezium in its sense of "a quadrilateral figure having only sides parallel...

 rapscallion 

 It had a parallel in now-extinct rampallion (1590s), from Middle English ramp (n.2) "ill-behaved woman."...

 twill 

 "cloth woven in parallel diagonal lines," early 14c., Scottish and northern English variant of Middle English twile, from...

 simile 

 "a comparison of two things in rhetoric or poetry," late 14c., from Latin simile "a like thing; a comparison, likeness, parallel...

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 modify 

 late 14c., modifien, "alter, amend, adjust, change the properties, form, or function of;" also "set limits, keep within the bounds of reason; choose a middle course," from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare "to limit, measure off, restrain," from modus "measure, ma

 echo 

 mid-14c., "sound repeated by reflection," from Latin echo, from Greek ēkhō, personified in classical mythology as a mountain nymph who pined away for love of Narcissus until nothing was left of her but her voice, from or related to ēkhē "sound," ēkhein "to resound," from PIE *wag

 Share parallel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/parallel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/parallel">Etymology of parallel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of parallel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/parallel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of parallel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parallel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of parallel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parallel. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of parallel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/parallel (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near parallel 
 parakeet 
 paralanguage 
 paralegal 
 paralipsis 
 parallax 
 parallel 
 parallelism 
 parallelogram 
 paralyse 
 paralysis 
 paralytic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix