URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mary
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Mary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Mary 

 Mary 

 fem. proper name, Old English Maria , Marie , name of the mother of Jesus, from Latin Maria , from Greek Mariam , Maria , from Aramaic Maryam , from Hebrew Miryam , name of the sister of Moses (Exodus xv), a word of unknown origin, said to mean literally "rebellion."

 The nursery rhyme "Mary had a Little Lamb" was written early 1830 by Sarah Josepha Hale of Boston and published September 1830 in "Juvenile Miscellany," a popular magazine for children. Mary Jane is 1921 as the proprietary name of a kind of low-heeled shoe worn chiefly by young girls, 1928 as slang for marijuana .

 Mary Sue as a type of ludicrously idealized fictional character, originally in fan fiction based on the Star Trek television series, is attested by 1992, from the name of a character in the 1973 parody story A Trekkie's Tale . Attested in reference to other types of fiction by 1999. The male counterpart is a Gary Stu (2002) a Marty Stu (2003) or a Murray Sue (2002).

 Mary Sue is often easy to spot because she's impossible to miss. Put simply, Mary Sue is more: more charming, more belligerent, more understanding, more beautiful, more graceful, more eccentric, more spiritual, more klutzy. She has better hair, better clothes, better weapons, better brains, better sex, and better karma than anyone else. [Pat Pflieger, "Too Good to Be True: 150 Years of Mary Sue." 2001.]

 Entries linking to Mary 

 marijuana (n.) 

 a preparation of Cannabis sativa for use as an intoxicant, generally by smoking, 1918, altered by influence of Spanish proper name Maria Juana "Mary Jane" from mariguan (1894), from Mexican Spanish marihuana , which is of uncertain origin. As the plant was not native to Mexico, a native source for the word seems unlikely.

 gun moll (n.) 

 "female criminal," 1908, second element from nickname of Mary , used of disreputable females since early 1600s; first element from slang gonif "thief" (1885), from Yiddish, from Hebrew gannabh "thief" (compare gonoph ); influenced by gun (n.).

 Maria 
 Marian 
 marigold 
 Marilyn 
 Mariolatry 
 Marion 
 marionette 
 marry 
 Miriam 
 Moll 
 molly 
 Polly 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 marry 

 c. 1300, marien, of parents or superiors, "to give (offspring) in marriage," also intransitive, "to enter into the conjugal state, take a husband or wife," from Old French marier "to get married; to marry off, give in marriage; to bring together in marriage," from Latin marītāre 

 molly 

 seabird, 1857, short for mollymawk, mallemuck, from Dutch mallemok, from mal "foolish" + mok "gull."...fem. proper name, a diminutive of Moll, which is a familiar form of Mary....a common 18c. colloquial term for "homosexual man" or "man who is deemed effeminate, a sissy," by 170

 bain-marie 

 the name of a meat dish cooked in one), from French bain-marie, from Medieval Latin balneum Mariae, literally "bath of Mary...to French sources, perhaps so called for the gentleness of its heating; others credit the name to the supposed inventor, Mary...Middle English had balne of mary (late 15c.)....

 marrowbone 

 The conjecture that it is a corruption of Mary-bones, in allusion to the reverence paid to the Virgin Mary by kneeling "is...

 madonna 

 Often specifically "the Virgin Mary," hence the sense of "picture or statue of the Virgin Mary," attested in English by 1640s...

 purification 

 of the soul from guilt or defilement," originally especially in reference to the Feast of the Purification of the Virgin Mary...

 Mercedes 

 fem. proper name, from Spanish, abbreviation of Maria de las Mercedes "Mary of the Mercies," from plural of merced "mercy...

 bust 

 1690s, "sculpture of upper torso and head," from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto "upper body," from Latin bustum "funeral monument, tomb," originally "funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned," perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus "burned around," past 

 chauvinism 

 1840, "exaggerated, blind nationalism; patriotism degenerated into a vice," from French chauvinisme (1839), from the character Nicholas Chauvin, soldier of Napoleon's Grand Armee, who idolized Napoleon and the Empire long after it was history, in the Cogniards' popular 1831 vaude

 prevent 

 early 15c., preventen, "act in anticipation of, act sooner or more quickly than (another)," from Latin praeventus, past participle of praevenire "come before, anticipate, hinder," in Late Latin also "to prevent," from prae "before" (see pre-) + venire "to come" (from a suffixed f

 Share Mary 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mary Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mary">Etymology of Mary by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Mary. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mary Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Mary," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mary. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Mary." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mary. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Mary." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mary (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Mary 
 marvel 
 marvellous 
 marvelous 
 Marxism 
 Marxist 
 Mary 
 Maryland 
 marzipan 
 masala 
 mascara 
 mascot 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix