URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/jersey
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:58:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Jersey - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Jersey - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of jersey 

 jersey (n.) 

 1580s as a type of knitted cloth; 1842 as a breed of cattle; both from Jersey , one of the Channel Islands. Its name is said to be a corruption of Latin Caesarea , the Roman name for the island (or another near it), influenced by Old English ey "island" (see island ); but it is perhaps rather a Viking name (perhaps meaning "Geirr's island").

 The meaning "woolen knitted close-fitting tunic," especially one worn during sporting events, is from 1845. In American English, short for New Jersey from 1758. Related: Jerseyman .
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to jersey 

 island (n.) 

 1590s, earlier yland (c. 1300), from Old English igland , iegland "an island," from ieg "island" (from Proto-Germanic *awjo "thing on the water," from PIE root *akwa- "water") + land (n.).

 The spelling of the first syllable was modified from 16c. by association with similar but unrelated isle . The second syllable was added to distinguish it from homonyms, especially Old English ea "water" (see ea ). Similar formation are in Old Frisian eiland , Middle Dutch eyland , German Eiland , Danish öland , etc.

 In place names, Old English ieg is often used of "slightly raised dry ground offering settlement sites in areas surrounded by marsh or subject to flooding" [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names], as probably in Isle of Ely . Old English had ealand "river-land, watered place, meadow by a river."

 As an adjective from 1620s. Island univers e "solar system" (1846) translates German Weltinsel (von Humboldt, 1845). Related: Islander .

 Guernsey 

 Channel Island, the name is Viking. The second element of the name is Old Norse ey "island" (compare Jersey ); the first element uncertain, traditionally meaning "green," but perhaps rather representing a Viking personal name, such as Grani .

 Like neighboring Jersey , its name also was taken as the word for a coarse, close-fitting vest of wool (1839), worn originally by seamen, and in Australia the word supplies many of the usages of jersey in U.S. As a type of cattle bred there, from 1784.

 New Jersey 
 Orkney 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sweater 

 "woolen vest or jersey, originally worn in rowing," 1882, from earlier sweaters "clothing worn to produce sweating and reduce...

 docudrama 

 Lewis and produced by the Tenafly, New Jersey, Citizens Education Council and the Tenafly Drama Workshop after the defeat...

 Mason-Dixon Line 

 became the technical boundary between "free" and "slave" states after 1804, when the last slaveholding state above it (New Jersey...

 rangy 

 As a rule, we hold that the Jersey should be "growthy," deep-flanked, and loose-jointed, and should have, generally, the...

 Rambo 

 The family name is an old one in New Jersey and Pennsylvania (where Morrell supposedly first heard it), originally Swedish...

 Limburger 

 Some frauds a few years ago started a Limburger cheese factory down in Keyport, New Jersey, but the imposition was soon exposed...

 Elizabeth 

 The city in New Jersey is named for Lady Elizabeth Carteret (d.1697), wife of one of the first proprietors of the colony....

 us 

 Old English us (cognate with Old Saxon, Old Frisian us, Old Norse, Swedish oss, Dutch ons, German uns), accusative and dative plural of we, from PIE *nes- (2), forming oblique cases of the first person plural personal pronoun (source also of Sanskrit nas, Avestan na, Hittite nash

 America 

 1507, "the western hemisphere, North and South America," in Cartographer Martin Waldseemüller's treatise "Cosmographiae Introductio," from Modern Latin Americanus, traditionally after Amerigo Vespucci (1454-1512) who made two trips to the New World as a navigator and claimed to h

 knit 

 Old English cnyttan "to tie with a knot, bind together, fasten by tying," related to Old Norse knytja "bind together, form into a knot," Middle Low German knütten "to tie, knot," Old English cnotta "a knot," from Proto-Germanic *knuttjan, from stem *knutt-. Of brows, late 14c. In

 Share jersey 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/jersey Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/jersey">Etymology of jersey by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of jersey. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/jersey Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of jersey," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jersey. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of jersey." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jersey. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of jersey." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/jersey (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near jersey 
 jeroboam 
 Jerome 
 Jerry 
 jerry-built 
 jerry-can 
 jersey 
 Jerusalem 
 jess 
 jessamine 
 Jesse 
 Jessica 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix