URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/regolith
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:24:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Regolith - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Regolith - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of regolith 

 regolith (n.) 

 in geology, "unconsolidated rocky material covering bedrock," 1897, from Latinized form of Greek rhēgos "rug, blanket" (from PIE *reg- (3) "to dye;" see raga ) + lithos "stone" (see litho- ).
 also from 1897 

 Entries linking to regolith 

 raga (n.) 

 in Indian music, a melodic framework for improvised melodies, 1788, from Sanskrit raga-s "harmony, melody, mode in music," literally "color, mood," related to rajyati "it is dyed," from PIE *reg- (3) "to dye" (source also of Greek rhegos "blanket, rug").

 litho- 

 before vowels, lith- , word-forming element meaning "stone, rock;" from Greek lithos "stone, a precious stone, marble; a piece on a game board," a word of unknown origin.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 virtual 

 late 14c., "influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent natural qualities," from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus "excellence, potency, efficacy," literally "manliness, manhood" (see virtue). The meaning "being something in essen

 matrix 

 late 14c., matris, matrice, "uterus, womb," from Old French matrice "womb, uterus" and directly from Latin mātrix (genitive mātricis) "pregnant animal," in Late Latin "womb," also "source, origin," from māter (genitive mātris) "mother" (see mother (n.1)). The many figurative and 

 staple 

 late 13c., stapel, "bent piece of metal with pointed ends," from Old English stapol, stapel "post, pillar, trunk of a tree, steps to a house," from Proto-Germanic *stapulaz "pillar" (source also of Old Norse stopull "tower," Old Saxon stapal "candle, small tub," Old Frisian stapu

 delight 

 c. 1200, delit, "high degree of pleasure or satisfaction," also "that which gives great pleasure," from Old French delit "pleasure, delight, sexual desire," from delitier "please greatly, charm," from Latin delectare "to allure, delight, charm, please," frequentative of delicere 

 fit 

 1680s, "process of fitting," from fit (v.). From 1823 as "the fitting of one thing to another;" 1831 as "the way something fits."..."paroxysm, sudden attack" (as of anger), 1540s, probably via Middle English fit (n.) "painful, exciting experience" (early 14c.), from Old English f

 higgledy-piggledy 

 "confusedly, hurriedly," 1590s, a "vocal gesture" [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky, hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c. 160

 stress 

 c. 1300, stresse, "hardship, adversity; constraining or compelling force or pressure, coercion;" the original senses are mostly archaic or obsolete. The word is in part a shortening of distress (n.) and in part from Old French estrece "narrowness, oppression," from Vulgar Latin *

 butterfly 

 common name of any lepidopterous insect active in daylight, Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but the name is of obscure signification. Perhaps based on the old notion that the insects (or, according to Grimm, witches disguised as butterflies) consume bu

 Prussia 

 region in northeastern Germany, late 14c., Prusse (late 13c. as a surname), from Medieval Latin Borussi, Prusi, Latinized forms of the native name of the Lithuanian people who lived in the bend of the Baltic before being conquered 12c. and exterminated by (mostly) German crusader

 testimony 

 c. 1400, "proof or demonstration of some fact, evidence, piece of evidence;" early 15c., "legal testimony, sworn statement of a witness," from Old North French testimonie (Old French testimoine 11c.), from Latin testimonium "evidence, proof, witness, attestation," from testis "a 

 Share regolith 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/regolith Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/regolith">Etymology of regolith by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of regolith. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/regolith Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of regolith," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/regolith. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of regolith." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/regolith. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of regolith." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/regolith (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near regolith 
 registrant 
 registrar 
 registration 
 registry 
 regnant 
 regolith 
 regress 
 regression 
 regressive 
 regret 
 regretful 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix