URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/samovar
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:02:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Samovar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Samovar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of samovar 

 samovar (n.) 

 "copper urn, used in Russia and nearby regions, in which water is kept boiling for use as needed in making tea," 1830, from Russian samovar , literally "self-boiler," from sam "self" (from PIE root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with") + varit "to boil" (from Old Church Slavonic variti "to cook," from PIE root *wer- "to burn"); but this is perhaps folk-etymology if the word is from Tatar sanabar "tea-urn."
 also from 1830 

 Entries linking to samovar 

 *sem- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "one; as one, together with."

 It might form all or part of: anomalous ; anomaly ; assemble ; assimilate ; ensemble ; facsimile ; fulsome ; hamadryad ; haplo- ; haploid ; hendeca- ; hendiadys ; henotheism ; hetero- ; heterodox ; heterosexual ; homeo- ; homeopathy ; homeostasis ; homily ; homo- (1) "same, the same, equal, like;" homogenous ; homoiousian ; homologous ; homonym ; homophone ; homosexual ; hyphen ; resemble ; same ; samizdat ; samovar ; samsara ; sangha ; Sanskrit ; seem ; seemly ; semper- ; sempiternal ; similar ; simple ; simplex ; simplicity ; simulacrum ; simulate ; simulation ; simultaneous ; single ; singlet ; singular ; some ; -some (1); -some (2); verisimilitude .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit sam "together," samah "even, level, similar, identical;" Avestan hama "similar, the same;" Greek hama "together with, at the same time," homos "one and the same," homios "like, resembling," homalos "even;" Latin similis "like;" Old Irish samail "likeness;" Old Church Slavonic samu "himself."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 urn 

 late 14c., "large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead," from Latin urna "a jar, vessel of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead" (also used as a ballot box and for drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus "pitcher, jug," and 

 run 

 Old English, "move swiftly by using the legs, go on legs more rapidly than walking," also "make haste, hurry; be active, pursue or follow a course," and, of inanimate things, "to move over a course." The modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which t

 SAM 

 1958, acronym for surface to air missile (see surface (n.))....masc. proper name, typically a shortening of Samuel (q.v.). Sam Browne in reference to a type of belt with shoulder strap is by 1915, from Sir Samuel James Browne (1824-1901), the British general who invented it. Sam 

 stamina 

 1670s, "rudiments or original elements of something," from Latin stamina "threads," plural of stamen (genitive staminis) "thread, warp" (see stamen). The sense of "power to resist or recover, strength, endurance" is attested by 1726 (originally plural), from the earlier meaning "

 hypochondria 

 "unfounded belief that one is sick," by 1816; a narrowing from the earlier sense "depression or melancholy without real cause" (1660s); from Middle English medical term ipocondrie "lateral regions of the upper abdomen" (late 14c.). This is from Late Latin hypochondria, from Greek

 education 

 1530s, "child-rearing," also "the training of animals," from French education (14c.) and directly from Latin educationem (nominative educatio) "a rearing, training," noun of action from past-participle stem of educare (see educate). Originally of instruction in social codes and m

 virtual 

 late 14c., "influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent natural qualities," from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus "excellence, potency, efficacy," literally "manliness, manhood" (see virtue). The meaning "being something in essen

 posh 

 by 1914 (1903 as push), a word of uncertain origin, but there is no evidence for the common derivation from an acronym of port outward, starboard home, supposedly the shipboard accommodations of wealthy British traveling to India on the P & O Lines (to keep their cabins out o

 chocolate 

 c. 1600, from Mexican Spanish chocolate, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) chocola-tl, "chocolate," and/or cacahua-tl "chocolate, chocolate bean." With a-tl "water." In the first form, the first element might be related to xocalia "to make something bitter or sour" [Karttunen]. Made with co

 tabernacle 

 mid-13c., "portable sanctuary carried by the Israelites in the wilderness," from Old French tabernacle "the Jewish Tabernacle; tent, canopy; tomb, monument" (12c.), from Latin tabernaculum "tent," especially "a tent of an augur" (for taking observations), diminutive of taberna "h

 Share samovar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/samovar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/samovar">Etymology of samovar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of samovar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/samovar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of samovar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/samovar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of samovar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/samovar. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of samovar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/samovar (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near samovar 
 Sammy 
 Samnite 
 Samoa 
 Samos 
 Samothrace 
 samovar 
 Samoyed 
 sampan 
 sample 
 sampler 
 samsara 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close