URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dragoman
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:16:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dragoman - Wikipedia

Dragoman - Wikipedia 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Contents 
 Current events 
 Random article 
 About Wikipedia 
 Contact us 

 Contribute

 Help 
 Learn to edit 
 Community portal 
 Recent changes 
 Upload file 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donate 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donate 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 (Top)

 1 
 Etymology and variants 

 2 
 History 

 Toggle History subsection 

 2.1 
 In the Ottoman Empire 

 2.2 
 Western dragomans 

 3 
 See also 

 4 
 Notes 

 5 
 References 

 6 
 External links 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 Dragoman 

 26 languages 

 العربية 
 Azərbaycanca 
 Български 
 Català 
 Čeština 
 Deutsch 
 Español 
 Français 
 עברית 
 Hrvatski 
 Magyar 
 Հայերեն 
 Bahasa Indonesia 
 Italiano 
 Македонски 
 Nederlands 
 Polski 
 Português 
 Română 
 Русский 
 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
 Shqip 
 Svenska 
 Türkçe 
 Українська 
 Vèneto 

 Edit links 

 Article 

 Talk 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 
 Switch to legacy parser 

 Print/export

 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Wikimedia Commons 
 Wikidata item 

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

 Arab interpreter of Eurasian languages

 For other uses, see Dragoman (disambiguation) .

 Amédée Jaubert (left) was Napoleon's "favourite orientalist adviser and dragoman". [ 1 ] He accompanied the Persian envoy Mirza Mohammad-Reza Qazvini at Finckenstein Palace to meet with Napoleon on 27 April 1807 for the Treaty of Finckenstein . Detail of a painting by François Mulard . 
 Plate from The Crescent and the Cross by Elliot Warburton entitled "Encampment at Baalbec , lady and dragoman in foreground." 
 A dragoman (ترجمان) was an interpreter , translator, and official guide between Turkish -, Arabic -, and Persian -speaking countries and polities of the Middle East and European embassies , consulates , vice-consulates and trading posts . A dragoman had to have a knowledge of Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and European languages. 

 In the Ottoman Empire , dragomans were mainly members of the Ottoman Greek community, who possessed considerable multilingual skills, because Greek trading communities did substantial business in the markets of the Mediterranean Sea , the Black Sea , the Atlantic Ocean , [ which? ] and the Indian Ocean . [ 2 ] To a lesser extent, other communities with international commercial links, notably the Armenians , were recruited. [ 2 ] 

 Dragoman Joseph Shaar. Temple of Jupiter, Baalbek , 1891 

 Etymology and variants
 [ edit ] 

 In Arabic the word is ترجمان ( tarjumān ), in Turkish tercüman . Deriving from the Semitic quadriliteral root t-r-g-m , it appears in Akkadian as "targumannu," in Ge'ez (Classical Ethiopic) as ትርጓም ( t-r-gw-m ), and in Aramaic as targemana . Hebrew makes a distinction between מתרגם ( metargem )—referring to a translator of written texts—and מתורגמן ( meturgeman ) referring to an interpreter of spoken conversation or speeches. The latter is obviously more closely related to the other languages mentioned, though both are derived from the same Semitic root. There has been speculation of a Hittite origin of the term (Salonen, p.   12; Rabin, pp.   134–136).

 During the Middle Ages the word entered European languages: in Middle English as dragman , from Old French drugeman , from Medieval Latin as dragumannus , from Middle Greek δραγομάνος, dragoumanos . Later European variants include the German trutzelmann , the French trucheman or truchement (in post- Tanzimat French, [ 3 ] and in modern French it is drogman ), the Italian turcimanno , and the Spanish trujamán , trujimán and truchimán ; these variants point to a Turkish or Arabic word "turjuman", with different vocalization. Webster's Dictionary of 1828 lists dragoman as well as the variants drogman and truchman in English.

 Consequently, the plural, in English, is "dragomans" (not "dragomen").

 History
 [ edit ] 

 In the Turkish tradition, the dragoman position is recorded in the pre-Ottoman Sultanate of Rum during the 13th-century reign of Keykubad I when two dragomans and two translator clerks were appointed. [ 4 ] 

 In the Ottoman Empire
 [ edit ] 

 In Ottoman records, the first imperial dragoman recorded was Lutfi Pasha , who was sent to Venice in 1479 to deliver a treaty. [ 4 ] 

 Letter issued by Sultan Ahmed III assigning Nicola Danal Spiro as dragoman to Thomas Funck, Swedish envoyée to the Ottoman court. 
 The position took particular prominence in the Ottoman Empire , where demand for the mediation provided by dragomans is said to have been created by the resistance on the part of the Muslim Ottomans to learn the languages of non-Muslim nations. The office incorporated diplomatic as well as linguistic duties—namely, in the Porte 's relation with Christian countries —and some dragomans thus came to play crucial roles in Ottoman politics. The profession tended to be dominated by ethnic Greeks , including the first Ottoman dragoman of the Sublime Porte , Panagiotis Nikousios , the official interpreter for the Divan ( Imperial Council ) of the sultan, and his successor Alexander Mavrocordatos . But this dominance changed in 1821 with the start of the Greek War of Independence . 

 In 1821 the chief dragoman Constantine Mourouzi was executed for suspected disloyalty, and his successor, Stavraki Aristarchi, was dismissed and exiled in 1822. [ 5 ] With unanswered correspondence accumulating, the chief naval instructor, one Ishak Efendi , took over the position and became a pioneer in translation of Western scientific literature into Turkish, a task for which he had to create an entirely new vocabulary. Following Ishak, the grand dragoman and his staff were Muslims, and the Translation Office ( Tercüme Odası , "Translation Room", in Turkish), with its familiarity with things European, became a new major ladder to influence and power in the Tanzimat era; this knowledge largely replaced the older ladders of the army, the bureaucracy, and the religious establishment in the mid- and late-19th century. [ 6 ] 

 The dragomans were exempt from taxation. As many of them were Jewish, in virtue of their proficiency in foreign languages, Jewish Halakhic responsa dealt with the question whether or not these dragomans were exempt also from the internal taxes of the Jewish community. [ 7 ] 

 It became customary that most hospodars of the Phanariote rule (roughly 1711–1821) over the Danubian Principalities ( Moldavia and Wallachia ) would previously have occupied this Ottoman office, a fact which did not prevent many of them from joining conspiracies that aimed to overthrow Turkish rule over the area.

 Western dragomans
 [ edit ] 

 These men were instrumental in spreading a wide-ranging curiosity about Islamic culture throughout the Latin parts of Europe during the 17th and 18th centuries. The dragomans had scholarly language training in Persian, Arabic and Turkish since they were translators, interpreters, authors and were very open to the material and fashionable intricacies of the Ottoman culture.

 The first French translation of the Quran was done by André du Ryer , in 1647. He was from the French consulate in Egypt. Another, Cosmo of Carbognano, from the Naples embassy, published in Latin: The Principles of Turkish Grammar for The Use of Apostolic Missionaries in Constantinople (Rome 1794). [ citation needed ] 

 As a highly trained group of diplomatic professionals, they were employed by Europeans in embassies and consulates, not only translating and interpreting items but often meeting with Ottoman officials without their employer being present. An 18th-century Venetian ambassador described the dragomans as ‘the tongue that speaks, the ear that hears, the eye that sees, the hand that gives, the spirit that acts, and on whom the life and success of every negotiation may depend. [ 8 ] 

 There was huge success from the published translation of Thousand And One Nights , by Antoine Galland (1646–1715). He was attached to the embassy of Charles Marie François Olier, marquis de Nointel , a Parisian who was a councilor to the Parlement of Paris , and a French ambassador to the Ottoman court , 1670 to 1679.

 One who created a large European interest in the history of Islam, with his published Geschichte des osmanischen Reiches was Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall of Austria, a student at the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna (the academy was initially established by Empress Maria Theresa in 1754 as "The Oriental Academy" to train young diplomats to represent the Habsburg Empire abroad). [ 9 ] 

 See also
 [ edit ] 

 Translation Office (Ottoman Empire) 

 List of dragomans 

 Reis Effendi 

 Dragoman of the Porte 

 Dragoman of the Fleet 

 Notes
 [ edit ] 

 ↑ Hamilton, Alastair; Groot, Alexander H. de; Boogert, Maurits H. van den (2000). Friends and rivals in the East: studies in Anglo–Dutch relations in the Levant from the seventeenth to the early nineteenth century . BRILL. pp.   230 ff . ISBN   978-90-04-11854-6 . 

 1 2 Quataert, Donald (2005). The Ottoman Empire, 1700-1922 . Cambridge University Press. p.   81. ISBN   978-0-521-83910-5 . 

 ↑ Young, George (1905). Corps de droit ottoman; recueil des codes, lois, règlements, ordonnances et actes les plus importants du droit intérieur, et d'études sur le droit coutumier de l'Empire ottoman (in French). Vol.   1. Clarendon Press . p.   244 . 

 1 2 Mona Baker (9 December 2008). Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies . Taylor & Francis. p.   550. ISBN   978-0-415-36930-5 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . 

 ↑ Bosworth, C.E. (2012). "Tard̲j̲umān". In P. Bearman; Th. Bianquis; C.E. Bosworth; E. van Donzel; W.P. Heinrichs (eds.). Encyclopaedia of Islam (2nd   ed.). Brill. doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_1179 . 

 ↑ Lewis, Bernard (2002). What Went Wrong . Oxford University Press . pp.   44–45 . ISBN   978-0-06-051605-5 . 

 ↑ e.g. Responsa Dvar Moshe, no. 48, p. 48d ; Responsa Nishmat Hayyim, no. 7, p. 20b ; Responsa Ro'ei Yisrael, no. 5, p. 20b ; Responsa Tzror haKesef, no. 10, p. 59b. The latter invalidated a governmental decree that they be taxed, because it contradicted international treaties. 

 ↑ Zecevic, Selma (2014). "Translating Ottoman Justice: Ragusan Dragomans as Interpreters of Ottoman Law" . Islamic Law and Society . 21 (4): 388– 418. doi : 10.1163/15685195-00214p03 . 

 ↑ Tolan, John; Veinstein, Gilles; Henry Laurens (2013). "Europe and the Islamic World: A History" . Princeton University Press. pp.   245– 247. ISBN   978-0-691-14705-5 . 

 References
 [ edit ] 

 Bernard Lewis , From Babel to Dragomans: Interpreting the Middle East , Oxford University Press , London and New York, 2004

 Philip Mansel , "Viziers and Dragomans," in Constantinople: City of the World's Desire 1453–1924 , London, 1995. pp.   133–162

 Marie de Testa, Antoine Gautier, "Drogmans et diplomates européens auprès de la Porte Ottomane", in Analecta Isisiana , vol. lxxi, Les Éditions ISIS, Istanbul, 2003

 Frédéric Hitzel (ed.), Istanbul et les langues Orientales , Varia Turca, vol. xxxi, L'Harmattan , Paris and Montreal, 1997

 Rabin, Chaim. 1963. Hittite Words in Hebrew. Orientalia 32.113–139.

 Salonen, Armas . 1952. Alte Substrat- und Kulturwörter im Arabischen. Studia Orientalia xvii.2.

 External links
 [ edit ] 

   This article   incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain :   Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Dragoman ". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th   ed.). Cambridge University Press. 

 The Dragoman – Interpreter at the Crossroads of East & West

 Authority control databases 

 International GND 

 National United States 
 Israel 

 Other Yale LUX 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dragoman&oldid=1363995635 "

 Categories : Diplomats by role 
 Dragomans 
 Court titles 
 History of West Asia 
 Politics of the Ottoman Empire 
 Ottoman titles 
 Government of the Ottoman Empire 
 Turkish words and phrases 

 Hidden categories: Articles with short description 
 Short description is different from Wikidata 
 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases 
 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2023 
 CS1 French-language sources (fr) 
 All articles with unsourced statements 
 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 
 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference 
 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica 

 This page was last edited on 13 July 2026, at 20:42  (UTC) .

 Page was rendered with Parsoid .

 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization.

 Privacy policy 

 About Wikipedia 

 Disclaimers 

 Contact Wikipedia 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 Dragoman 

 26 languages 

 Add topic