URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/messiah
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:46:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Messiah - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Messiah - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Messiah 

 Messiah (n.) 

 c. 1300, Messias , a designation of Jesus as the savior of the world, from Late Latin Messias , from Greek Messias , from Aramaic (Semitic) meshiha and Hebrew mashiah "the anointed" (of the Lord), from mashah "anoint." It is thus the Hebrew equivalent of Christ , and it is the word rendered in Septuagint as Greek Khristos (see Christ ).

 In Old Testament prophetic writing, it was used as a descriptive title of an expected deliverer of the Jewish nation. The modern English form represents an attempt to make the word look more Hebrew, and dates from the Geneva Bible (1560). Transferred sense of "an expected liberator or savior of a captive people" is attested from 1660s. Related: Messiahship "the character, state, or office of Jesus Christ as savior of the world" (1620s).
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to Messiah 

 Christ (n.) 

 "the Anointed," synonymous with and translating to Greek Hebrew mashiah ( see messiah ), a title given to Jesus of Nazareth; Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus , from Greek khristos "the anointed," noun use of verbal adjective of khriein "to rub, anoint" (from PIE root *ghrei- "to rub").

 In the primitive Church it was a title, and used with the definite article, but from an early period it was used without it and regarded as part of the proper name of Jesus. It was treated as a proper name in Old English, but not regularly capitalized until 17c. Pronunciation with long -i- is result of Irish missionary work in England, 7c.-8c. The ch- form, regular since c. 1500 in English, was rare before. Capitalization of the word begins 14c. but is not fixed until 17c. The Latin term drove out Old English Hæland "healer, savior," as the preferred descriptive term for Jesus.

 As an oath or strong exclamation (of surprise, dismay, etc.), attested by 1748. The 17c. mystical sect of the Familists edged it toward a verb with Christed "made one with Christ." Christ-child "Jesus as a baby" (1842) translates German Christkind .

 messianic (adj.) 

 "relating or pertaining to the Messiah or to anyone exercising the offices of a messiah," 1831, from Modern Latin messianicus , from Messias (see Messiah ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 savior 

 c. 1300, saveour, "one who delivers or rescues from peril," also a title of Jesus Christ, from Old French sauveour, from Late Latin salvatorem (nominative salvator) "a saver, preserver," originally and chiefly Church Latin, with reference to Christ (source also of Spanish salvado

 demagogue 

 1640s, "an unprincipled popular orator or leader; one who seeks to obtain political power by pandering to the prejudices, wishes, ignorance, and passions of the people or a part of them," ultimately from Greek dēmagōgos "popular leader," also "leader of the mob," from dēmos "peop

 liberal 

 mid-14c., "generous," also "nobly born, noble, free;" from late 14c. as "selfless, magnanimous, admirable;" from early 15c. in a bad sense, "extravagant, unrestrained," from Old French liberal "befitting free people; noble, generous; willing, zealous" (12c.), and directly from La

 wait 

 c. 1200, "to watch with hostile intent, lie in wait for, plot against," from Anglo-French and Old North French waitier "to watch" (Old French gaitier "defend, watch out, be on one's guard; lie in wait for;" Modern French guetter), from Frankish *wahton or another Germanic source,

 stigma 

 1590s (earlier stigme, c. 1400), "mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron," from Latin stigma (plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) "mark of a pointed instrument, puncture, tattoo-mark, brand," which is related to stizein "to mark, tattoo" (from PIE root 

 function 

 1530s, "one's proper work or purpose; power of acting in a specific proper way," from French fonction (16c.) and directly from Latin functionem (nominative functio) "a performance, an execution," noun of action from funct-, past-participle stem of fungi "perform, execute, dischar

 cocktail 

 "drink made from water, sugar, spirits and bitters" first attested 1798, but the reason for the application of the name, and the image intended, if any, were obscure even to contemporaries. Ayto ("Diner's Dictionary") derives it from cocktail "horse with a docked tail" (the word 

 poverty 

 late 12c., poverte, "destitution, want, need or insufficiency of money or goods," from Old French poverte, povrete "poverty, misery, wretched condition" (Modern French pauvreté), from Latin paupertatem (nominative paupertas) "poverty," from pauper "poor" (see poor (adj.)). From e

 delta 

 c. 1200, name of the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet (equivalent to our D), which was shaped like a triangle. The name is from Phoenician daleth "tent door." Sense of "triangular island or alluvial tract between the diverging branches of the mouth of a great river" is because

 glamour 

 1715, glamer, Scottish, "magic, enchantment" (especially in phrase to cast the glamour), a variant of Scottish gramarye "magic, enchantment, spell," said to be an alteration of English grammar (q.v.) in a specialized use of that word's medieval sense of "any sort of scholarship, 

 Share Messiah 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Messiah Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Messiah">Etymology of Messiah by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Messiah. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Messiah Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Messiah," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Messiah. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Messiah." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Messiah. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Messiah." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Messiah (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Messiah 
 message 
 messaging 
 Messalina 
 messenger 
 Messerschmitt 
 Messiah 
 messianic 
 Messier 
 messmate 
 messrs. 
 messuage 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix