URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrome
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chrome - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chrome - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chrome 

 chrome (n.) 

 1800, "chromium," from French chrome , the name proposed by Fourcroy and Haüy for a new element, from Greek khrōma "color" (see chroma ); so called because it makes colorful compounds. The metallic element had been isolated 1798 by French chemist Louis Nicolas Vauquelin, who named it chrome . It is now known as chromium (q.v.).

 Chrome continued in commercial use in English for "chrome steel" (steel with 2 percent or so chrome) after the chemical name was changed internationally. As a short form of chromium plating it dates from 1937. Related: Chromic .
 also from 1800 

 Entries linking to chrome 

 chroma (n.) 

 in reference to color, "intensity of distinctive hue, degree of departure of a color-sensation from that of white or gray," 1889, from Latinized form of Greek khrōma "surface of the body, skin, color of the skin," also used generically for "color" and, in plural, "ornaments, makeup, embellishments," a verbal noun from khroizein "to color, stain, to touch the surface of the body," khrosthenai "to take on a color or hue," from khros, khroia "surface of the body, skin."

 Beekes considers this noun to be of uncertain origin. It sometimes is explained as being somehow from PIE *ghreu- "to rub, grind" (see grit (n.)).

 chromium (n.) 

 metallic element, 1807, Latinized from French chrome (Fourcroy and Haüy), from Greek chroma "color" (see chrome ; also see chroma ). So called for its colorful compounds. Related: Chromite .

 polychrome (adj.) 

 "having or tinted with several or many colors," 1816, from French polychrome , from Latinized form of Greek polykhrōmos (also polykhrōmatos ) "many-colored" (see poly- + chrome ). As a noun from 1800, "work of art decorated in several colors;" by 1838 as "a fluorescent substance forming prismatic crystals." Related: Polychromic ; polychromatic ; polychromate .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 grill 

 In many instances, Modern English grill is a shortened form of grille, such as "chrome front of an automobile."...

 process 

 early 14c., proces, "fact of being carried on" (as in in process), from Old French proces "a journey; continuation, development; legal trial" (13c.) and directly from Latin processus "a going forward, advance, progress," from past-participle stem of procedere "go forward" (see pr

 plate 

 mid-13c., "flat sheet of gold or silver," also "flat, round coin," from Old French plate "thin piece of metal" (late 12c.), from Medieval Latin plata "plate, piece of metal," perhaps via Vulgar Latin *plattus, formed on model of Greek platys "flat, broad" (from PIE root *plat- "t

 treat 

 c. 1300, "negotiate, bargain, deal with," from Old French traitier "deal with, act toward; set forth (in speech or writing)" (12c.), from Latin tractare "manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward," originally "drag about, tug, haul, pull violently," frequentative of trahe

 diaspora 

 1825 in reference to Moravian protestants; 1869 in reference to the dispersion of the Jews; from Greek diaspora "dispersion," from diaspeirein "to scatter about, disperse," from dia "about, across" (see dia-) + speirein "to scatter" (see sparse). The Greek word was used in Septua

 peremptory 

 mid-15c., peremptorie, "absolute, allowing no refusal," a legal term, from Anglo-French peremptorie, from Late Latin peremptorius "destructive, decisive, final," from peremptor "destroyer," agent noun from past-participle stem of Latin perimpere "destroy, cut off," from per "away

 interview 

 1510s, "face-to-face meeting, formal conference," from French entrevue, verbal noun from s'entrevoir "to see each other, visit each other briefly, have a glimpse of," from entre- "between" (see inter-) + Old French voir "to see" (from Latin videre, from PIE root *weid- "to see").

 bath 

 Old English bæð "an immersing of the body in water, mud, etc.," also "a quantity of water, etc., for bathing," from Proto-Germanic *badan (source also of Old Frisian beth, Old Saxon bath, Old Norse bað, Middle Dutch bat, German Bad), from PIE root *bhē- "to warm" + *-thuz, German

 prosperous 

 early 15c., "favorable, auspicious, tending to bring success;" late 15c., "flourishing, successful, making good progress in anything good or desirable;" from Anglo-French prosperous, prospereus, Anglo-Latin prosperosus, or directly from Old French prospereus (15c.), from prospere

 reprobate 

 early 15c., "rejected as worthless," from Late Latin reprobatus, past participle of reprobare "disapprove, reject, condemn," from Latin re- "back, again," here perhaps indicating "opposite of, reversal of previous condition" (see re-) + probare "prove to be worthy" (see probate (

 Share chrome 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrome Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrome">Etymology of chrome by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chrome. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrome Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chrome," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrome. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chrome." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrome. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chrome." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrome (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chrome 
 chromato- 
 chromatography 
 chromatology 
 chromatophore 
 chromatopsy 
 chrome 
 chromium 
 chromophotography 
 chromosome 
 chromosphere 
 chronic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix