URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/palladium
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:46:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Palladium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Palladium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of palladium 

 palladium (n.1) 

 "a safeguard," c. 1600, originally (late 14c., Palladioun ) "a sacred image of Pallas Athene," from Old French palladion , from Latin palladium , from Greek Palladion , noun use of neuter of Palladios "of Pallas." It stood in the citadel of Troy and the safety of the city was believed to depend on it. Related: Palladian .
 also from c. 1600 

 palladium (n.2) 

 metallic element, coined 1803 by discoverer William Hyde Wollaston (1766-1828), from Pallas , the name given to an asteroid discovered the previous year (by German astronomer Olbers) and named for the goddess (see Pallas ).
 also from 1803 

 Entries linking to palladium 

 Pallas 

 Greek goddess' name, another name for Athene, literally "little maiden," related to pallake "concubine," and probably somehow connected to Avestan pairika "beautiful women seducing pious men." The asteroid so named was discovered 1802 by Olbers and Bremen.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Beatlemania 

 Beatles played the Royal Albert Hall in London, and in October they had top bill on "Val Parnell's Sunday Night at the Palladium...Fans lined up all day on Argyll Street outside the Palladium for a glimpse of the boys, a phenomenon that was unprecedented...

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 hallucinate 

 "to have illusions," 1650s, from Latin alucinatus (later hallucinatus), past participle of alucinari "wander (in the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought," probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein "wander in mind, be at a loss, be beside oneself (with grief, joy, p

 ideology 

 1796, "science of ideas," originally "philosophy of the mind which derives knowledge from the senses" (as opposed to metaphysics), from French idéologie "study or science of ideas," coined by French philosopher Destutt de Tracy (1754-1836) from idéo- "of ideas," from Greek idea (

 category 

 1580s, in Aristotle's logic, "a highest notion," from French catégorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek katēgoria "accusation, prediction, category," verbal noun from katēgorein "speak against; to accuse, assert, predicate," from kata "down to" (or perhaps "against;" see ca

 pamphlet 

 "small, unbound treatise," late 14c., pamflet, "brief written text; poem, tract, small book," from Anglo-Latin panfletus, which probably is a popular short form of "Pamphilus, seu de Amore" ("Pamphilus, or about Love"), a short 12c. Latin love poem popular and widely copied in th

 palate 

 late 14c., "roof of the mouth of a human or animal; the parts which separate the oral from the nasal cavity," from Old French palat and directly from Latin palatum "roof of the mouth," also "a vault," which is perhaps of Etruscan origin [Klein], but de Vaan suggests an IE root me

 fob 

 1650s, "men's small waist pocket for valuables," of uncertain origin, probably related to Low German fobke "pocket," High German fuppe "pocket," "a dialectal word used in Livonia" [Klein]. Meaning "chain or ornament attached to a watch carried in the fob" is by 1888, shortened fr

 Share palladium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/palladium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/palladium">Etymology of palladium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of palladium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/palladium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of palladium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/palladium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of palladium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/palladium. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of palladium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/palladium (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near palladium 
 paling 
 palinode 
 palisade 
 pall 
 Palladian 
 palladium 
 Pallas 
 pallbearer 
 pallet 
 palliard 
 palliate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix