URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/estuary
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:01:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Estuary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Estuary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of estuary 

 estuary (n.) 

 1530s, from Latin aestuarium "a tidal marsh, mudbeds covered by water at high tides; channel inland from the sea," from aestus "boiling (of the sea), tide, heat," from PIE *aidh- "to burn" (see edifice ).
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to estuary 

 edifice (n.) 

 "a building, structure," late 14c., from Old French edifice "building" (12c.), from Latin aedificium "building," from aedificare "to erect a building," from aedis , variant of aedes "temple, sanctuary," usually a single edifice without partitions, also, in the plural, "dwelling house, building," originally "a place with a hearth." The second element is combining form of facere "to make, to do" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, put").

 Aedis/aedes is reconstructed to be from PIE *eidh- "to burn, burning" (source also of Sanskrit inddhe "burst into flames;" Avestan aesma- "firewood;" Greek aithein "to burn," aithos "fire;" Latin aestas "summer," aestus "heat;" Lithuanian iesmė "firewood;" Old Irish aed "fire," Welsh aidd "heat, zeal;" Old English ād , Old High German eit "funeral pile," Old Norse eisa "burning coals"), which is perhaps related to the root *as- "to burn, glow."

 estuarine (adj.) 

 1835, from estuary on model of marine (adj.); see -ine (1).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Inverness 

 Scotland of Gaelic origin, usually of places at the confluence of a river with another or the sea, from Old Irish *in(d)ber- "estuary...

 Geneva 

 city in Switzerland, from Latin Genava, perhaps from a PIE root meaning "estuary" or one meaning "bend;" in either case a...

 fleet 

 The Old English word also meant "estuary, inlet, flow of water," especially the one into the Thames near Ludgate Hill, which...

 river 

 early 13c. (late 12c. in surnames), "a considerable body of water flowing with perceptible current in a definite course or channel," from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere "river, riverside, river bank" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *riparia "riverbank, seashore, river" (source

 water 

 Old English wæter, from Proto-Germanic *watr- (source also of Old Saxon watar, Old Frisian wetir, Dutch water, Old High German wazzar, German Wasser, Old Norse vatn, Gothic wato "water"), from PIE *wod-or, suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet." To keep (one's) head above w

 drama 

 1510s, "a composition presenting in dialogue a course of human action, the description of a story converted into the action of a play," from Late Latin drama "play, drama," from Greek drama (genitive dramatos) "action, deed; play, spectacle," from drāo "to do, make, act, perform"

 indict 

 formerly also endict, c. 1300, enditen, inditen, "bring formal charges against (someone); accuse of a crime," from Anglo-French enditer "accuse, indict, find chargeable with a criminal offense" (late 13c.), Old French enditier, enditer "to dictate, write, compose; (legally) indic

 confer 

 1530s, "examine by comparison;" 1540s (intransitive) "consult together on some special subject;" 1560s, "bestow as a gift or permanent possession," from Old French conférer (14c.) "to give; to converse; to compare," from Latin conferre "to bring together," figuratively "to compar

 perdition 

 mid-14c., "condition of damnation, spiritual ruin, state of the souls of the wicked in Hell," a special theological sense; the general sense of "utter destruction, entire ruin, great harm, death, fact of being lost or destroyed," is by late 14c.; from Old French perdicion "loss, 

 Israel 

 Old English Israel, "the Jewish people, the Hebrew nation," from Latin Israel, from Greek, from Hebrew yisra'el "he that striveth with God" (Genesis xxxii.28), symbolic proper name conferred on Jacob and extended to his descendants, from sara "he fought, contended" + El "God." As

 Share estuary 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/estuary Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/estuary">Etymology of estuary by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of estuary. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/estuary Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of estuary," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/estuary. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of estuary." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/estuary. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of estuary." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/estuary (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near estuary 
 estrange 
 estrangement 
 estrogen 
 estrus 
 estuarine 
 estuary 
 esurient 
 -et 
 et al. 
 et cetera 
 eta 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix