URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/oxygen
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:16:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Oxygen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Oxygen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of oxygen 

 oxygen (n.) 

 gaseous chemical element, 1790, from French oxygène , coined in 1777 by French chemist Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier (1743-1794), from Greek oxys "sharp, acid" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce") + French -gène "something that produces" (from Greek -genēs "formation, creation;" see -gen ).

 Intended to mean "acidifying (principle)," it was a Greeking of French principe acidifiant . So called because oxygen was then considered essential in the formation of acids (it is now known not to be). The element was isolated by Priestley (1774), who, using the old model of chemistry, called it dephlogisticated air . The downfall of the phlogiston theory required a new name, which Lavoisier provided. Oxygen-mask is attested from 1912.
 also from 1790 

 Entries linking to oxygen 

 anoxic (adj.) 

 "characterized by or causing lack of oxygen in tissues," 1920, medical Latin, from Greek an- "not, without" (see an- (1)) + first two letters of oxygen + -ic . Anoxia "oxygen deficiency" is attested from 1931.

 carbon dioxide (n.) 

 1869, so called because it consists of one carbon and two oxygen atoms. The chemical was known since mid-18c. under the name fixed air ; later as carbonic acid gas (1791). "The term dioxide for an oxide containing two atoms of oxygen came into use in the middle of the 19th century." [Flood].

 carbon monoxide 
 epoxy 
 hypoxia 
 oxide 
 *ak- 
 -gen 
 deoxy- 
 oxo- 
 oxy- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 epoxy 

 1916, in reference to certain chemical compounds, from epi- + first element of oxygen. Epoxy- is used as a prefix in chemistry to indicate an oxygen atom that is linked to two carbon atoms of a chain, thus forming a "bridge" ("intramolecular connection" is one of the chemical use

 O 

 fifteenth letter of the alphabet, from a character that in Phoenician was called 'ain (literally "eye") and represented "a very peculiar and to us unpronounceable guttural" [Century Dictionary]. The Greeks also lacked the sound, so when they adopted the Phoenician letters th

 aerobic 

 "able to live or living only in the presence of oxygen, requiring or using free oxygen from the air," 1875, after French...Hence aerobe "type of micro-organism which lives on oxygen from the air."...

 carbohydrate 

 general name for a group of organic compounds consisting of carbon atoms in multiples of 6 and hydrogen and oxygen in the...

 hydrogen 

 So called because it forms water when exposed to oxygen....

 asphyxia 

 Obsolete in its original sense; the transferred sense of "suffocation, extreme condition caused by lack of oxygen in the...

 implosion 

 confusion have been, they speak in the same breath of all these explosions, and of the explosion of a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen...

 air 

 c. 1300, "invisible gases that surround the earth," from Old French air "atmosphere, breeze, weather" (12c.), from Latin aer "air, lower atmosphere, sky," from Greek aēr (genitive aeros) "mist, haze, clouds," later "atmosphere" (perhaps related to aenai "to blow, breathe"), which

 oh 

 interjection expressing various emotions (fear, surprise, pain, invocation, gladness, admiration, etc.), 1530s, from Middle English o, from Old French ô, oh or directly from Latin o, oh; a common Indo-European interjection (compare Greek ō; Old Church Slavonic and Lithuanian o; I

 ho 

 exclamation of surprise, etc., c. 1300; as an exclamation calling attention or demanding silence, late 14c. Used after the name of a place to which attention is called (as in Westward-Ho) it dates from 1590s, originally a cry of boatmen, etc., announcing departures for a particul

 Share oxygen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/oxygen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/oxygen">Etymology of oxygen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of oxygen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/oxygen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of oxygen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oxygen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of oxygen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oxygen. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of oxygen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/oxygen (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near oxygen 
 oxtail 
 ox-tongue 
 oxy- 
 oxycodone 
 OxyContin 
 oxygen 
 oxymoron 
 oy 
 oyer 
 oyez 
 oyster 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix