URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/basket
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:41:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Basket - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Basket - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of basket 

 basket (n.) 

 "vessel made of thin strips of wood, or other flexible materials, interwoven in a great variety of forms, and used for many purpose," early 13c., from Anglo-French bascat ; a word of obscure origin despite much speculation.

 On one theory, it is from Latin bascauda "kettle, table-vessel," said by the Roman poet Martial to be from Celtic British and perhaps cognate with Latin fascis "bundle, faggot," in which case it probably originally meant "wicker basket." But OED frowns on this, and there is no evidence of such a word in Celtic unless later words in Irish and Welsh, sometimes counted as borrowings from English, are original. As "a goal in the game of basketball," 1892; as "a score in basketball," by 1898.
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to basket 

 basket case (n.) 

 1919, American English, originally a reference to rumors of quadriplegics as a result of catastrophic wounds suffered in World War I (the U.S. military authorities vehemently denied there were any such in its hospitals), from basket (n.) + case (n.2). Probably literal, i.e., stuck in a basket, but basket had colloquial connotations of poverty (begging) and helplessness long before this. The figurative sense of "person emotionally unable to cope" is from 1921.

 basketball (n.) 

 also basket-ball , "game in which the object is to throw the ball into one of the two baskets placed at opposite ends of the court," 1892, American English, from basket + ball (n.1). The game was invented 1891 by James A. Naismith (1861-1939), physical education instructor in Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.

 bread-basket 
 hand-basket 
 wash-basket 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hoop 

 late 12c., "circular band, flattened ring," probably from an unrecorded Old English *hop, from Proto-Germanic *hōp (source also of Old Frisian hop "a hoop, band," Middle Dutch and Dutch hoep "hoop," Old Norse hop "a small bay"). The original meaning must have been "curve; ring," 

 coffin 

 early 14c., "chest or box for valuables," from Old French cofin "sarcophagus," earlier "basket, coffer" (12c., Modern French...coffin), from Latin cophinus "basket, hamper" (source of Italian cofano, Spanish cuebano "basket"), from Greek kophinos..."a basket," which is of uncertain origin....

 bin 

 "enclosed receptacle for some commodity," Old English binne "basket, manger, crib," a word of uncertain origin....Celtic word seems to be preserved in Italian benna "dung cart," French benne "grape-gatherer's creel," Dutch benne "large basket...," all of which are from Late Latin benna "cart," Medieval Latin benna "basket."...

 scuttle 

 Middle English scutel "dish; basket, winnowing basket," from late Old English scutel "broad, shallow dish; platter," from...The meaning "basket for sifting grain" is attested from mid-14c.; the sense of "deep, sheet-metal bucket for holding small...

 junket 

 late 14c., jonket, "basket in which fish are caught or carried," from Medieval Latin iuncata "rush basket," perhaps from...The English word shifted meaning by 1520s to "feast, banquet," probably via the notion of a picnic basket; this led to extended...

 canasta 

 1945, Uruguayan card game played with two decks and four jokers, popular 1945-c. 1965; from Spanish, literally "basket,"...a meld was tejiendo las cartas, literally "weaving the cards," hence perhaps the name is based on the image of a woven "basket...

 confiscate 

 participle of confiscare, from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + fiscus "public treasury," originally "money basket..., wicker basket" (see fiscal)....

 pooh 

 1590s, "a 'vocal gesture' expressing the action of puffing anything away" [OED], used as an exclamation of dislike, scorn, or contempt, first attested in Hamlet Act I, Scene III, where Polonius addresses Ophelia with, "Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl, / Unsifted in s

 hamper 

 late 14c., hampren "surround, imprison, confine; pack in a container; impede in motion or progress," of uncertain origin; probably from hamper (n.1), unless it is somehow connected to Middle English hamelian "to maim." Related: Hampered; hampering...."large basket," early 14c., h

 gaol 

 see jail (n.), you tea-sodden football hooligan. Formerly in official use in Britain, and thus sometimes regarded in U.S. as a characteristic British spelling (though George Washington used it); by the time of OED 2nd edition (1980s) both spellings were considered correct there; 

 Share basket 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/basket Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/basket">Etymology of basket by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of basket. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/basket Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of basket," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/basket. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of basket." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/basket. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of basket." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/basket (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near basket 
 basin 
 basinet 
 basis 
 bask 
 Baskerville 
 basket 
 basket case 
 basketball 
 basking 
 basmati 
 Basque 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix