URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/canon
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:02:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Canon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Canon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of canon 

 canon (n.1) 

 "a rule or law," Middle English canoun , Old English canon "rule, law, or decree of the Church," from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon "Church law, a rule or doctrine enacted by ecclesiastical authority," in classical Latin, "measuring line, rule," from Greek kanōn "any straight rod or bar; rule; standard of excellence," which is perhaps from kanna "reed" (see cane (n.)), but Beekes favors Pre-Greek origin.

 The Latin word was taken in Christian use for "decree of the Church." The general sense of "a rule or principle" is attested from late 14c.; that of "standard of judging" is by c. 1600.

 It is attested from c. 1400 as "the Scriptures, the books of the Bible accepted by the Christian church," and also extended to secular books of admitted excellence or authoritative supremacy (such as the Trojan legends or Avicenna's  Liber Canonis Medicinae ). The meaning "catalogue of acknowledged saints" is from 1727.

 The fandom sense of "material regarded as veritable" is attested by 1934, originally in reference to the Sherlock Holmes series. The musical use in reference to a kind of fugal composition is from 1590s. Related: Canonicity .

 The secular canon, with the word meaning a catalog of approved authors, does not actually begin until the middle of the eighteenth century .... [Harold Bloom, "The Western Canon," 1994].

 canon (n.2) 

 "clergyman living according to rules," c. 1200 (late 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French canun , from Old North French canonie (Modern French chanoine ), from Church Latin canonicus "clergyman living under a rule," noun use of Latin adjective canonicus "according to rule" (in ecclesiastical use, "pertaining to the rules or institutes of the church canonical"), from Greek kanonikos , from kan ō n "rule" (see canon (n.1)).
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to canon 

 cane (n.) 

 late 14c., "long slender woody stem," from Old French cane "reed, cane, spear" (13c., Modern French canne ), from Latin canna "reed, cane," from Greek kanna , perhaps from Babylonian-Assyrian qanu "tube, reed" (compare Hebrew qaneh , Arabic qanah "reed"), which may come from Sumerian-Akkadian gin "reed." The sense of "length of cane used as a walking stick" is from 1580s.

 canonical (adj.) 

 early 15c., "according to ecclesiastical law," from Medieval Latin canonicalis , from Late Latin canonicus "according to rule," in Church Latin, "pertaining to the canon " (see canon (n.1)). Earlier was canonial (early 13c.). The general sense of "conformed or conforming to rule" is from 1560s. The meaning "of or belonging to the canon of Scripture" is from 1560s; hence "of admitted excellence" (1550s).

 canonize (v.) 

 late 14c., "to place officially in the canon or calendar of saints," from Old French canonisier and directly from Medieval Latin canonizare , from Late Latin canon "church rule, catalogue of saints" (see canon (n.1)). Related: Canonized ; canonizing .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 canyon 

 "narrow valley between cliffs," 1834, from Mexican Spanish cañon, extended sense of Spanish cañon "a pipe, tube; deep hollow, gorge," augmentative of cano "a tube," from Latin canna "reed" (see cane (n.)). But earlier spelling callon (1560s) might suggest a source in calle "stree

 cannon 

 c. 1400, "artillery piece, mounted gun for throwing projectiles by force of gunpowder," from Anglo-French canon (mid-14c....), Old French canon (14c.), from Italian cannone "large tube, barrel," augmentative of Latin canna "reed, tube" (see cane...The double -n- spelling to differentiate it from canon is from c. 1800....

 memento 

 late 14c., "Psalm cxxxi in the Canon of the Mass" (which begins with the Latin word Memento and in which the dead are commemorated...

 duodenum 

 Coined by Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187) in "Canon Avicennae," a loan-translation of Greek dodekadaktylon, literally "twelve...

 rehabilitate 

 Century Dictionary calls it "a term drawn from the civil and canon law."...

 preface 

 late 14c., "an introduction to the canon of the Mass," also "statement or statements introducing a discourse, book, or other...

 extravagant 

 late 14c., in constituciouns extravagaunt, a term in Canon Law for papal decrees not originally included or codified in the...

 list 

 "catalogue consisting of names in a row or series," c. 1600, from Middle English liste "border, edging, stripe" (late 13c.), from Old French liste "border, band, row, group," also "strip of paper," or from Old Italian lista "border, strip of paper, list," both from Germanic sourc

 silt 

 mid-15c., "fine sand or sediment deposited by seawater," probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian and Danish sylt "salt marsh," Old Swedish sylta "mud"), or from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch silte, sulte "salt marsh, brine," from Proto-Germanic *sultjo- (source

 esprit 

 1590s, "liveliness, wit, vivacity," from French esprit "spirit, mind," from Old French espirit "spirit, soul" (12c.), from Latin spiritus "spirit" (see spirit (n.)). For initial e-, see e-. Esprit de corps, recorded from 1780 in English, preserves the usual French sense. French a

 Share canon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/canon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/canon">Etymology of canon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of canon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/canon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of canon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/canon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of canon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/canon. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of canon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/canon (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near canon 
 cannula 
 canny 
 canoe 
 canoeing 
 canola 
 canon 
 canonical 
 canonization 
 canonize 
 canoodle 
 can-opener 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix