URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rover
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:29:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rover - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rover - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rover 

 rover (n.1) 

 "sea-robber, pirate," late 14c. (c. 1300 as a surname), from Middle Dutch rover "robber, predator, plunderer," especially in zeerovere "pirate," literally "sea-robber," from roven "to rob," from Middle Dutch roof "spoil, plunder," related to Old English reaf "spoil, plunder," reafian "to reave" (see reave (v.), and compare reaver ).
 also from late 14c. 

 rover (n.2) 

 "one who wanders or rambles," especially to a great distance, 1610s, agent noun from rove (v.). Meaning "remote-controlled surface vehicle for extraterrestrial exploration" is from 1970.
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to rover 

 reave (v.) 

 Middle English reven "to rob plunder," from Old English reafian "to rob (something from someone), plunder, pillage, take away by force or stealth," from Proto-Germanic *raubōjanan "to rob, deprive of" (source also of Old Frisian ravia , Middle Dutch roven , Dutch rooven , Old High German roubon , German rauben ), from PIE *runp- "to break" (see corrupt (adj.)).

 Related: Reaved ; reaving . Now obsolete or archaic or dialectal only. The old past participle was reft . Also compare bereave . OED reports that the forms reive , rieve , originally Scottish, were sometimes used "when the reference is to the taking of goods or cattle by force," hence reiver , reiver , etc., e.g. "The Reivers," Faulkner's novel.

 reaver (n.) 

 also reiver , Middle English rever , revere , "robber, destroyer, plunderer," Old English reafere "plundering forager," agent noun from reafian "to rob, plunder" (see reave (v.)). Similar formation in Old Frisian ravere , Middle Dutch rover , Dutch roover , Old High German roubari , German Räuber . Middle English rēverie (c. 1300) meant "robbery, plundering."

 rove (v.) 

 "to wander with no fixed destination," 1530s (earliest sense was "to shoot arrows at a mark selected at pleasure or at random," late 15c.); possibly a Midlands dialectal variant of northern English and Scottish rave "to wander, stray," from Middle English raven "to wander, stray, rove" (late 14c.). This is probably from Old Norse rafa "to wander, rove." Or it might be from Old French raver , a late 15c. variant of resver "to stray" (see rave (v.)). Influenced by rover , if not in part a back-formation from it. Related: Roved ; roving .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bank 

 As "rising ground in a sea or rover, shoal," from c. 1600. As "bench for rowers in an ancient galley," 1590s....

 interloper 

 seamen of those who pass their lives on shore"); perhaps from a dialectal form of leap, or from Middle Dutch loper "runner, rover...

 buccaneer 

 "piratical rover on the Spanish coast," 1680s; earlier "one who roasts meat on a boucan" (1660s), from French boucanier "...

 cop 

 They choose up sides as all take part in some exciting game Like Hide=and=Seek, Red Rover, Cops and Robbers, Pris'ner's...

 Viking 

 historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from Old Norse vikingr "freebooter, sea-rover...

 red 

 Red rover, the children's game, attested from 1891....

 nomad 

 "a wanderer, one of a tribe of people who have no fixed abode," 1550s (in plural, nomades), from French nomade (16c.), from Latin Nomas (genitive Nomadis) "wandering groups in Arabia," from Greek nomas (genitive nomados, plural nomades) "roaming, roving, wandering" (from place to

 monad 

 1610s, "unity, arithmetical unit," 1610s, from Late Latin monas (genitive monadis), from Greek monas "unit," from monos "alone" (from PIE root *men- (4) "small, isolated"). In Leibnitz's philosophy, "an ultimate unit of being, a unit of the universal substance" (1748); he apparen

 vagrant 

 mid-15c., "person who lacks regular employment, one without fixed abode, a tramp," probably from Anglo-French vageraunt, also wacrant, walcrant, which is said in many sources to be a noun use of the past participle of Old French walcrer "to wander," from Frankish (Germanic) *walk

 bird 

 "feathered, warm-blooded vertebrate animal of the class Aves," Old English bird, a rare collateral form of bridd, originally meaning "young bird, nestling" (the usual Old English for "bird" being fugol, for which see fowl (n.)), which is of uncertain origin with no cognates in an

 Share rover 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rover Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rover">Etymology of rover by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rover. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rover Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rover," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rover. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rover." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rover. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rover." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rover (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rover 
 router 
 routine 
 routinization 
 roux 
 rove 
 rover 
 row 
 rowan 
 rowboat 
 rowdy 
 rowel 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix