URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/jail
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:40:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Jail - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Jail - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of jail 

 jail (n.) 

 c. 1300 (c. 1200 in surnames) "a jail, prison; a birdcage." The form in j- is from Middle English jaile , from Old French jaiole "a cage; a prison," from Medieval Latin gabiola "a cage," from Late Latin caveola , diminutive of Latin cavea "a cage, enclosure, stall, coop; a hollow place, a cavity" (see cave (n.)).

 The form in g- was the more usual in Middle English manuscripts ( gaile , also gaiole ), from Old French gaiole "a cage; a prison," a variant spelling that seems to have been frequent in Old North French, which would have been the system familiar to Norman scribes.

 Now pronounced "jail" however it is spelled. Persistence of gaol (preferred in Britain) is "chiefly due to statutory and official tradition" [OED], and, probably, the fact that it is known the Americans spell it the other way.

 In U.S. usually a place of confinement for petty offenders. The Medieval Latin word also is the source of Spanish gayola , Italian gabbiula .
 also from c. 1300 

 jail (v.) 

 "to put in jail, to confine as if in jail," c. 1600, from jail (n.). Related: Jailed ; jailing .
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to jail 

 cave (n.) 

 "a hollow place in the earth, a natural cavity of considerable size and extending more or less horizontally," early 13c., from Old French cave "a cave, vault, cellar" (12c.), from Latin cavea "hollow" (place), noun use of neuter plural of adjective cavus "hollow" (from PIE root *keue- "to swell," also "vault, hole"). It displaced Old English eorðscrafu .

 gaol (n.) 

 see jail (n.), you tea-sodden football hooligan. Formerly in official use in Britain, and thus sometimes regarded in U.S. as a characteristic British spelling (though George Washington used it); by the time of OED 2nd edition (1980s) both spellings were considered correct there; the g- spelling is said to have been dominant longest in Australia.

 [T]he very anomalous pronunciation of g soft before other vowels than e, i, & y ... is a strong argument for writing 
 jail [Fowler]

 cajole 
 jail-bait 
 jail-bird 
 jail-break 
 jailer 
 jail-house 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gaol 

 see jail (n.), you tea-sodden football hooligan. Formerly in official use in Britain, and thus sometimes regarded in U.S. as a characteristic British spelling (though George Washington used it); by the time of OED 2nd edition (1980s) both spellings were considered correct there; 

 lag 

 "move slowly, fail to keep pace," 1520s, earlier as a noun meaning "last person" (1510s), later also as an adjective, "slow, tardy, coming behind" (1550s, as in lag-mon "last man"). All are of uncertain relationship and origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegi

 jug 

 "deep vessel for carrying liquids, usually with a handle or ear," late 15c., jugge, variant of jubbe (late 14c.), a word of unknown origin. Perhaps it is from jug "a low woman, a maidservant" (mid-16c.), a familiar alteration of Jug, a common personal name such as Joan or Judith.

 cage 

 From c. 1300 in English as "a cage for prisoners, jail, prison, a cell."...

 hock 

 "pawn, debt," 1859, American English, in hock, which meant both "in debt" and "in prison," from Dutch hok "jail, pen, doghouse...

 stannary 

 The courts and the jail for it in Devon were at Lydford, hence: Lydford law: is to hang men first, and indite them afterwards...

 quad 

 building-court sense (in this case "quadrangle of a college," Oxford student slang); also in old slang the quadrangle of a jail...

 lock-up 

 also lockup, "detention cell for offenders," 1838, perhaps short for earlier lock-up house; from the verbal phrase. Meaning "action of locking up" is from 1845. The verbal phrase lock (someone) up in a dwelling, prison, etc., is from early 15c. Of things, "to hold in safekeeping 

 remand 

 mid-15c., remaunden, "to send (something) back," from Anglo-French remaunder, Old French remander "send for again" (12c.) or directly from Late Latin remandare "to send back word, repeat a command," from Latin re- "back" (see re-) + mandare "to consign, order, commit to one's cha

 Bastille 

 14th century Paris fortress later used as a prison and destroyed by revolutionaries on July 14, 1789, as a symbol of royal despotism; French, literally "fortress, gate tower" (see bastion). Many French cities kept their medieval gate-towers as prisons after other fortifications w

 Share jail 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/jail Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/jail">Etymology of jail by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of jail. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/jail Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of jail," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jail. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of jail." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jail. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of jail." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/jail (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near jail 
 jager 
 jagged 
 jaguar 
 Jah 
 jai alai 
 jail 
 jail-bait 
 jail-bird 
 jail-break 
 jailer 
 jail-house 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix