URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/essence
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:41:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Essence - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Essence - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of essence 

 essence (n.) 

 late 14c., essencia , essencie (respelled late 15c. on French model), in philosophy, "true being, substance," as distinguished from accidental qualities or appearances, from Latin essentia "being, essence," abstract noun formed (to translate Greek ousia "being, essence") from essent- , present participle stem of esse "to be," which is reconstructed to be from PIE root *es- "to be."

 Originally in English in reference to the substance of the Trinity; the general sense of "basic element of anything" is attested by 1650s, though this is the underlying notion of the Middle English use of essential .

 The meaning "ingredient which gives something its particular character" is from c. 1600, especially in reference to distilled oils from plants (1650s), hence "fragrance, perfume" (17c.). In 19c. U.S., essence-peddler could mean "medical salesman" and "skunk."

 Essence, in its primary signification, means the principle of individuation, the inmost principle of the possibility of any thing, as that particular thing. [Coleridge, "Biographia Literaria"]
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to essence 

 essential (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "that is such by its essence," from Late Latin essentialis , from essentia "being, essence," abstract noun formed (to translate Greek ousia "being, essence") from essent- , present participle stem of esse "to be," from PIE root *es- "to be." Meaning "pertaining to essence" is from late 14c., that of "constituting the essence of something" is from 1540s; that of "necessary" is from 1520s. Essentials "indispensable elements" is from early 16c. Related: Essentially .

 *es- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to be."

 It might form all or part of: absence ; absent ; am ; Bodhisattva ; entity ; essence ; essential ; essive ; eu- ; eucalyptus ; Eucharist ; Euclidean ; Eudora ; Eugene ; eugenics ; eulogy ; Eunice ; euphemism ; euphoria ; euthanasia ; homoiousian ; improve ; interest ; is ; onto- ; Parousia ; present (adj.) "existing at the time;" present (n.2) "what is offered or given as a gift;" proud ; quintessence ; represent ; satyagraha ; sin ; sooth ; soothe ; suttee ; swastika ; yes .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit asmi , Hittite eimi , Greek esti- , Latin est , Old Church Slavonic jesmi , Lithuanian esmi , Gothic imi , Old English eom , German ist .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 perfume 

 1530s, "fumes from a burning substance," from French parfum (16c.), from parfumer "to scent," from Old Provençal perfumar or cognate words in dialectal Italian (perfumare) or Spanish (perfumar), from Latin per "through" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through") + fumar

 kernel 

 "edible substance in a nut or the stone of a fruit," Old English cyrnel "seed, kernel, pip," from Proto-Germanic *kurnilo- (source also of Middle High German kornel "a grain," Middle Dutch cornel "coarse meal"), from the root of corn "seed, grain" (from PIE root *gre-no- "grain")

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 quintessence 

 early 15c., quint-essence, in ancient philosophy and medieval alchemy, "a pure essence latent in all things, and the substance...of which the heavenly bodies are composed," literally "fifth essence," from Old French quinte essence (14c.) and directly...," abstract noun formed (to translate Greek ousia "being, essence") from essent-, present-participle stem of esse "to be"...The transferred or figurative sense of "purest essence" (of a situation, character, etc.), "an extract from anything containing...

 substantial 

 directly from Latin substantialis "having substance or reality, material," in Late Latin "pertaining to the substance or essence...," from substantia "being, essence, material" (see substance)....

 quiddity 

 "a trifling nicety in argument, a quibble," 1530s, from Medieval Latin quidditas "the essence of things," in Scholastic philosophy...Original classical meaning "real essence or nature of a thing, that which distinguishes a thing from other things and makes...

 substantive 

 Old French substantif, from Late Latin substantivus "of substance or being, self-existent," from Latin substantia "being, essence...

 signification 

 early 14c., significacioun, "symbolization, representation," from Old French significacion and directly from Latin significationem (nominative significatio) "a signifying, indication, expression, sign, token, meaning, emphasis," noun of action from past-participle stem of signifi

 sum 

 c. 1300, somme, summe, "a quantity or amount of money," from Anglo-French and Old French summe, somme "amount, total; collection; essential point; summing up, conclusion" (13c., Modern French somme), from Latin summa "the top, summit; chief place, highest rank; main thing, chief 

 recent 

 early 15c., "recently made," of foods, etc., "fresh, newly made," from Latin recentem (nominative recens) "lately done or made, of recent origin, new, fresh, young," from re- (see re-) + PIE root *ken- "fresh, new, young" (source also of Greek kainos "new;" Sanskrit kanina- "youn

 Share essence 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/essence Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/essence">Etymology of essence by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of essence. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/essence Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of essence," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/essence. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of essence." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/essence. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of essence." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/essence (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near essence 
 -esque 
 esquire 
 -ess 
 essay 
 essayist 
 essence 
 Essene 
 essential 
 essentialism 
 Essex 
 essive 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix