URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sans
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sans - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sans - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sans 

 sans (prep.) 

 c. 1300, sauns , saun , "without" (mid-12c. in surnames), from Old French san , sans , sen , senz (some of the forms with adverbial genitive -s ) "without, except, apart, not counting." This is cognate with Provençal senes , Old Catalan senes , Old Spanish sen (Spanish sin ), Old Italian sen , all from Vulgar Latin *sene , from Latin sine "without," an enlarged form of sed , se "without" (from PIE root *sen(e)- "apart, separated;" see sunder ).

 "A French word which has existed long in English without becoming naturalized; now archaic or affected, except as used in heraldry ..." [Century Dictionary, 1891]; OED writes that the words limited modern use is "chiefly with reminiscence of Shakespere," which it spells that way. In reference to fonts, by 1927, short for sans-serif . Sans souci , French, as an adverbial phrase "free from care, without care or concern," was the name of Frederick the Great's royal palace at Potsdam. 
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to sans 

 sans-serif 

 also sanserif , "printing type without finishing cross-lines on the main strokes," 1830, from French sans "without" (see sans ) + English serif (1841), earlier ceref (1827). This is perhaps from Dutch and Flemish schreef "a line, a stroke," a noun related to schrijven "to write," a Germanic borrowing from Latin scribere "to write" (from PIE root *skribh- "to cut"). OED finds the Dutch and Flemish word "fairly suits the sense and form; but historical evidence is wanting, and the quasi-French form of sans-ceriph is not accounted for." Short form sans is by 1927.

 sunder (v.) 

 Middle English sonderen , "separate (two or more things) from each other," from Old English sundrian , syndrian "to divide, disunite in any manner." This is from the adjective and adverb sundor "separately, apart," which is from Proto-Germanic *sunder (source also of Old Norse sundr , Old Frisian sunder , Old High German suntar "aside, apart;" German sondern "to separate").

 This is from PIE root *sen(e)- "apart, separated" (source also of Sanskrit sanutar "away, aside," Avestan hanare "without," Greek ater "without," Latin sine "without," Old Church Slavonic svene "without," Old Irish sain "different").

 The adjective survived in Middle English only in compounds, and is preserved in asunder . Related: Sundered ; sundering; sunderment .

 s.a. 
 Sanka 
 sansculotte 
 sine die 
 sine prole 
 sine qua non 
 sinecure 
 sinsemilla 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sansculotte 

 also sans-culotte, "lower-class republican of the French Revolution," 1790, from French, literally "without breeches;" see sans + culottes. This usually is explained as referring to the class whose distinctive costume was pantalons (long trousers) as opposed to the upper classes,

 Bayard 

 integrity, in this sense from Pierre du Terrail, seigneur de Bayard (1473-1524), French knight celebrated as Chevalier sans...peur et sans reproche....

 Marsellaise 

 Revolution, the city was punished for its royalist Sympathies by being stripped of its name and called instead  Ville-sans-Nom...

 omelet 

 The proverb you can't make an omelet without breaking eggs (1845) translates French On ne saurait faire une omelette sans...

 saying 

 Ça va sans dire, a familiar French locution, whose English equivalent might be "that is a matter of course," or "that may...

 treadmill 

 invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill (n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s. As a corrective punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the pris

 philosophy 

 c. 1300, philosophie, "knowledge, learning, scholarship, scholarly works, body of knowledge," from Old French filosofie "philosophy, knowledge" (12c., Modern French philosophie) and directly from Latin philosophia, from Greek philosophia "love of knowledge, pursuit of wisdom; sys

 tan 

 c. 1400, tannen, in part from late Old English tannian "convert hides into leather" (by steeping them in liquid containing tannin), from Medieval Latin tannare "tan, dye a tawny color" (c. 900), from tannum "crushed oak bark," used in tanning leather. This is believed to be from 

 eclectic 

 1680s, "not confined to or following any one model or system," originally in reference to ancient philosophers who selected doctrines from every system; from French eclectique (1650s), from Greek eklektikos "selective," literally "picking out," from eklektos "selected," from ekle

 capital 

 early 13c., "of or pertaining to the head," from Old French capital, from Latin capitalis "of the head," hence "capital, chief, first," from caput (genitive capitis) "head" (from PIE root *kaput- "head"). The meaning "main, principal, chief, dominant, first in importance" is from

 Share sans 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sans Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sans">Etymology of sans by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sans. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sans Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sans," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sans. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sans." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sans. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sans." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sans (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sans 
 sanitizer 
 sanity 
 sanjak 
 sank 
 Sanka 
 sans 
 sansculotte 
 sansei 
 Sanskrit 
 sans-serif 
 Santa 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix