URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/punch
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Punch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Punch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of punch 

 punch (v.) 

 "to thrust, push; jostle;" also, "to prod, drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding," late 14c., from Old French ponchonner "to punch, prick, stamp," from ponchon "pointed tool, piercing weapon" (see punch (n.1)).

 Meaning "to pierce, make a hole or holes in with a punch, emboss with a tool" is from early 15c.; meaning "to stab, puncture" is from mid-15c. Related: Punched; punching .

 Specialized sense "to hit with the fist, give a blow, beat with blows of the fist" is recorded by 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare "to fight with the fists," from a root meaning "to pierce, sting." In English this sense-shift evolved also probably by influence of punish : Punch or punsch for punish is found in documents from 14c.-15c.:

 punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery Plays, late 15c.] 

 To punch (someone) out "beat (someone) up" is from 1971. To punch a ticket, etc., "make a hole in" to indicate use of it is from mid-15c. To punch the clock "record one's arrival at or departure from the workplace using an automated timing device" is from 1900.

 There are time recorders for checking the minute of arrival and departure of each office employee—machines that operate with clock attachment and which in response to worker's punch print on tabular sheets of paper his promptnesses and delinquencies. [Richard Lord, "Running an Office by Machinery," in System, September 1909] 

 Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say. 

 Who lords it o'er the common herd who chance to come your way; 

 Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock, 

 When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK. 

 [from "Punch the Clock," by "The Skipper," The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912] 
 also from late 14c. 

 Punch (n.) 

 violent, squeaky-voiced puppet-show star, 1709, shortening of Punchinello (1666), from Italian (Neapolitan) Pollecinella , Pollecenella , diminutive of pollecena "turkey pullet," probably in allusion to his big nose. The phrase pleased as punch apparently refers to his unfailing triumph over enemies. The comic weekly of this name was published in London from 1841.
 also from 1709 

 punch (n.1) 

 "pointed tool for making holes, pricking, or embossing," late 14c., short for puncheon , from Old French ponchon , poinchon "pointed tool, piercing weapon," from Vulgar Latin *punctionem (nominative *punctio ) "pointed tool," from past-participle stem of Latin pungere "to prick, pierce, sting" (from suffixed form of PIE root *peuk- "to prick").

 From mid-15c. as "a stab, thrust;" late 15c. as "a dagger." Extended from the simple instrument to machines doing similar work; the meaning "machine for pressing or stamping a die" is from 1620s.
 also from late 14c. 

 punch (n.2) 

 a name of a type of alcoholic drink, by 1600. It is commonly said to be from Hindi panch "five," and so called for the number of its ingredients: citrus juice, water, spirits, sugar, and spice. (This Hindi word is ultimately from PIE root *penkwe- "five.")

 The explanation traces to John Fryer's "A New Account of East India and Persia, in Eight Letters" (1698), but lexicographers have long noted phonetic and historical difficulties. There is no evidence of a drink called panch in India, or elsewhere, before the English word; and the English word is now known to have been in use before the English became regular traders to the Indies or attempted settlements in India.

 Mixtures similar to the five-ingredient punch had been drunk in Europe since the Middle Ages, made with wine. Distilled spirits became common in England only during 17c., which also was when the punch drink became common. By 1650s punch is called "an Indian drink." It much resembles the Middle Eastern drink sherbet , which differed only in being non-alcoholic; but the association could have been with the East India Company trade that made the drink's exotic ingredients affordable in England. In 17c. sources it is as often associated with the West Indies:

 [T]here is a pernicious sort of Drink in great Reputation and Use amongst them [our Country-men, viz. in Iamaica, Barbadoes and the Leward Islands], call'd, PVNCH , [...] This sort of beloved Liquor is made of Brandy or Run, Sugar, Water, Lime-Iuice, and sometimes Ginger or Nutmegs: Now here are four or five Ingredients, all of as different Natures as Light is from Darkness, and all great Extreams in their kind, except only the Water. [Thomas Tryon, "The planter's speech to his neighbours & country-men of Pennsylvania, East & West Jersey and to all such as have transported themselves into new-colonies for the sake of a quiet retired life." 1684.] 

 English punch is first attested in the term punch pot (spelled paunche pot ), and the reference might be to a drink served from a particular type of vessel rather than to a particular beverage recipe. Older spelling suggests possible connection with or influence from paunch . A proposed connection to puncheon (n.1) is noted in OED: "the name [...] may have been a sailors' shortening of puncheon, as that to which sailors would look for their allowance of liquor." But earliest use does not suggest nautical origin.

 A puncheon or  poncheon  (attested by c. 1400) also was the name of a unit of measurement for wine or liquor of roughly 70 gallons, more than a household’s daily use, but history records punch bowls of considerable size meant to serve large gatherings, which could link it to the vessel. Also compare Middle French dialectal variants of  poncheon , such as pochon , with senses that included: a cup or glass, a large ladle for soup, and a kind of three-footed pan or casserole dish.

 Compare also Falernum and daiquiri .
 also from 1600 

 punch (n.3) 

 "a quick blow, dig, or thrust with the fist," by 1570s, probably from punch (v.). In early use it also could refer to blows with the foot or jabs with a staff or club. Originally especially of blows that sink in to some degree ("... whom he unmercifully bruises and batters from head to foot: here a slap in the chaps, there a black eye, now a punch in the stomach, and then a kick on the breech," Monthly Review, 1763).

 The figurative sense of "forceful, vigorous quality" is recorded from 1911. Punch line (also punch-line ) is from 1915, originally in popular-song writing. To beat (someone) to the punch in the figurative sense is from 1915, a metaphor from boxing (where it is attested by 1913). Punch-drunk "dazed from continued punching, having taken so many punches one can no longer feel it" is from 1915 (alternative form slug-nutty is from 1933; compare sleep-drunk , 1889, "confused and excited while being half awakened from a sound sleep").
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to punch 

 daiquiri (n.) 

 alcoholic drink made with rum, citrus juice, and sugar, 1910, from Daiquiri , name of a river and village in eastern Cuba, said to be from a Taino word. Originally attested in promotional materials for Bacardi rum, headquartered in Santiago de Cuba, about 15 miles from Daiquiri. A 1910 advertisement instructs the reader to pronounce it "Die-kee-ree."

 Three mining men of international reputation identified with the famous mines of Daiquiri, at the extreme easterly end of Cuba not far distant from Santiago, were imbibing an old-fashioned decoction at the Casa Grande, the Delmonico of that locale. One the partners of Bacardi joined them, and instead of spirits from Scotland asked for the product of Cuba, which aroused the curiosity of the others and led to a trial of the beverage, which was immediately pronounced excellent. Then and there it was most felicitously baptized ‘Daiquiri,’ from which place its fame and name has radiated in all directions. [John Vavasour Noel, 'Who Discovered "Bacardi" the Famous Cuban Drink?' in 
 The South American , November 1916.] 

 Other early names for the drink include a Rum Flip and a Cuban Cocktail. A version with added grenadine existed by 1913. As a frozen drink by 1959.

 Falernum (n.) 

 Carribean liqueur made from rum, lime juice and sugar, by 1842, a word of uncertain etymology. An unlikely story is that it is a corruption of the phrase "You have to learn them." OED has no entry for this word but mentions a "chiefly poetical" type of ancient wine called Falerne or Falernum (in this sense, mid-15c.), documented by Pliny, which perhaps could have suggested the name; an 1806 account of a visit to a Guiana sugar plantation mentions the serving of "Falernum wine."

 Falernum  or 
 drink of contradictions  — Falernum is made in the same manner and contains the same ingredients, in the same proportions, as shrub; with the addition of four gallons of water to every three gallons of rum. Proportions are thus — one, two, three, and four. 

 Of lime juice 
  one , to make it 
 sour ; 

 Of sugar 
  two , to make it 
 sweet ; 

 Three of 
 rum , to make it 
 strong ; 

 Of water 
  four , to make it 
 weak . 

 [Robert Duff, " 
 British Guiana ," 1866] 

 paunch 
 puncheon 
 punish 
 sherbet 
 belly-punch 
 bimbo 
 interfere 
 keypunch 
 Polichinelle 
 pounce 
 pugilist 
 punch-bowl 
 puncheon 
 Punchinello 
 punching 
 punchless 
 punchy 
 suckerpunch 
 See All Related Words (23) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 paunch 

 late 14c. paunce, "the human belly," from Old French pance (Old North French panche) "belly, stomach," from Latin panticem (nominative pantex) "belly, bowels" (source also of Spanish panza, Italian pancia); which is possibly related to panus "swelling" (see panic (n.2)). Earlier 

 puncheon 

 also poncheon, "barrel or cask for soap or liquor," according to Century Dictionary ranging from 72 to 120 gallons, c. 1400, from Old French ponchon, poinçon, ponson "wine vessel" (13c.), of unknown origin. Formally identical with puncheon (n.2) "pointed tool for punching or pier

 punish 

 c. 1300, punishen, "inflict a penalty on," from Old French puniss-, extended present-participle stem of punir "to punish," from Latin punire "punish, correct, chastise; take vengeance for; inflict a penalty on, cause pain for some offense," earlier poenire, from poena "penalty, p

 cartoon 

 Punch has the benevolence to announce, that in an early number of his ensuing Volume he will astonish the Parliamentary Committee...[Punch, June 24, 1843] Also see -oon. As "an animated movie," by 1916....

 buffer 

 1835, agent noun from obsolete verb buff "make a dull sound when struck" (mid-16c.), from Old French bufe "a blow, slap, punch...

 pound 

 Meaning "to beat, strike, punch (someone)" is from early 14c....

 planter 

 proprietor of a cultivated estate in West Indies or southern colonies of North America" is from 1640s, hence planter's punch...

 plug 

 1620s, "piece of wood or other substance, usually in the form of a peg or bottle-cork, used to stop a hole in a vessel," originally a seamen's term, probably from Dutch plug, Middle Dutch plugge "bung, stopper," related to Norwegian plugg, Danish pløg (the Scandinavian words also

 recipe 

 1580s, "medical prescription, a formula for the composing of a remedy written by a physician," from French récipé (15c.), from Latin recipe "take!" (this or that ingredient), second person imperative singular of recipere "to hold, contain" (see receive). It was the word written b

 pierce 

 c. 1300 (c. 1200 as a surname), percen, "make a hole in; force one's way through; thrust through with or as with a sharp or pointed instrument," from Anglo-French perser, Old French percier "pierce, transfix, drive through" (12c., Modern French percer), probably from Vulgar Latin

 Share punch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/punch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/punch">Etymology of punch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of punch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/punch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of punch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/punch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of punch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/punch. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of punch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/punch (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near punch 
 pump 
 pumper 
 pumpernickel 
 pumpkin 
 pun 
 punch 
 punch-bowl 
 puncheon 
 Punchinello 
 punching 
 punchless 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix