URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caesar
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:58:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caesar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Caesar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Caesar 

 Caesar 

 "an emperor, a ruler, a dictator," late 14c., cesar , from Cæsar , originally a surname of the Julian gens in Rome, elevated to a title after Caius Julius Caesar (100 B.C.E.-44 B.C.E.) became dictator; it was used as a title of emperors down to Hadrian (138 C.E.). The name is of uncertain origin; Pliny derives it from caesaries "head of hair," because the future dictator was born with a full one; Century Dictionary suggests Latin caesius "bluish-gray" (of the eyes), also used as a proper name. Also compare caesarian .

 Old English had casere , which would have yielded modern *coser , but it was replaced in Middle English by keiser (c. 1200), from Norse or Low German, and later by the French or Latin form of the name. Cæsar also is the root of German Kaiser and Russian tsar (see czar ). He competes as progenitor of words for "king" with Charlemagne (Latin Carolus ), as in Lithuanian karalius , Polish krol .

 The use in reference to "temporal power as the object of obedience" (contrasted with God ) is from Matthew xxii.21. Caesar's wife (1570s) as the figure of a person who should be above suspicion is from Plutarch. In U.S. slang c. 1900, a sheriff was Great Seizer .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to Caesar 

 caesarian (n.) 

 "delivery of a child by cutting through the abdomen of the mother," 1923, shortening of Caesarian section (1610s); caesar as "baby delivered by caesarian section is from 1530s. Section (n.) here has the literal Latin sense of "act or action of cutting," which is attested from 1550s in English but is rare outside of medicine.

 Supposedly from Caius Julius Caesar , who was said to have been delivered surgically. Thus also legend traces his cognomen to Latin caesus, past participle of caedere "to cut" (see -cide ). But if this is the etymology of the name, it was likely an ancestor who was so born (Caesar's mother lived to see his triumphs and such operations would have been fatal to the woman in ancient times). Rather, caesar here may come directly from caesus .

 The operation was prescribed in Rome for cases of dead mothers; the first recorded instance of it being performed on a living woman is c. 1500, but as late as the early 19c., before antiseptics and blood transfusions, it had a 50% mortality rate.

 czar (n.) 

 the common title of the emperor of Russia, 1550s, from Russian tsar , from Old Slavic tsesari , from Gothic kaisar , from Greek kaisar , from Latin Caesar . First adopted by Russian emperor Ivan IV, 1547.

 The spelling with 
 cz- is against the usage of all Slavonic languages; the word was so spelt by Herberstein, 
 Rerum Moscovit. Commentarii , 1549, the chief early source of knowledge as to Russia in Western Europe, whence it passed into the Western Languages generally; in some of these it is now old-fashioned; the usual Ger. form is now 
 zar ; French adopted 
 tsar during the 19th c. This also became frequent in English towards the end of that century, having been adopted by the 
 Times newspaper as the most suitable English spelling. [OED]

 The Germanic form of the word also is the source of Finnish keisari , Estonian keisar . The transferred sense of "person with dictatorial powers" is first recorded 1866, American English, initially in reference to President Andrew Johnson. The fem. czarina is 1717, from Italian czarina , from Ger. Zarin , fem. of Zar "czar." The Russian fem. form is tsaritsa . His son is tsarevitch , his daughter is tsarevna .

 Caesarea 
 Cesar 
 kaiser 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kaiser 

 1858 in reference to the emperors of Austria and (after 1870) Germany, from German Kaiser, Bavarian and Austrian spelling variant of of Middle High German keisar, from Old High German keisar "emperor," an early borrowing of Latin cognomen Caesar. The Germanic peoples seem to have

 August 

 sixth month of the later Roman calendar, renamed from Sextilis (literally "sixth") in 8 B.C.E. to honor emperor Augustus Caesar..., literally "Venerable Caesar" (see august (adj.), and compare Augustus)....

 punt 

 Old English punt, which probably is from British Latin ponto "flat-bottomed boat" (see OED), a kind of Gallic transport (Caesar...

 Rubicon 

 It was crossed by Caesar, Jan. 10, 49 B.C.E., when he left his province to attack Pompey....

 July 

 of the Roman calendar" (which began its year in March), renamed after his death and deification in honor of Gaius Julius Caesar...

 emperor 

 Originally a title conferred by vote of the Roman army on a successful general, later by the Senate on Julius and Augustus Caesar...

 ablative 

 directly from Latin (casus) ablativus "(case) of removal," expressing direction from a place or time, coined by Julius Caesar...

 coincidence 

 c. 1600, "exact correspondence in substance or nature," from French coincidence, from coincider, from Medieval Latin coincidere, literally "to fall upon together," from assimilated form of  Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + incidere "to fall upon" (from in- "upon" + co

 emotion 

 1570s, "a (social) moving, stirring, agitation," from French émotion (16c.), from Old French emouvoir "stir up" (12c.), from Latin emovere "move out, remove, agitate," from assimilated form of ex "out" (see ex-) + movere "to move" (from PIE root *meue- "to push away"). The sense 

 wine 

 Old English win "wine," from Proto-Germanic *winam (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German win, Old Norse vin, Dutch wijn, German Wein), an early borrowing from Latin vinum "wine," from PIE *uoin-a-, related to words for "wine" in other southern European languages

 Share Caesar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caesar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caesar">Etymology of Caesar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Caesar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caesar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Caesar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caesar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Caesar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caesar. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Caesar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caesar (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Caesar 
 caduceus 
 caducous 
 cady 
 caecum 
 Caenozoic 
 Caesar 
 Caesar salad 
 Caesarea 
 caesarean 
 caesarian 
 caesium 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix