URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cumulus
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:40:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cumulus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cumulus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cumulus 

 cumulus (n.) 

 1650s, "a heap," from Latin cumulus "a heap, pile, mass, surplus," from PIE *ku-m-olo- , suffixed shortened form of root *keue- "to swell." Meteorological use for "rounded mass of clouds, snowy white at the top with a darker, horizontal base" is attested by 1803.
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to cumulus 

 cirrocumulus (n.) 

 also cirro-cumulus , type of cloud having the characteristics of both cirrus and cumulus clouds, 1803, from combining form of cirrus + cumulus .

 encumber (v.) 

 early 14c., "burden, vex, inconvenience," from Old French encombrer "to block up, hinder, thwart," from Late Latin incombrare , from in- "in" (see in- (2)) + combrus "barricade, obstacle," probably from Latin cumulus "heap" (see cumulus ). The meaning "hinder, hamper" is attested in English from late 14c. Related: Encumbered ; encumbering .

 halcyon 
 strato-cumulus 
 *keue- 
 cumulo- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 halcyon 

 "calm, quiet, peaceful," 1540s, in halcyon dayes (translating Latin alcyonei dies, Greek alkyonides hemerai), 14 days of calm weather at the winter solstice, when a mythical bird (also identified with the kingfisher) was said to breed in a nest floating on calm seas. The name of 

 pile 

 early 15c., "heap or stack of something," usually consisting of an indefinite number of separate objects arranged in a more or less regular conical or pyramidal form, from Old French pile "a heap, a stack," and directly from Latin pila "a pillar," also "stone barrier, pier" (see 

 heap 

 Old English heap "pile (of things); great number, crowd, multitude (of persons)," from West Germanic *haupaz (source also of Old Saxon hop, Old Frisian hap, Middle Low German hupe, Dutch hoop, German Haufe "heap"), of uncertain origin. The group is perhaps related to Old English 

 cloud 

 suspended in the sky" is a metaphoric extension that begins to appear c. 1300 in southern texts, based on similarity of cumulus...The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus, nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist...

 shock 

 1560s, "violent encounter of armed forces or a pair of warriors," a military term, from French choc "violent attack," from Old French choquer "strike against," probably from Frankish, from a Proto-Germanic imitative base (compare Middle Dutch schokken "to push, jolt," Old High Ge

 accumulation 

 late 15c., "that which is heaped up, an accumulated mass," from Latin accumulationem (nominative accumulatio) "a heaping up," noun of action from past-participle stem of accumulare "to heap up, amass," from ad "to," here perhaps emphatic (see ad-), + cumulare "heap up," from cumu

 collection 

 late 14c., "action of collecting, practice of gathering together," from Old French collection (14c.), from Latin collectionem (nominative collectio) "a gathering together," noun of action from past-participle stem of colligere "gather together" (see collect). Especially of money 

 stack 

 c. 1300, stak, "pile, heap, or group of things," especially a pile of grain in the sheaf in circular or rectangular form (late 12c. in surnames), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse stakkr "haystack" (cognate with Danish stak, Swedish stack "heap, stack"), from Proto-Ger

 mound 

 1550s, "hedge, fence," also "an embankment, a dam" (a sense probably influenced by mount (n.)), a word of obscure origin. The relationship between the noun and the verb is uncertain. Commonly supposed to be from Middle English mounde "the hand; guardianship, power," from Old Engl

 prey 

 mid-13c., preie, "animal hunted for food, that which is seized by any carnivorous animal to be devoured" (also, figuratively, of souls captured by Satan, etc.), also "goods taken in war," from Old French preie "booty, animal taken in the chase" (mid-12c., Modern French proie), fr

 Share cumulus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cumulus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cumulus">Etymology of cumulus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cumulus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cumulus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cumulus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cumulus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cumulus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cumulus. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cumulus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cumulus (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cumulus 
 cumulate 
 cumulation 
 cumulative 
 cumulo- 
 cumulous 
 cumulus 
 cun 
 Cunard 
 cunctator 
 cuneate 
 cuneiform 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix