URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nephew
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:35:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nephew - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nephew - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nephew 

 nephew (n.) 

 c. 1300, neveu , "son of one's sister or brother," also "a grandson; a relative; a kinsman," from Old French neveu (Old North French nevu ) "grandson, descendant," from Latin nepotem (nominative nepos ) "sister's son, grandson, descendant," in post-Augustan Latin (c. 150 A.D.), "nephew."

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *nepot- "grandchild," and in a general sense, "male descendant other than son" (source also of Sanskrit napat "grandson, descendant;" Old Persian napat- "grandson;" Old Lithuanian nepuotis "grandson;" Dutch neef ; German Neffe "nephew;" Old Irish nia , genitive niath "son of a sister," Welsh nei ).

 The original pronunciation is /nev-u/; the spelling was changed unetymologically to -ph- after c. 1400, and the pronunciation partly followed it. Used in English in all the classical senses until the meaning narrowed in 17c., and also as a euphemism for "the illegitimate son of an ecclesiastic" (1580s). The Old English cognate, nefa "nephew, stepson, grandson, second cousin" survived to 16c.

 [I]ts final exclusive use for 'nephew' instead of 'grandson' is prob. due in part to the fact that, by reason of the great difference in age, a person has comparatively little to do with his grandsons, if he has any, while nephews are proverbially present and attentive, if their uncle is of any importance. [Century Dictionary]
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to nephew 

 nepotism (n.) 

 "favoritism shown to relatives, especially in appointment to high office," 1660s, from French népotisme (1650s), from Italian nepotismo , from nepote "nephew," from Latin nepotem (nominative nepos ) "grandson, nephew" (see nephew ). Originally, practice of granting privileges to a pope's "nephew" which was a euphemism for his natural son.

 Draw round my bed : is Anselm keeping back ? 

 Nephews—sons mine ... ah God, I know not ! 

 [Browning, "The Bishop Orders His Tomb at Saint Praxed's"] 

 niece (n.) 

 c. 1300, nece , "daughter of one's brother or sister; granddaughter; female relative," from Old French niece "niece; granddaughter" (12c., Modern French nièce ), earlier niepce , from Latin neptia (also source of Portuguese neta , Spanish nieta ), a more decidedly feminine form of neptis "granddaughter," in Late Latin "niece," fem. of nepos "grandson, nephew" (see nephew ). Cognate with Old Lithuanian neptė , Sanskrit naptih "granddaughter;" Czech net , Old Irish necht , Welsh nith , German Nichte "niece." 

 It replaced Old English nift , from Proto-Germanic *neftiz , from the same PIE root (Old English also used broðordohter and nefene ). Until c. 1600 in English, niece also commonly meant "a granddaughter" or any remote female descendant or kinswoman.

 pH 
 Stephen 
 grand- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cousin 

 13c., "a collateral blood relative more remote than a brother or sister" (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French cosin "nephew...Words for cousin tend to drift to "nephew" on the notion of "father's nephew."...

 Roland 

 The name of the legendary nephew of Charlemagne, celebrated in "Chanson de Roland" (c. 1300) and suchlike romances....

 fashionable 

 Wynne, her nephew, and a lady, who from her dress and modest appearance was evidently nobody....

 googol 

 Newman, the word supposedly coined a year or two before by Kasner's 9- (or 8-) year-old nephew (unnamed in the book's account...

 gossamer 

 c. 1300, "filmy substance (actually spider threads) found in fields of stubble in late fall," apparently from gos "goose" (see goose (n.)) + sumer "summer" (see summer (n.)). Blount (1656) has it as gossymeare or gossomor "the white and cobweb-like exhalations, which fly abroad i

 pessimism 

 1794 "worst condition possible, point of greatest deterioration" (a sense now rare or obsolete), borrowed (by Coleridge) from French pessimisme, formed (on model of French optimisme) from Latin pessimus "worst," perhaps originally "bottom-most," from PIE *ped-samo-, suffixed (sup

 prosperous 

 early 15c., "favorable, auspicious, tending to bring success;" late 15c., "flourishing, successful, making good progress in anything good or desirable;" from Anglo-French prosperous, prospereus, Anglo-Latin prosperosus, or directly from Old French prospereus (15c.), from prospere

 apt 

 mid-14c., "inclined, disposed;" late 14c., "suited, fitted, adapted, possessing the necessary qualities for the purpose," from Old French ate "fitting, suitable, appropriate" (13c., Modern French apte), or directly from Latin aptus "fit, suited, proper, appropriate," adjectival u

 admonish 

 mid-14c., amonesten "remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning," from Old French amonester "urge, encourage, warn" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere "bring to mind, remind (of a debt);" also "warn, advise, urge," from ad "to," here probably with frequenta

 cologne 

 "a distilled spirit blended with certain essential oils so as to give off a fragrant scent," by 1844, short for Cologne water (1814), loan-translation of French eau de Cologne (which also was used in English), literally "water from Cologne," from the city in Germany (German Köln,

 Share nephew 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nephew Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nephew">Etymology of nephew by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nephew. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nephew Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nephew," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nephew. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nephew." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nephew. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nephew." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nephew (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nephew 
 neoteny 
 neoteric 
 Nepal 
 nepenthe 
 nephalist 
 nephew 
 Nephilim 
 nephrectomy 
 nephridium 
 nephritis 
 nephro- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix