URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/silver
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:29:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Silver - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Silver - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of silver 

 silver (n.) 

 "rare white metal, harder than gold, softer than copper, valued for its luster and malleability," Middle English silver , from Old English seolfor , Mercian sylfur , Northumbrian sulfer , "the metal silver; silver coin, money," from Proto-Germanic *silabur- (source also of Old Saxon silvbar , Old Frisian selover , Old Norse silfr , Middle Dutch silver , Dutch zilver , Old High German silabar , German silber "silver; money," Gothic silubr "silver"), which is of uncertain origin.

 It seems to be Germanic/Balto-Slavic (source also of Old Church Slavonic s(u)rebo , Russian serebro , Polish srebro , Lithuanian sidabras "silver"), but has long been presumed to be a Wanderwort (a loan-word that has spread among several languages) displacing the usual IE word for the metal (represented by Latin argentum ; see argent ).

 Basque zilharr "silver" usually is considered a loan-word from West Germanic, but the Germanic form lately has been compared to old Celtic words used in Spain, and because the rest of Celtic uses the argentum word, this suggests the borrowing might be in the other direction, and Germanic word might be from "a Hispano-Celtic innovation due to an Iberian donor language. In this connection, the old comparison of Basque zilharr is attractive" [Boutkan].

 From c. 1300 as "articles, plates, etc. of silver, silverware." As a color name from late 15c. Chemical abbreviation Ag is from Latin argentum "silver."

 silver (v.) 

 mid-14c., silveren , "cover or plate with silver," from silver (n.). Old English had beseolfrian . The meaning "tinge with gray" (of hair) is from c. 1600. Related: Silvered ; silvering .
 also from mid-14c. 

 silver (adj.) 

 "made of silver," late Old English seolfor , from the noun (see silver (n.), also compare silvern ). Of voices, words, etc., from 1520s in reference to the metal's pleasing resonance; silver-tongued is from 1590s. Of hair by 1580s.

 The silver age (1560s) was a phrase used by Greek and Roman poets. A silver fox is a North American variety of the common red fox with silver-tipped black hair. A silver spoon in the literal sense is attested from late 15c.; see spoon (n.). The old figurative expression fish with a silver hook is attested from c. 1600.

 The 
 Silver Hook , and the 
 Golden Bait , catch all the Fish upon dry Land. [Defoe, "The Union-Proverb," 1708]

 Entries linking to silver 

 argent (n.) 

 early 15c., "silver, silver coin," from Old French argent "silver, silver money; quicksilver" (11c.), from Latin argentum "silver, silver work, silver money," from PIE *arg-ent- , suffixed form of root *arg- "to shine; white," thus "silver" as "the shining or white metal." It was earlier in English in the sense of "quicksilver, the metal mercury" (c. 1300); the adjective sense "silver-colored" is from late 15c.

 silvern (adj.) 

 "made of or resembling silver," Middle English silveren , from Old English seolfren "made or consisting of silver;" see silver (n.) + -en (2). Similar formation in German silbern , Dutch zilveren , etc. It fell from use in English other than in poetry.

 spoon 
 quicksilver 
 silver bullet 
 silverfish 
 silversmith 
 silverware 
 silvery 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 spoon 

 Middle English spon, from Old English spon "chip, sliver, shaving, splinter of wood" (a sense now obsolete), from Proto-Germanic *spe-nu- (source also of Old Norse spann, sponn "chip, splinter," Swedish spån "a wooden spoon," Old Frisian spon, Middle Dutch spaen, Dutch spaan, Old

 quicksilver 

 common popular designation of metallic mercury, Middle English quik-silver, from late Old English cwicseolfor, literally "living silver," so called for its mobility, translating Latin argentum vivum (source also of Italian argento vivo), "living silver;" so called from its liquid

 fluent 

 1580s, "flowing freely" (of water), also, of speakers, "able and nimble in the use of words," from Latin fluentem (nominative fluens) "lax, relaxed," figuratively "flowing, fluent," present participle of fluere "to flow, stream, run, melt," from extended form of PIE *bhleu- "to s

 hydrargyrum 

 Greek hydrargyros "quicksilver" (as prepared artificially from cinnabar ore; native quicksilver was argyros khytos "fused silver..."), from hydr-, stem of hydor "water" (from suffixed form of PIE root *wed- (1) "water; wet") + argyros "silver" (from PIE...root *arg- "to shine; white," hence "silver" as the shining or white metal)....

 purl 

 "knit with inverted stitches," 1825; earlier "embroider with gold or silver thread" (1520s), probably from Middle English...As a noun, from late 14c. as "bordering, frills;" 1530s as "twisted thread of gold and silver."...

 mercury 

 silver-white fluid metallic element, late 14c., from Medieval Latin mercurius, from Latin Mercurius (see Mercury)....The others were Sun/gold, Moon/silver, Mars/iron, Saturn/lead, Jupiter/tin, Venus/copper....The Greek name for it was hydrargyros "liquid silver," which gives the element its symbol, Hg....

 plate 

 mid-13c., "flat sheet of gold or silver," also "flat, round coin," from Old French plate "thin piece of metal" (late 12c....The cognate in Spanish (plata) and Portuguese (prata) has become the usual word for "silver," superseding argento via a shortening...of *plata d'argento "plate of silver, coin."...Meaning "table utensils" (originally of silver or gold only) is from Middle English....

 prize 

 "that which is obtained or offered as the reward of exertion or contest; reward or symbol of victory," spelling alteration of Middle English prise (c. 1300 in this sense), from Old French pris "price, value, worth; reward" (see price (n.)). Figuratively, "anything worth striving 

 garnet 

 mid-15c., metathesized form of gernet "the gem garnet" (early 14c.), from Old French grenate, gernatte, granate "garnet," also an adjective, "of a dark red color," from Medieval Latin granatum "garnet; of dark red color," perhaps abstracted from the Medieval Latin or Old French w

 color 

 early 13c., "skin color, complexion," from Anglo-French culur, coulour, Old French color "color, complexion, appearance" (Modern French couleur), from Latin color "color of the skin; color in general, hue; appearance," from Old Latin colos, originally "a covering" (akin to celare

 Share silver 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/silver Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/silver">Etymology of silver by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of silver. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/silver Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of silver," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/silver. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of silver." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/silver. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of silver." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/silver (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near silver 
 Siloam 
 silphium 
 silt 
 Silurian 
 silvan 
 silver 
 silver bullet 
 silver lining 
 silver screen 
 Silver Star 
 silverfish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix