URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/traffic
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:41:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Traffic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Traffic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of traffic 

 traffic (n.) 

 c. 1500, "transportation of merchandise for the purpose of trade;" 1560s in the wider sense of "trade, commerce; interchange of goods, merchandise, or property;" from French trafique (15c.), from Italian traffico (early 14c.), from trafficare "carry on trade."

 This is a word of uncertain origin; OED (1989) writes that the noun "appears to have been the noun of action from the verb." Perhaps it is from a Vulgar Latin *transfricare "to rub across," from Latin trans "across" (see trans- ) + fricare "to rub" (see friction ), with the original sense of the Italian verb being "touch repeatedly, handle." Or the second element may be an unexplained alteration of Latin facere "to make, do." Klein suggests ultimate derivation of the Italian word from Arabic tafriq "distribution."

 English spelled the word variously at first; OED (1989) writes that the spelling traffick , "rare before 1600, becomes frequent in the 17th c. and in the form traffic the prevailing one in the 18th c."

 With suggestion of sinister or illicit dealing by 1660s. The meaning "people and vehicles coming and going, coming and going of persons or transportation of goods along a line of travel" is recorded by 1825. By 1858 as "amount of business done by a railroad in passengers and goods."

 The word emerges from c. 1915 in city planning discussions of automobiles ( traffic engineer ), earlier it was used in reference to police work on city streets ( traffic-regulating policeman is by 1901). Traffic jam "condition in which traffic on the road cannot proceed" is by 1908, ousting earlier traffic block (1895). Traffic circle is from 1938 (in Britain generally a roundabout ); traffic-island is by 1931; traffic-light by 1929 ( traffic-regulation light is from 1920).
 also from c. 1500 

 traffic (v.) 

 1540s, intransitive, "to buy and sell, pass goods and commodities from one person to another for equivalents or money," from traffic (n.) and preserving the original commercial sense.

 In an opprobrious or disparaging sense, suggesting illicit, secret, or improper dealing, by 1560s. Related: Trafficked ; trafficking . The -k- is inserted to preserve the "k" sound of -c- before a suffix beginning in -i- , -y- , or -e- (compare picnic / picnicking , panic / panicky , shellac / shellacked ).
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to traffic 

 friction (n.) 

 1560s, "a chafing, rubbing," from French friction (16c.) and directly from Latin frictionem (nominative frictio ) "a rubbing, rubbing down," noun of action from past-participle stem of fricare "to rub, rub down," which is of uncertain origin. Watkins suggests possibly from PIE root *bhreie- "to rub, break." De Vaan suggests a PIE bhriH-o- "to cut" and compares Sanskrit bhrinanti , Old Church Slavonic briti "to shave." Sense of "resistance to motion" is from 1722; figurative sense of "disagreement, clash, lack of harmony, mutual irritation" first recorded 1761. Related: Frictional .

 picnic (v.) 

 "go on a picnic," 1842, from picnic (n.). Related: Picnicked ; picnicking . The -k- is retained to preserve the "k" sound of -c- before a suffix beginning in -i- , -y- , or -e- (compare traffic / trafficking , panic / panicky , shellac / shellacked ).

 trafficker 
 trans- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 red-light 

 a red light as a sign to stop is from 1849, long before traffic signals; see red (adj.1) + light (n.)....As the name of a children's game (in reference to the traffic light meaning) it is recorded from 1953....

 contraband 

 1520s, "smuggling, illegal or prohibited traffic;" 1590s, "smuggled goods, anything by law forbidden to be imported or exported...

 long-distance 

 1878, in reference to telephoning (1876 of railway fares and traffic), from long (adj.) + distance (n.). Lieut. G.R.R....

 congestion 

 Medical sense "unnatural accumulation of fluid" is from 1630s; meaning "a crowding together of people, traffic, etc." is...

 cope 

 The meaning evolved by 18c. into "handle (successfully), deal with," perhaps influenced by now-obsolete cope "to traffic,...

 barter 

 "to traffic or trade by exchanging one commodity for another," mid-15c., apparently from Old French barater "to barter, cheat...

 bumper 

 cars; 1901 of automobiles, in the phrase bumper-to-bumper, in reference to a hypothetical situation (it was used of actual traffic...

 commerce 

 1530s, "social intercourse;" 1580s, "interchange of goods or property, trade," especially trade on a large scale by transportation between countries or different parts of the same country, from French commerce (14c.), from Latin commercium "trade, trafficking," from com "with, to

 simony 

 c. 1200, simonie, "the sin of buying or selling sacred things," from Old French simonie "selling of church offices" (12c.) and directly from Late Latin simonia, from Simon Magus, the Samaritan magician who was rebuked by Peter when he sought to buy the power of conferring the Hol

 merchandise 

 mid-13c., marchaundise, "trading, commerce, action or business of buying and selling goods or commodities for profit;" mid-14c., "commodities of commerce; wares, movable objects, and articles for sale or trade," from Anglo-French marchaundise, Old French marcheandise "goods, merc

 Share traffic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/traffic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/traffic">Etymology of traffic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of traffic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/traffic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of traffic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/traffic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of traffic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/traffic. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of traffic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/traffic (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near traffic 
 tradition 
 traditional 
 traduce 
 traducer 
 Trafalgar 
 traffic 
 trafficker 
 tragedian 
 tragedize 
 tragedy 
 tragic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix