URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/day
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:36:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Day - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Day - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of day 

 day (n.) 

 Old English dæg "period during which the sun is above the horizon," also "lifetime, definite time of existence," from Proto-Germanic *dages- "day" (source also of Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Dutch dag , Old Frisian di, dei , Old High German tag , German Tag , Old Norse dagr , Gothic dags ), according to Watkins, from PIE root *agh- "a day." He adds that the Germanic initial d- is "of obscure origin." But Boutkan says it is from PIE root *dhegh- "to burn" (see fever ). Not considered to be related to Latin dies (which is from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine").

 Meaning originally, in English, "the daylight hours;" it expanded to mean "the 24-hour period" in late Anglo-Saxon times. The day formerly began at sunset, hence Old English Wodnesniht was what we would call "Tuesday night." Names of the weekdays were not regularly capitalized in English until 17c.

 From late 12c. as "a time period as distinguished from other time periods." From day to day was in late Old English; day-by-day "daily" is from late 14c.; all day "all the time" is from late 14c.  Day off "day away from work" is attested from 1883; day-tripper first recorded 1897. The days in nowadays , etc. is a relic of the Old English and Middle English use of the adverbial genitive.

 All in a day's work "something unusual taken as routine" is by 1820. The nostalgic those were the days is attested by 1907. That'll be the day , expressing mild doubt following some boast or claim, is by 1941. One of these days "at some day in the near future" is from late 15c. One of those days "a day of misfortune, day when nothing goes right" is by 1924.

 The locals have no alibi with the exception that it must have been one of those "days" that comes to every ball club when every player strives to out do the other in an attempt to lose the game. ["Columbus 11, Ulysses 3," Ulysses (Neb.) Dispatch, Aug. 7, 1924] 

 Entries linking to day 

 fever (n.) 

 earlier also feaver , late Old English fefor , fefer "fever, temperature of the body higher than normal," from Latin febris "fever," related to fovere "to warm, heat," which is probably from PIE root *dhegh- "burn" (source also of Gothic dags , Old English dæg "day," originally "the heat;" Greek tephra "ashes;" Lithuanian dāgas "heat," Old Prussian dagis "summer;" Middle Irish daig "fire"); but some suggest a reduplication of a root represented by Sanskrit *bhur- "to be restless."

 The Latin word was adopted into most of the Germanic languages (German Fieber , Swedish feber , Danish feber ), but not Dutch. English spelling was influenced by Old French fievre .

 An alternative word for "fever" was Old English hrið , hriðing (which is cognate with Old High German hritto , Irish crith , Welsh cryd , Lithuanian skriečiù, skriesti ); Latin febris also was glossed by bryneadl . The extended sense of "intense nervous excitement" is from 1580s. Also as a verb in Old English, feferian .

 adays (adv.) 

 late 14c., "by day; on or in the day or time," with adverbial genitive -s from earlier aday (mid-13c.), prepositional phrase used as an adverb, from a- (1) "on, on each" + day (n.). The genitive ending now is regarded as an accusative plural.

 birthday 
 Bundestag 
 call it a day 
 daily 
 daisy 
 day care 
 day-book 
 daybreak 
 day-dream 
 daylight 
 daylong 
 dayside 
 daytime 
 D-day 
 doomsday 
 everyday 
 good-day 
 holiday 
 See All Related Words (40) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 daily 

 "happening or being every day," mid-15c.; see day + -ly (1). Compare Old English dglic, a form found in compounds: twadglic "happening once in two days," reodglic "happening once in three days." The more usual Old English adjective was dghwamlic (also dgehwelc), which became Midd

 daisy 

 common wildflower of Europe, growing in pastures and on mountainsides and cultivated in gardens, c. 1300, daiseie, from Old English dægesege, from dæges eage "day's eye;" see day (n.) + eye (n.). So called because the petals open at dawn and close at dusk. In Medieval Latin it wa

 daylight 

 c. 1300 (as two words from mid-12c., daies liht), "the light of day," from day + light (n.); its figurative sense of "clearly visible open space between two things" (1820) has been used in references to boats in a race, U.S. football running backs avoiding opposing tackles, a rid

 ephemera 

 late 14c., originally a medical term, from Medieval Latin ephemera (febris) "(fever) lasting a day," from fem. of ephemerus..., from Greek ephemeros "daily, for the day," also "lasting or living only one day, short-lived," from epi "on" (see epi-)...+ hēmerai, dative of hēmera "day," from PIE *Hehmer "day."...Compare Greek ephemeroi "men," literally "creatures of a day."...

 diurnal 

 late 14c., "daily, happening every day," from Late Latin diurnalis "daily," from Latin dies "day" + -urnus, an adjectival...Dies "day" is from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine" (source also of Sanskrit diva "by day," Welsh diw, Breton deiz "day;" Armenian...From early 15c. as "performed in or occupying one day;" 1620s as "of or belonging to the daytime (as distinguished from nocturnal...

 adjourn 

 mid-14c., ajournen, "assign a day, fix a day" (for convening or reconvening of an organized body), from Old French ajorner..."meet" (at an appointed time), from the phrase à jorn "to another day, to a (stated) day," from à "to" (see ad-) + journ..."day," from Latin diurnus "daily," from dies "day" (from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine")....

 journey 

 one's path in life," from Old French journée "a day's length; day's work or travel" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *diurnum "day...," noun use of neuter of Latin diurnus "of one day" (from dies "day," from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine")....In Middle English it also meant "a day" (c. 1400); a day's work (mid-14c.); "distance traveled in one day" (mid-13c.), and...as recently as Johnson (1755) the primary sense was still "the travel of a day."...

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 Share day 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/day Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/day">Etymology of day by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of day. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/day Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of day," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/day. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of day." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/day. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of day." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/day (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near day 
 dawdle 
 dawdling 
 dawg 
 dawn 
 dawning 
 day 
 day care 
 day-book 
 daybreak 
 day-dream 
 Day-Glo 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close