URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hippopotamus
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:30:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hippopotamus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hippopotamus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hippopotamus 

 hippopotamus (n.) 

 omnivorous ungulate pachydermatous mammal of Africa, 1560s, from Late Latin hippopotamus , from Greek hippopotamos "riverhorse," an irregular formation from earlier ho hippos potamios "the horse of the river"), from hippos "horse" (from PIE root *ekwo- "horse") + adjective from potamos "river, rushing water" (see potamo- ). Replaced Middle English ypotame (c. 1300), which is from the same source but deformed in Old French. Glossed in Old English as sæhengest . Translated as river-horse in Holland's Pliny (1601).

 Ypotamos comen flyngynge. ... Grete bestes and griselich ["Kyng Alisaunder," c. 1300]

 Related: Hippopotamic .
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to hippopotamus 

 hippo (n.) 

 short for hippopotamus , attested from 1872.

 *ekwo- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "horse." Perhaps related to *ōku- "swift."

 It might form all or part of: alfalfa ; Eohippus ; equestrian ; equine ; equus ; hippo- ; hippocampus ; Hippocratic ; Hippocrene ; hippocrepian ; hippodrome ; hippogriff ; Hippolytus ; hippopotamus ; Philip ; philippic ; Philippines ; Xanthippe .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit açva- , Avestan aspa- , Greek hippos , Latin equus , Old Irish ech , Old Church Slavonic ehu- , Old English eoh , Gothic aihwa- all meaning "horse."

 potamo- 
 *pet- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nixie 

 Proto-Germanic *nikwiz (source also of Old Norse nykr, Old English nicor "water spirit, water monster," also used to gloss hippopotamus...

 behemoth 

 But the Hebrew word is perhaps a folk etymology of Egyptian pehemau, literally "water-ox," the name for the hippopotamus....

 river 

 early 13c. (late 12c. in surnames), "a considerable body of water flowing with perceptible current in a definite course or channel," from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere "river, riverside, river bank" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *riparia "riverbank, seashore, river" (source

 horse 

 "solidungulate perissodactyl mammal of the family Equidæ and genus Equus" [Century Dictionary], Old English hors "horse," from Proto-Germanic *harss- (source also of Old Norse hross, Old Frisian, Old Saxon hors, Middle Dutch ors, Dutch ros, Old High German hros, German Roß "horse

 broad 

 Old English brad "wide, not narrow," also "flat, open, extended," from Proto-Germanic *braidi- (source also of Old Frisian bred, Old Norse breiðr, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brouþs), which is of unknown origin. Not found outside Germanic languages. There is no clear distin

 rapture 

 c. 1600, "act of carrying off" as prey or plunder, from rapt + -ure, or else from French rapture, from Medieval Latin raptura "seizure, rape, kidnapping," from Latin raptus "a carrying off, abduction, snatching away; rape" (see rapt). The earliest attested use in English is with 

 theology 

 mid-14c., "the science of religion, study of God and his relationship to humanity," from Old French theologie "philosophical study of Christian doctrine; Scripture" (14c.), from Latin theologia, from Greek theologia "an account of the gods," from theologos "one discoursing on the

 adept 

 1690s, "completely skilled, well-versed," from Latin adeptus "having reached or attained," past participle of adipisci "to come up with, arrive at," figuratively "to attain to, acquire," from ad "to" (see ad-) + apisci "to grasp, attain" (related to aptus "fitted," from PIE root 

 mirage 

 "optical illusion of objects reflected in a sheet of water in hot, sandy deserts," 1800, in translations of French works, from French mirage (1753), from se mirer "to be reflected," from Latin mirare (see mirror (n.)). Or the French word is from Latin mirus "wonderful" (see mirac

 sheepish 

 c. 1200, shepishe, "of, pertaining to, or resembling a sheep" in some perceived characteristic, from sheep + -ish. Originally "meek, modest, docile, simple," often as qualities of good Christians. With suggestions of "easy to deceive" by c. 1400. The sense of "bashful, over-modes

 Share hippopotamus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hippopotamus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hippopotamus">Etymology of hippopotamus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hippopotamus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hippopotamus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hippopotamus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hippopotamus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hippopotamus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hippopotamus. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hippopotamus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hippopotamus (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hippopotamus 
 Hippolytus 
 hippomania 
 hippomobile 
 hippophagy 
 hippophile 
 hippopotamus 
 hippy 
 hip-shot 
 hipster 
 hir 
 hiragana 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix