URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mist
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:17:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mist - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mist - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mist 

 mist (n.) 

 "weather condition consisting of a cloud resting upon the ground, fog," also "precipitation consisting of fine droplets of water, much smaller than rain," Old English mist (earliest in compounds, such as misthleoðu "misty cliffs," wælmist "mist of death"), from Proto-Germanic *mikhstaz (source also of Middle Low German mist , Dutch mist , Icelandic mistur , Norwegian and Swedish mist ), perhaps from PIE *meigh- "to urinate." Greek omikhle "fog;" Old Church Slavonic migla "fog;" Sanskrit mih- "fog, mist," megha "cloud" sometimes are said to be cognates in this secondary sense, but Beekes finds these rather more likely to be from a separate IE root meaning "fog."

 Sometimes distinguished from 
 fog , either as being less opaque or as consisting of drops large enough to have a perceptible downward motion. [OED]

 Also in Old English in reference to dimness of the eyes or eyesight, either by illness or tears, and in a figurative sense of "something that darkens and obscures mental vision." Meaning "haze of dust in the air producing obscurity of things seen at a distance" is by 1785.

 mist (v.) 

 Old English mistian "to become misty, to be or grow misty;" see mist (n.). Meaning "cover with or as with mist" is from early 15c. Related: Misted ; misting .

 Entries linking to mist 

 haze (n.) 

 "opaqueness of the atmosphere," 1706, probably a back-formation of hazy (q.v.). Sense of "confusion, vagueness" is 1797. The differentiation of haze , mist , fog (and other dialectal words) is unmatched in other tongues, where the same word generally covers all three and often "cloud" as well; this may be an effect of the English climate on the English language.

 misty (adj.) 

 Old English mistig ; but the modern word is perhaps reformed in Middle English from mist (n.) + -y (2). From mid-14c. as "filled or covered with mist, overspread with mist;" early 15c. as "dim, obscure, or clouded as if by mist." Related: Mistily ; mistiness .

 *meigh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to urinate." 

 It might form all or part of: micturate ; micturition ; missel ; mist ; mistletoe .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit mehati "urinates;" Avestan maezaiti "urinates;" Greek omeikhein "to urinate;" Latin mingere "to urinate;" Armenian mizem "urinate;" Lithuanian minžu, minžti "urinate;" Old English migan "to urinate," micga "urine," meox "dung, filth."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share mist 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mist Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mist">Etymology of mist by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mist. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mist Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mist," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mist. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mist." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mist. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mist." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mist (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mist 
 misstate 
 misstatement 
 misstep 
 missus 
 missy 
 mist 
 mistake 
 mistaken 
 mister 
 misthink 
 mistime 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix