URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/loot
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:45:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Loot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Loot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of loot 

 loot (n.) 

 "goods taken from an enemy, etc.," 1802 (in Charles James's "Military Dictionary," London, which defines it as "Indian term for plunder or pillage"), Anglo-Indian, from Hindi lut , from Sanskrit loptram , lotram "booty, stolen property," from PIE *roup-tro- , from root *reup- "to snatch" (see rip (v.)).

 LOOTICS, Ind. A term in India to express a body of irregular horsemen, who plunder and lay waste the country, and harrass the enemy in their march. They may be compared to the Hulans of Europe and other free-booters.

 LOOTY WALLOW, Ind. A term of the same import as Lootics.

 [James, "Military Dictionary"]

 also from 1802 

 loot (v.) 

 "to plunder; carry off as loot," 1821, from loot (n.). Related: Looted ; looting .
 also from 1821 

 Entries linking to loot 

 looting (n.) 

 1842, verbal noun from loot (v.).

 rip (v.) 

 "tear apart, cut open or off," c. 1400, rippen , "pull out sutures," probably from a North Sea Germanic language (compare Flemish rippen "strip off roughly," Frisian rippe "to tear, rip;" also Middle Dutch reppen , rippen "to rip") or else from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish reppa , Danish rippe "to tear, rip"). Likely most or all of them are from a Proto-Germanic *rupjan- (from PIE root *reup- , *reub- "to snatch"). "Of somewhat obscure origin and history; it is not quite certain that all the senses really belong to the same word" [OED].

 The meaning "to slash with a sharp instrument" is from 1570s. Intransitive sense of "be torn or split open" is by 1840. Related: Ripped ; ripping . In old U.S. slang, "to utter strong language" (1772), often with out ; hence "break forth with sudden violence." The meaning "to move with slashing force" (1798) is the sense in let her rip "allow something to go or continue unrestrained," an American English colloquial phrase attested by 1846.

 At another time, when a charge was ordered one of the officers could not think of the word, and he shouted—'Let 'er rip!'—when the whole line burst out with a yell—'Let 'er rip!' and dashed in among the Mexicans, laughing and shouting this new battle cry. [from an account of Illinois volunteers in the Mexican-American War, in the Pensacola Gazette, March 29, 1851] 

  In garments we 
 rip  along the line at which they were sewed ; we 
 tear the texture of the cloth; we say, "It is not 
 torn ; it is only 
 ripped ." More broadly, 
 rip , especially with 
 up , stands for a cutting open or apart with a quick, deep strike: as, to 
 rip up a body or a sack of meal. 
 Rend implies great force or violence. [Century Dictionary]

 looter (n.) 

 "one who plunders," 1858, agent noun from loot (v.). The proper Anglo-Indian agent-noun was looty , from Hindi luti , from lut .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pillage 

 late 14c., "act of plundering" (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) "plunder," from pillier "to plunder, loot, ill-treat," possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare "to plunder," probably from a figurative use of Latin pilare "to strip of hair," perhaps also meaning "to s

 plunder 

 "take goods or valuable forcibly from, take by pillage or open force," 1630s, from German plündern, from Middle High German plunderen "to plunder," originally "to take away household furniture," from plunder (n.) "household goods, clothes," also "lumber, baggage" (14c.; compare M

 prize 

 "that which is obtained or offered as the reward of exertion or contest; reward or symbol of victory," spelling alteration of Middle English prise (c. 1300 in this sense), from Old French pris "price, value, worth; reward" (see price (n.)). Figuratively, "anything worth striving 

 spoliation 

 "robbery, plunder, loot, theft," c. 1400, spoliacioun, Anglo-French esploiacion, from Latin spoliationem (nominative spoliatio...

 liberate 

 free an occupied territory from the enemy" (often used ironically) is from 1942; hence the World War II slang sense "to loot...

 baggage 

 mid-15c., "portable equipment of an army; plunder, loot," from Old French bagage "baggage, (military) equipment" (14c.),...

 swag 

 Swag also was English criminal's slang for "quantity of stolen property, loot" from c. 1839....

 scratch 

 c. 1400, scracchen, transitive, "mark or wound slightly on the surface by a scraping or tearing action with something rough, sharp, or pointed," probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning "to scratch," both of uncertain origin. Also compare scr-. Relat

 dough 

 "mass of flour or meal moistened and mixed for baking," Middle English dogh, from Old English dag "dough," from Proto-Germanic *daigaz "something kneaded" (source also of Old Norse deig, Swedish deg, Middle Dutch deech, Dutch deeg, Old High German teic, German Teig, Gothic daigs 

 rifle 

 "portable firearm having a barrel or barrels with a spirally grooved bore," by 1775; the word was used earlier of the grooves themselves (1751), and is a noun use from rifled pistol, 1680s, from the verb rifle meaning "to cut spiral grooves in" (a gun barrel); see rifle (v.2). Th

 Share loot 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/loot Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/loot">Etymology of loot by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of loot. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/loot Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of loot," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/loot. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of loot." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/loot. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of loot." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/loot (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near loot 
 loose cannon 
 loose-leaf 
 loosely 
 loosen 
 looseness 
 loot 
 looter 
 looting 
 lop 
 lope 
 lopho- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix