URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pan
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:57:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pan 

 pan (n.) 

 "broad, shallow vessel of metal used for domestic purposes," Middle English panne , from Old English panne , earlier ponne (Mercian) "pan," from Proto-Germanic *panno "pan" (source also of Old Norse panna , Old Frisian panne , Middle Dutch panne , Dutch pan , Old Low German panna , Old High German phanna , German pfanne ), probably an early borrowing (4c. or 5c.) from Vulgar Latin *patna. This is supposed to be from Latin patina "shallow pan, dish, stew-pan," from Greek patane "plate, dish," reconstructed (Watkins) to be from a suffixed form of PIE root *pete- "to spread."

 But both the Latin and Germanic words might be from a substrate language [Boutkan]. Irish panna probably is from English, and Lithuanian panė is from German.

 The word has been used of any hollow thing shaped somewhat like a pan; the sense of "head, top of the head" is by c. 1300. It was used of pan-shaped parts of mechanical apparatus from c. 1590; hence flash in the pan (see flash (n.1)), a figurative use from early firearms and the "pan" that held the priming. To go out of the (frying) pan into the fire "escape one evil only to fall into a worse" is in Spenser (1596).

 pan (v.2) 

 "follow with a camera," 1913 shortening of panoramic in panoramic camera (1878). Meaning "to swing from one object to another in a scene" is from 1931. Related: Panned ; panning .
 also from 1913 

 Pan 

 Greek god of shepherds and flocks, woods and fields, with upper body of a man and horns and lower part like a goat, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Pan . Klein and others suggest the Greek word is cognate with Sanskrit pusan, a Vedic god, guardian and multiplier of cattle and other human possessions, literally "nourisher," from a PIE root *peh- "to protect," but others doubt this.

 His worship originated in Arcadia and gradually spread throughout Greece. The similarity to pan "all" (see pan- ) led to his being regarded as a general personification of nature. He was fond of music and dancing with the forest nymphs; the pan-pipe , which he invented and upon which he played, is attested by that name in English from 1820.
 also from late 14c. 

 pan (v.1) 

 "to wash (gravel or sand) in a pan in search of gold," 1839, from pan (n.); thus to pan out "turn out, succeed" (1868) is a figurative use (the expression in the literal sense of "yield gold when washed out in a pan" is by 1849). The meaning "criticize severely" is from 1911, probably from the notion in contemporary slang expressions such as on the pan "under reprimand or criticism" (1923), probably from the notion of being roasted or fried. Related: Panned ; panning .
 also from 1839 

 Entries linking to pan 

 flash (n.1) 

 1560s, "sudden burst of flame or light," from flash (v.); originally of lightning. Figuratively (of wit, laughter, anger, etc.) from c. 1600. The meaning "period occupied by a flash, very short time" is from 1620s. The sense of "superficial brilliancy" is attested from 1670s. The meaning "first news report" is from 1857. The comic book character dates to 1940. The meaning "photographic lamp" is from 1913. Flash cube is by 1965.

 panoramic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or of the nature of a panorama," by 1803; see panorama + -ic . Panoramic camera is attested from 1878.

 bedpan 
 deadpan 
 dishpan 
 dustpan 
 faun 
 flash in the pan 
 frying-pan 
 paddle 
 paella 
 pail 
 pancake 
 panfish 
 panhandle 
 panic 
 pannikin 
 pate 
 patella 
 saucepan 
 See All Related Words (24) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dishpan 

 also dish-pan, "pan in which dishes are washed," 1858, from dish (n.) + pan (n.). Dishpan hands "inflamed or sore hands caused by housework" is attested by 1935, an advertiser's phrase. In 1922, Lever Brothers began to advertise Lux in this country to "rid your hands of that dis

 faun 

 "rustic woodland spirit or demigod part human, part goat," late 14c., from Latin Faunus, the name of a god of the countryside, worshipped especially by farmers and shepherds, equivalent of Greek Pan. The faunalia were held in his honor. Formerly somewhat assimilated to satyrs, bu

 paddle 

 c. 1400, padell "small, long-handled spade used to remove earth adhering to a plow," probably from Medieval Latin padela, a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from Latin patella "small pan, little dish, plate," diminutive of patina (see pan (n.)). Meaning "short oar with a wide bl

 pandemic 

 people or region," 1660s, from Late Latin pandemus, from Greek pandemos "pertaining to all people; public, common," from pan...- "all" (see pan-) + dēmos "people" (see demotic)....

 fry 

 late 13c., "cook (something) in a shallow pan over a fire," from Old French frire "to fry" (13c.), from Latin frigere "to...Frying pan is recorded from mid-14c. (friing panne)....

 patina 

 This appears to be from Latin patina "shallow pan, dish, stew-pan" (from Greek patane "plate, dish," from PIE *pet-ano-,...

 pawn 

 (mid-12c. as Anglo-Latin pandum), from Old French pan, pant "pledge, security," also "booty, plunder," perhaps from Frankish...The Old French word is formally identical to pan "cloth, piece of cloth," from Latin pannum (nominative pannus) "cloth, piece...

 travel 

 late 14c., "to journey," from travailen (1300) "to make a journey," originally "to toil, labor" (see travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced 

 belittle 

 1781, "to make small, reduce in proportion," from be- + little (v.); first recorded in writings of Thomas Jefferson (and probably coined by him), Jefferson used it in "Notes on the State of Virginia" to characterize the view promoted as scientific by French naturalist Georges-Lou

 skillet 

 c. 1400, skellet, "pan used for boiling or frying," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French escuelette "a little dish" (Modern French écuelle), diminutive of escuele "plate," from Latin scutella "serving platter" (see scuttle (n.)); or formed in English from skele "wo

 Share pan 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pan Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pan">Etymology of pan by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pan. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pan Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pan," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pan. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pan." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pan. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pan." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pan (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pan 
 pamphlet 
 pamphleteer 
 Pamphylia 
 Pamplona 
 pan- 
 pan 
 panacea 
 panache 
 pan-Africanism 
 Panama 
 pan-Arabism 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close