URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Hebrew
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:39:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hebrew - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Hebrew - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Hebrew 

 Hebrew (adj.) 

 late Old English, from Old French Ebreu , from Latin Hebraeus , from Greek Hebraios , from Aramaic (Semitic) 'ebhrai , corresponding to Hebrew 'ibhri "an Israelite." Traditionally from an ancestral name Eber , but probably literally "one from the other side," perhaps in reference to the River Euphrates, or perhaps simply signifying "immigrant;" from 'ebher "region on the other or opposite side." The initial H- was restored in English from 16c. As a noun from c. 1200, "the Hebrew language;" late 14c. in reference to persons, originally "a biblical Jew, Israelite."

 Entries linking to Hebrew 

 Hebe (2) 

 derogatory word for "a Jew," 1921, shortened from Hebrew (n.).

 Hebraic (adj.) 

 late 14c., from Old French hebraique and directly from Late Latin Hebraicus , from Greek Hebraikos , from Hebraios (see Hebrew ). Related: Hebraical .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Moses 

 masc. proper name, name of the Hebrew prophet and lawgiver, Middle English Moises, from Latin, from Greek Mouses, from Hebrew...derivation the words of Pharaoh's daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation of the Hebrew...express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound, and therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew...

 pedagogic 

 Earlier (1755) in reference to the points used in printing Hebrew and Greek letters....Lastly, we observe, that Hebrew being a Sacred language, is chiefly studied by Divines, who often make use of Points in Theological...writings; tho' plain Hebrew as well as Greek, are understood and very frequently printed without Points or Accents....

 Noah 

 masc. proper name, biblical patriarch, from Hebrew Noach, literally "rest."...The adjective Noachian, in reference to the flood legend, is from 1670s, reflecting the Hebrew pronunciation....

 Masoretic 

 1701, especially with reference to the system of Hebrew vowel points first established by the Masora (also Massorah), "the...Testament and preserve it from corruption," also "a book or marginal notes which preserve the results of the effort," from Hebrew...

 Ladino 

 1889, a jargon of Spanish mixed with Hebrew, Arabic, and other elements, written in Hebrew characters, spoken by Sephardim...

 Messiah 

 designation of Jesus as the savior of the world, from Late Latin Messias, from Greek Messias, from Aramaic (Semitic) meshiha and Hebrew...It is thus the Hebrew equivalent of Christ, and it is the word rendered in Septuagint as Greek Khristos (see Christ)....The modern English form represents an attempt to make the word look more Hebrew, and dates from the Geneva Bible (1560)....

 manna 

 Old English borrowing from Late Latin manna, from Greek manna, from Hebrew mān, probably literally "substance exuded by the...The Hebrew word often is referred to man "a gift." Meaning "spiritual nourishment" is attested from late 14c....

 Sadducee 

 member of a Jewish group in New Testament times, Middle English Saduce, from Old English, from Late Latin Sadducaei (plural), from Greek Zaddoukaios, an inexact transliteration of Hebrew tzedoqi, from the personal name Tzadhoq "Zadok" (II Samuel viii.17), the high priest from who

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 zealot 

 early 14c., "member of a militant 1st century Jewish sect which fiercely resisted the Romans in Palestine," from Late Latin zelotes, from Greek zēlōtēs "one who is a zealous follower," from zēloōn "to be zealous," from zēlos "zeal" (see zeal). Extended sense of "a fanatical enthu

 Share Hebrew 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Hebrew Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Hebrew">Etymology of Hebrew by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Hebrew. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Hebrew Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Hebrew," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Hebrew. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Hebrew." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Hebrew. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Hebrew." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Hebrew (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Hebrew 
 hebephrenia 
 hebetate 
 hebetude 
 Hebraic 
 Hebraism 
 Hebrew 
 Hebrides 
 Hecate 
 hecatomb 
 heck 
 heckle 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix