URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ash
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:18:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ash - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ash - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ash 

 ash (n.1) 

 "powdery remains of fire," Middle English asshe , from Old English æsce "ash," from Proto-Germanic *askon (source also of Old Norse and Swedish aska , Old High German asca , German asche , Middle Dutch asche , Gothic azgo "ashes"), from PIE root *as- "to burn, glow." Spanish and Portuguese ascua "red-hot coal" are Germanic loan-words.

 The meaning "finely pulverized lava thrown from a volcano" is from 1660s. An ancient symbol of grief or repentance; hence Ash Wednesday (c. 1300, in Middle English also sometimes Pulver-wednesdai ), from the custom introduced by Pope Gregory the Great of sprinkling ashes on the heads of penitents on the first day of Lent.

 Ashes "mortal remains of a person" is attested from late 13c., in reference to the ancient custom of cremation.

 ash (n.2) 

 popular name of a common type of forest tree of Eurasia, North America, and North Africa, Middle English asshe , from Old English æsc "ash tree," from Proto-Germanic *askaz , *askiz (source also of Old Norse askr , Old Saxon ask , Middle Dutch esce , German Esche ), from PIE root *os- "ash tree" (source also of Armenian haci "ash tree," Albanian ah "beech," Greek oxya "beech," Latin ornus "wild mountain ash," Russian jasen , Lithuanian uosis "ash").

 The close-grained wood of the ash is tough and elastic, and it was the preferred wood for spear-shafts, so Old English æsc sometimes meant "spear," especially in poetry, as in æsc-here "company armed with spears," æsc-plega "war," literally "spear-play." Æsc also was the name of the Old English runic letter that begins the word.

 Entries linking to ash 

 anneal (v.) 

 Middle English anelen , from Old English onælan "to set on fire, kindle; inspire, incite," from on- "on" (see an- (1)) + ælan "to burn, bake," from Proto-Germanic *ailan , "probably" [Watkins] from the same PIE root meaning "to burn" that is the source of ash (n.1). It is related to Old English æled "fire, firebrand," Old Norse eldr , Danish ild "fire."

 The -n- was doubled after c. 1600 by analogy of Latinate words ( annex , etc.; compare accursed , afford , allay ). Meaning "to treat by heating and gradually cooling" (of glass, earthenware, metals, etc., to toughen them) was in late Old English. Related: Annealed ; annealing .

 ash-bin (n.) 

 "receptacle for ashes and other refuse," 1847, from ash (n.1) + bin (n.).

 ashen 
 ash-heap 
 Ashley 
 ash-pit 
 ash-tray 
 ashy 
 Cinderella 
 potash 
 *as- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 potash 

 "vegetable alkali; substance obtained originally by leaching wood-ashes and evaporating the solution obtained in a large iron pot or pan; one of the fixed alkalis," 1751, earlier pot-ash (1640s), a loan-translation of older Dutch potaschen, literally "pot ashes" (16c.); see pot (

 Nashville 

 in Sussex Subsidy Rolls, atten Eysse, atte Nasche (with assimilation of -n- from a preposition; see N), meaning "near an ash...tree," or "near a place called Ash."...

 pyroclastic 

 in geology, "formed by volcanic agencies," especially in reference to fast-moving, dense, superheated surges of ash, gas...The word "ash" is not a very good one to include all the mechanical accompaniments of a subaerial or subaqueous eruption,...since ash seems to be restricted to a fine powder, the residuum of combustion....English word which should express this meaning, and believe, therefore, that the only plan will be to retain the word "ash...

 cinder 

 Geological sense "coarse ash thrown out by volcanoes" is from 1774; cinder cone, formed around a volcano by successive eruptions...of ash, is recorded from 1849....

 rowan 

 "mountain ash," 1804, from rowan-tree, rountree (1540s), rawntre (late 15c.), northern English and Scottish, from a Scandinavian...

 birch 

 Slavonic breza, Russian bereza, Lithuanian beržas, Sanskrit bhurjah, all names of birch-like trees, Latin fraxinus "mountain ash...

 feisty 

 Compare also Danish fise "to blow, to fart," and obsolete English aske-fise, "fire-tender," literally "ash-blower" (early...

 residue 

 mid-14c., "the remainder, that which is left after a part is taken," from Old French residu (14c.), from Latin residuum "a remainder, that which is left behind," noun use of neuter of adjective residuus "remaining, left over," from residere "remain behind" (see reside). In law, "

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 modify 

 late 14c., modifien, "alter, amend, adjust, change the properties, form, or function of;" also "set limits, keep within the bounds of reason; choose a middle course," from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare "to limit, measure off, restrain," from modus "measure, ma

 Share ash 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ash Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ash">Etymology of ash by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ash. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ash Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ash," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ash. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ash." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ash. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ash." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ash (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ash 
 aseptic 
 asexual 
 asexuality 
 asexually 
 Asgard 
 ash 
 ashamed 
 Ashanti 
 ash-bin 
 ashen 
 Asher 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix