URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliver
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:52:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Deliver - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Deliver - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of deliver 

 deliver (v.) 

 c. 1200, deliveren , "save, rescue, set free, liberate," from Old French delivrer "to set free; remove; save, preserve; hand over (goods)," also used of childbirth, from Late Latin deliberare , from de "away" (see de- ) + Latin liberare "to free," from liber "free, unrestricted, unimpeded" (see liberal (adj.)).

 The sense of "to bring (a woman) to childbirth," in English is from c. 1300. Sense of "hand over, give, give up, yield" is from c. 1300 in English, which is in opposition to its etymological sense. Meaning "to project, cast, strike, throw" is from c. 1400. Related: Delivered ; delivering .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to deliver 

 liberal (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "generous," also "nobly born, noble, free;" from late 14c. as "selfless, magnanimous, admirable;" from early 15c. in a bad sense, "extravagant, unrestrained," from Old French liberal "befitting free people; noble, generous; willing, zealous" (12c.), and directly from Latin liberalis "noble, gracious, munificent, generous," literally "of freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free person," from liber "free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled, unchecked, licentious."

 This is conjectured to be from PIE *leudh-ero- , which probably originally meant "belonging to the people," though the precise semantic development is obscure; but compare frank (adj.). This was a suffixed form of the base *leudh- (2) "people" (source also of Old Church Slavonic ljudu , Lithuanian liaudis , Old English leod , German Leute "nation, people;" Old High German liut "person, people").

 Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,

 Confess'd the vile encounters they have had

 A thousand times in secret.

 ["Much Ado," IV.1.93]

 Liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a term of reproach with the meaning "free from restraint in speech or action." The Enlightenment revived it in a positive sense "free from prejudice, tolerant, not bigoted or narrow," which emerged 1776-88. In 19c. often theological rather than political, opposed to orthodox , used of Unitarians, Universalists, etc. For educational use, see liberal arts .

 Purely in reference to political opinion, "tending in favor of freedom and democracy," it dates from c. 1801, from French libéral . In English the label at first was applied by opponents (often in the French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to the party more favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending to mean "favorable to government action to effect social change," which seems at times to draw more from the religious sense of "free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established institutions" (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which emerged by 1823.

 This is the attitude of mind which has come to be known as liberal. It implies vigorous convictions, tolerance for the opinions of others, and a persistent desire for sound progress. It is a method of approach which has played a notable and constructive part in our history, and which merits a thorough trial today in the attack on our absorbingly interesting American task. [Guy Emerson, "The New Frontier," 1920]

 deliverable (adj.) 

 "that may be delivered," 1727, from deliver + -able .

 deliverance 
 delivery 
 undelivered 
 de- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 delivery 

 early 15c., "act of setting free from bondage," also "action of handing over to another," from Anglo-French delivrée, noun use of fem. past participle of Old French delivrer (see deliver). Sense of "childbirth, giving forth of offspring" is by 1570s; that of "manner of utterance 

 present 

 c. 1300, "being in the same place as someone or something;" early 14c., "existing at the time," from Old French present "evident, at hand, within reach;" as a noun, "the present time" (11c., Modern French présent) and directly from Latin praesentem (nominative praesens) "present,

 render 

 late 14c., rendren, rendre, "repeat, say again, recite; translate," from Old French rendre "give back, present, yield" (10c.) and Medieval Latin rendere, from Vulgar Latin *rendere, a variant of Latin reddere "give back, return, restore," from red- "back" (see re-) + combining fo

 rescue 

 c. 1300, rescouen, "deliver (someone) from an enemy's attack or restraint; deliver or save (someone) from evil or harm,"...Anglo-French rescu-, Old French rescou-, stem of Old French rescorre, rescoure, rescure, etc., "protect, keep safe; free, deliver...

 redeem 

 early 15c., redemen, "buy back, ransom, recover by purchase," also in a theological sense, "deliver from sin and spiritual...The general sense of "rescue, deliver, save" is from late 15c. The meaning "make amends for" is from 1520s....

 sell 

 Middle English sellen, from Old English sellan "to give (something to someone), furnish, supply, lend; surrender, give up; deliver...to; promise," from Proto-Germanic *saljanan "offer up, deliver" (source also of Old Norse selja "to hand over, deliver,...

 reprove 

 From mid-14c. as "deliver a rebuke, admonish;" late 14c. as "disapprove, condemn, find fault with."...

 consign 

 mid-15c. (implied in consigned), "to ratify or certify by a sign or seal," from French consigner (15c.) and directly from Latin consignare "to seal, register," originally "to mark with a sign," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + signare "to sign, mark," fr

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 Share deliver 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliver Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliver">Etymology of deliver by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of deliver. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliver Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of deliver," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliver. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of deliver." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliver. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of deliver." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliver (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near deliver 
 delinquent 
 deliquesce 
 deliquescent 
 delirious 
 delirium 
 deliver 
 deliverable 
 deliverance 
 delivery 
 dell 
 Della Crusca 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix