URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/river
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:30:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: River - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

River - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of river 

 river (n.) 

 early 13c. (late 12c. in surnames), "a considerable body of water flowing with perceptible current in a definite course or channel," from Anglo-French rivere , Old French riviere "river, riverside, river bank" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *riparia "riverbank, seashore, river" (source also of Spanish ribera , Italian riviera ), noun use of fem. of Latin riparius "of a riverbank" (see riparian ).

 The generalized sense of "a copious flow" of anything is from late 14c., as is figurative use. The Old English word was ea "river," cognate with Gothic ahwa , Latin aqua (see aqua- ). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense "river bank" as the main one, or else the secondary Latin sense "coast of the sea" (compare Riviera ). In printing by 1898: "streaks of white space in text caused by the spaces between words in several lines happening to fall one almost below the other."

 U.S. slang phrase up the river "in prison" (1891) is said to be originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, up the Hudson River from New York City. The phrase down the river "done for, finished" (1893) perhaps echoes the sense in sell down the river (1836, American English), originally of slaves sold from the Upper South to the harsher plantations of the Deep South.
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to river 

 riparian (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to river banks, situated on or near a river bank," 1849, with -an + Latin riparius "of a river bank," from riparia "shore," later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa "(steep) bank of a river, shore."

 This is probably etymologically "break" (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream bed), or else "that which is cut out by the river," from PIE root *rei- "to scratch, tear, cut" (source also of Greek ereipia "ruins," eripne "slope, precipice;" Old Norse rifa "break, to tear apart;" Danish rift "breach," Middle High German rif "riverbank, seashore;" English riven , rift ).

 Riparious , of animals, "living on or in river banks," is from 1650s.

 Riviera (n.) 

 1630s, "Mediterranean seacoast around Genoa," from Italian riviera , literally "bank, shore" (see river ). In extended use it refers to the whole coast from Marseilles in France to La Spezia in Italy, which became popular 19c. as a winter resort. Thence adopted (sometimes ironically) in reference to areas of other countries, as in American Riviera (Florida, 1887); English Riviera (Devonshire coast, 1882). Related: Rivieran .

 river-bank 
 river-bottom 
 riverine 
 riverman 
 riverrun 
 riverside 
 salt river 
 up-river 
 aqua- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Guadalcanal 

 The place name contains the Spanish form of Arabic wadi "river" which occurs in other Spanish place names (such as Guadalajara..., from Arabic Wadi Al-Bajara "River of the Stones," either a parallel formation to or ultimately a translation of the ancient...Iberian name for the river that gave the place its earlier name, based on caruca "stony;" Guadalquivir, from Arabic Al-Wadi...Al-Kabir "Big River;" and Guadalupe, from the Arabic river word and the Roman name of the river, Lupus, literally "wolf"...

 holm 

 "small island in a river; river meadow," late Old English, from Old Norse holmr "small island," especially in a river or...various senses derived from the basic one of "island:" "'raised ground in marsh, enclosure of marginal land, land in a river-bend..., river meadow, promontory'" ["Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names"]....

 Cambridge 

 city in eastern England, Old English Grontabricc (c. 745) "Bridge on the River Granta" (a Celtic river name, of obscure origin...The river name Cam is a back-formation in this case, but Cam also was a legitimate Celtic river name, meaning "crooked."...

 hippopotamus 

 hippopotamus, from Greek hippopotamos "riverhorse," an irregular formation from earlier ho hippos potamios "the horse of the river..."), from hippos "horse" (from PIE root *ekwo- "horse") + adjective from potamos "river, rushing water" (see potamo-)....Translated as river-horse in Holland's Pliny (1601). Ypotamos comen flyngynge. ......

 India 

 in reference to the Republic of India, Old English India, Indea, from Latin India, from Greek India "region of the Indus River...," later used of the region beyond it, from Indos "Indus River," also "an Indian," from Old Persian Hindu, the name for the...province of Sind, from Sanskrit sindhu "river."...

 Nebraska 

 U.S. territory organized 1854, admitted as a state 1867, from a native Siouan name for the Platte River, either Omaha ni...The modern river name is from French rivière platte, which means "flat river." Related: Nebraskan....

 ea 

 the usual Old English word for "river, running water" (still in use in Lancashire, according to OED), from Proto-Germanic..."The standard word in place-names for river denoting a watercourse of greater size than a broc or a burna" [Cambridge Dictionary...

 rapid 

 1630s, "moving or doing quickly, capable of great speed," from French rapide (17c.) and directly from Latin rapidus "hasty, swift; snatching; fierce, impetuous," from rapere "hurry away, carry off, seize, plunder," from PIE root *rep- "to snatch" (source also of Greek ereptomai "

 master 

 late Old English mægester "a man having control or authority over a place; a teacher or tutor of children," from Latin magister (n.) "chief, head, director, teacher" (source of Old French maistre, French maître, Spanish and Italian maestro, Portuguese mestre, Dutch meester, Germa

 stream 

 Middle English strem "course of water, current of a stream, body of water flowing in a natural channel," from Old English stream, from Proto-Germanic *strauma- (source also of Old Saxon strom, Old Norse straumr, Danish strøm, Swedish ström, Norwegian straum, Old Frisian stram, Du

 Share river 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/river Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/river">Etymology of river by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of river. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/river Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of river," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/river. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of river." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/river. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of river." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/river (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near river 
 rival 
 rivalrous 
 rivalry 
 rive 
 riven 
 river 
 river-bank 
 river-bottom 
 riverine 
 riverman 
 riverrun 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix