URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/devil
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:19:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Devil - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Devil - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of devil 

 devil (n.) 

 Old English deofol "a devil, a subordinate evil spirit afflicting humans;" also, in Christian theology, "the Devil, a powerful spirit of evil otherwise known as Satan," from Late Latin diabolus (also the source of Italian diavolo , French diable , Spanish diablo ; German Teufel is Old High German tiufal , from Latin via Gothic diabaulus ).

 The Late Latin word is from Ecclesiastical Greek diabolos , which in Jewish and Christian use was "the Devil, Satan," and which in general use meant "accuser, slanderer" (thus it was a scriptural loan-translation of Hebrew satan; see Satan ). It is an agent noun from Greek diaballein "to slander, attack," literally "to throw across," from dia "across, through" (see dia- ) + ballein "to throw" (from PIE root *gwele- "to throw, reach").

 Jerome re-introduced Satan in Latin bibles, and English translators have used both words in different measures. In Vulgate, as in Greek, diabolus and dæmon (see demon ) were distinct, but they have merged in English and other Germanic languages.

 Meaning "false god, heathen god" is from c. 1200. Sense of "diabolical person, person resembling a devil or demon in character" is from late 12c. Playful use for "clever rogue" is from c. 1600, on the notion of mischievous energy and cleverness. The sense of "errand-boy in a printing office" (1680s) is from this, perhaps reinforced because they often were blackened by the ink (devils then being popularly supposed to be black).

 As an expletive and in expletive phrases from c. 1200.

 Meaning "sand spout, dust storm" is from 1835 ( dust devil is attested by 1867). In U.S. place names, the word often represents a native word such as Algonquian manito , more properly "spirit, god." Phrase a devil way (c. 1300) was originally "Hell-ward, to Hell," but by late 14c. it was a mere expression of irritation.

 Devil's books "playing cards" is from 1729, but the cited quote says they've been called that "time out of mind" (the four of clubs is the devil's bedposts ); devil's coach-horse is from 1840, the large rove-beetle, which is defiant when disturbed. Devil's food cake (1895; three different recipes in the cookbook "compiled by the Ladies' Aid Society of the Friends' Church, Wilmington, Ohio"), rich and chocolate, probably is in deliberate contrast to angel food cake . Conventional phrase talk (or speak ) of the Devil, and he's presently at your elbow is by 1660s.

 Entries linking to devil 

 demon (n.) 

 c. 1200, "an evil spirit, malignant supernatural being, an incubus, a devil," from Latin daemon "spirit," from Greek daim ō n "deity, divine power; lesser god; guiding spirit, tutelary deity" (sometimes including souls of the dead); "one's genius, lot, or fortune;" from PIE *dai-mon- "divider, provider" (of fortunes or destinies), from root *da- "to divide."

 The malignant sense is because the Greek word was used (with daimonion ) in Christian Greek translations and the Vulgate for "god of the heathen, heathen idol" and also for "unclean spirit." Jewish authors earlier had employed the Greek word in this sense, using it to render shedim "lords, idols" in the Septuagint, and Matthew viii.31 has daimones , translated as deofol in Old English, feend or deuil in Middle English. Another Old English word for this was hellcniht , literally "hell-knight."

 The usual ancient Greek sense, "supernatural agent or intelligence lower than a god, ministering spirit" is attested in English from 1560s and is sometimes written daemon or daimon for purposes of distinction. Meaning "destructive or hideous person" is from 1610s; as "an evil agency personified" (rum, etc.) from 1712.

 The Demon of Socrates (late 14c. in English) was a daimonion , a "divine principle or inward oracle." His accusers, and later the Church Fathers, however, represented this otherwise. The Demon Star (1895) is Algol (q.v.) .

 Satan (n.) 

 proper name of the supreme evil spirit and great adversary of humanity in Christianity, Old English Satan , from Late Latin Satan (in Vulgate in the Old Testament only), from Greek Satanas , from Hebrew satan "adversary, one who plots against another," from satan "to show enmity to, oppose, plot against," from root s-t-n "one who opposes, obstructs, or acts as an adversary."

 In the Septuagint usually translated into Greek as diabolos "slanderer," literally "one who throws (something) across" the path of another (see devil (n.)), though epiboulos "plotter" is once used.

 In biblical sources the Hebrew term the 
 satan describes an adversarial role. It is not the name of a particular character. Although Hebrew storytellers as early as the sixth century B.C.E. occasionally introduced a supernatural character whom they called the 
 satan , what they meant was any one of the angels sent by God for the specific purpose of blocking or obstructing human activity. [Elaine Pagels, "The Origin of Satan," 1995]

 In Middle English also Satanas , Sathanas .

 bedevil 
 daredevil 
 devil-fish 
 devilish 
 devilled 
 devilment 
 devilry 
 devil-worship 
 diabolic 
 diabolism 
 she-devil 
 Tasmania 
 dia- 
 *gwele- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 daredevil 

 1794, "recklessly daring person, one who fears nothing and will attempt anything," from dare (v.) + devil (n.). The devil might refer to the person, or the sense might be "one who dares the devil." For the formation, compare scarecrow, killjoy, dreadnought, pickpocket (n.), cut-t

 annoy 

 late 13c., anoien, annuien, "to harm, hurt, injure; be troublesome or vexatious to, disquiet, upset," from Anglo-French anuier, Old French enoiier "to weary, vex, anger," anuier "be troublesome or irksome to;" according to French sources these are from Late Latin inodiare "make l

 rag 

 "torn or worn scrap of cloth," early 14c., probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse rögg "shaggy tuft, rough hair," earlier raggw-; Old Danish rag; see rug), or else a back-formation from ragged. It also may represent an unrecorded Old English cognate of Old Norse r

 warlock 

 Old English wærloga "traitor, liar, enemy, devil," from wær "faith, fidelity; a compact, agreement, covenant," from Proto-Germanic...Original primary sense seems to have been "oath-breaker;" given special application to the devil (c. 1000), but also used...Meaning "one in league with the devil" is recorded from c. 1300....

 Puck 

 name was Robin Goodfellow or Friar Rush), also generally, "an elf, fairy, or sprite;" probably from Middle English pouke "devil...spirit" (c. 1300; early 13c. in place-names), from Old English puca, pucel "goblin," which is cognate with Old Norse puki "devil...

 bogus 

 to tantrabobus, also tantrabogus, a late 18c. colloquial Vermont word for any odd-looking object (in later 19c. use "the devil..."), which might be connected to tantarabobs, recorded as a Devonshire name for the devil....

 hex 

 Compare Middle English hexte "the devil" (mid-13c.), perhaps originally "sorcerer," probably from Old English haehtis....

 harry 

 Old English hergian "make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder," the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (source also of Old Frisian urheria "lay waste, ravage, plunder," Old Norse herja "to make a raid, to plunder," 

 exclamation 

 late 14c., exclamacioun, "a calling or crying aloud; that which is uttered with emphasis or passion, a vehement speech or saying," from Latin exclamationem (nominative exclamatio) "an exclamation" (in rhetoric), "a loud calling or crying out," noun of action from past-participle 

 gravel 

 "stone in small, irregular fragments," early 13c., from Old French gravele "sand, gravel; sea-shore; sandy bed of a river," diminutive of grave "sand, seashore" (Modern French grève), possibly from Celtic *graw- (compare Welsh gro "coarse gravel," Breton grouan, Cornish grow "gra

 Share devil 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/devil Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/devil">Etymology of devil by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of devil. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/devil Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of devil," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/devil. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of devil." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/devil. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of devil." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/devil (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near devil 
 deviance 
 deviant 
 deviate 
 deviation 
 device 
 devil 
 devil's advocate 
 devil-fish 
 devilish 
 devilled 
 devil-may-care 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix