URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/encyclopedia
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Encyclopedia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Encyclopedia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of encyclopedia 

 encyclopedia (n.) 

 1530s, "general course of instruction," from Modern Latin encyclopaedia (c. 1500), thought to be a false reading by Latin authors of Greek enkyklios paideia taken as "general education," but literally "training in a circle," i.e. the "circle" of arts and sciences, the essentials of a liberal education; from enkyklios "circular," also "general" (from en "in;" see in + kyklos "circle;" see cycle (n.)) + paideia "education, child-rearing," from pais (genitive paidos ) "child" (see pedo- ).

 The first encyclopedias were Latin; Cato the Censor compiled one (c. 185 B.C.E.), now lost. They were summaries of learning intended for general instruction, the "cycle of learning" proper to a free man and embodied in the seven liberal arts.

 The modern sense of "reference work arranged alphabetically" is from 1640s, often applied specifically to the French Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire raisonné des Sciences, des Arts, et des Métiers (1751-65). Related: Encyclopedist .
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to encyclopedia 

 cycle (n.) 

 late 14c., cicle , "perpetual circulating period of time, on the completion of which certain phenomena return in the same order," especially and originally in reference to astronomical phenomena, from Old French cicle and directly from Late Latin cyclus , from Greek kyklos "circle, wheel, any circular body," also "circular motion, cycle of events," from PIE kw(e)-kwl-o- , a suffixed, reduplicated form of the root *kwel- (1) "to revolve, move round."

 From 1660s as "any recurring round of operations or events" (as in life cycle ). From 1821 as "single complete period in a cycle." Extended by 1842 to "any long period of years, an age." In literary use, "the aggregate of the legends or traditions around some real or mythical event or character" (1835).

 By 1884 as "recurring series of oscillations or operations in an engine, etc." From 1870 as short for motorcycle ; by 1881 as short for bicycle or tricycle .

 in (adv., prep.) 

 a Middle English merger of Old English in (prep.) "in, into, upon, on, at, among; about, during;" and Old English inne (adv.) "within, inside," from Proto-Germanic *in (source also of Old Frisian, Dutch, German, Gothic in , Old Norse i ), which is reconstructed to be from PIE root *en "in." The simpler form took on both senses in Middle English.

 Sense distinction between in and on is from later Middle English, and nuances in use of in and at still distinguish British and American English ( in school / at school ). Sometimes in Middle English shortened to i .

 The noun sense of "influence, access (to power or authorities)," as in have an in with , is first recorded 1929 in American English. to be in for it "certain to meet with something unpleasant" is from 1690s. To be in with "on friendly terms with" is from 1670s. Ins and outs "intricacies, complications of an action or course" is from 1660s. In-and-out (n.) "copulation" is attested from 1610s.

 cyclopedia 
 encyclopaedia 
 encyclopedic 
 pedo- 
 *kwel- 
 *pau- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 broadcasting 

 susceptible of appreciation by a scattered audience, individually or in groups, with appropriate receiving apparatus. [ Encyclopedia...

 homoioteleuton 

 Waltz, "The Encyclopedia of New Testament Textual Criticism," 2013]; Greek, literally "same ending;" see homo- (1) "the same...

 English 

 John of Trevisa's Middle English translation of the encyclopedia De Proprietatibus Rerum (c. 1398) has frensshe see for "...

 fetch 

 [Lewis Spence, "An Encyclopedia of Occultism," 1920]...

 dysphemism 

 Hughes, "An Encyclopedia of Swearing," 2006]...

 horology 

 confined to the principles upon which the art of making clocks and watches is established" [American edition of the "British Encyclopedia...

 hansom 

 [Encyclopedia Britannica, 1929]...

 reference 

 1580s, "act of referring" (some matter, to someone for consideration), from refer + -ance, or else from French référence, from Medieval Latin *referentia, from Latin referentem (nominative referens), present participle of referre. Meaning "direction to a book or passage" where ce

 protest 

 c. 1400, "avowal, pledge, solemn declaration," from Old French protest, from protester, from Latin protestari "declare publicly, testify, protest," from pro- "forth, before" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, before") + testari "testify," from testis "witness

 psychology 

 1650s, "the study of the soul," from Modern Latin psychologia, probably coined mid-16c. in Germany by Melanchthon from Latinized form of Greek psykhē "breath, spirit, soul" (see psyche) + logia "study of" (see -logy). The meaning "science or study of the phenomena of the mind" is

 Share encyclopedia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/encyclopedia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/encyclopedia">Etymology of encyclopedia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of encyclopedia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/encyclopedia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of encyclopedia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/encyclopedia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of encyclopedia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/encyclopedia. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of encyclopedia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/encyclopedia (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near encyclopedia 
 encumber 
 encumbrance 
 -ency 
 encyclical 
 encyclopaedia 
 encyclopedia 
 encyclopedic 
 encyst 
 end 
 endanger 
 endangerment 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix