URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cake
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:49:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cake - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cake - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cake 

 cake (n.) 

 early 13c., "flat or comparatively thin mass of baked dough," from Old Norse kaka "cake," from West Germanic *kokon- (source also of Middle Dutch koke , Dutch koek "a cake, gingerbread, dumpling," Old High German kuohho , German Kuchen "a cake, a tart"). Not believed to be related to Latin coquere "to cook," as formerly supposed. Replaced its Old English cognate, coecel .

 What man, I trow ye raue, Wolde ye bothe eate your cake and haue your cake? ["The Proverbs & Epigrams of John Heywood," 1562]

 Extended mid-15c. to any flat, rounded mass. Extended from early 15c. to "a light composition of flour, sugar, butter and other ingredients baked in any form." To take the cake "win all, rank first" (often ironic) is from 1847, American English; piece of cake "something easy" is from 1936.

 The let them eat cake story (Fr: q u'ils mangent de la brioche ) is found in Rousseau's "Confessions," in reference to an incident c. 1740, long before Marie Antoinette, though it has been associated with her since c. 1870; it apparently was a chestnut in the French royal family that had been told of other princesses and queens before her.
 also from early 13c. 

 cake (v.) 

 "to form into a cake" (transitive), c. 1600; "to concrete into a hard mass" (intransitive), 1610s; from cake (n.). Related: Caked ; caking .
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to cake 

 caked (adj.) 

 "thickly encrusted," 1922, past-participle adjective from cake (v.).

 cakewalk (n.) 

 "something easy," 1863, American English, from cake (n.) + walk (n.). Probably it is in some way a reference to the cake given as a prize for the fanciest steps in a procession in a Southern black custom (explained by Thornton, 1912, as, "A walking competition among negroes," in which the prize cake goes to "the couple who put on most style"), even though its figurative meaning is recorded before the literal one (1879). As a verb, from 1904. This also might be the source of the verbal phrase take the cake "win all" (1847).

 cheesecake 
 cookie 
 cupcake 
 fruitcake 
 Marie Antoinette 
 pancake 
 quiche 
 seed-cake 
 shortcake 
 spice-cake 
 sweet-cake 
 yellowcake 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cheesecake 

 also cheese-cake, mid-15c., from cheese (n.1) + cake (n.). Originally a cake or tart containing cheese, later one made with sweetened soft curds, etc. It was used figuratively for "soft, effeminate" from 18c. The modern slang meaning dates from 1933; a "Time" magazine article fro

 cookie 

 1730, Scottish, but the sense is "plain bun," and it is debatable whether it is the same word; in the sense of "small, flat, sweet cake" by 1808 (American English); this use is from Dutch koekje "little cake," diminutive of koek "cake," from Middle Dutch koke (see cake (n.)). "Du

 bar 

 late 12c., "stake or rod of iron used to fasten a door or gate," from Old French barre "beam, bar, gate, barrier" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *barra "bar, barrier," which some suggest is from Gaulish *barros "the bushy end" [Gamillscheg, etc.], but OED regards this as "discredited"

 flan 

 "open tart," 1846, from French flan "custard tart, cheesecake," from Old French flaon "flat-cake, tart, flan" (12c.), from...flado (10c.), which probably is from Frankish *flado or another Germanic source (compare Old High German flado "offering cake...," Middle High German vlade "a broad, thin cake," Dutch vla "baked custard"), from Proto-Germanic *flatho(n) "flat cake,"...

 simnel 

 kind of sweet cake or bun made of fine flour, c. 1200, from Old French simenel "fine wheat flour; flat bread cake, Lenten...cake," probably by dissimilation from Vulgar Latin *siminellus (also source of Old High German semala "the finest wheat...

 placenta 

 vertebrate embryo or fetus to the wall of the uterus or womb of the female," from Modern Latin placenta uterina "uterine cake..." (so called 16c. by Italian anatomist Realdo Colombo), from Latin placenta "a cake, flat cake," from Greek plakoenta, accusative...

 lozenge 

 .); "small square cake; window-pane," etc., a word used for many flat quadrilateral things (Modern French losange)....From late 14c. as "diamond-shaped cake or wafer;" specific sense "small cake or tablet (originally diamond-shaped) of medicine...

 biscuit 

 "kind of hard, dry bread baked in thin flat cakes," respelled early 19c. from bisket (16c.), ultimately (besquite, early 14c.) from Old French bescuit "biscuit" (12c.), altered under influence of cognate Old Italian biscotto, both from Medieval Latin biscoctum, literally "twice-b

 gingerbread 

 late 13c., gingerbrar, "preserved ginger," from Old French ginginbrat "ginger preserve," from Medieval Latin gingimbratus "gingered," from gingiber (see ginger). The ending changed by folk etymology to -brede "bread," a formation attested by mid-14c. Meaning "sweet cake spiced wi

 waffle 

 "kind of batter-cake, baked crisp in irons and served hot," 1744, from Dutch wafel "waffle," from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German wafel, from Proto-Germanic *wabila- "web, honeycomb" (source also of Old High German waba "honeycomb," German Wabe), related to Old High German weba

 Share cake 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cake Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cake">Etymology of cake by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cake. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cake Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cake," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cake. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cake." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cake. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cake." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cake (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cake 
 Caitlin 
 Caius 
 cajole 
 cajolery 
 Cajun 
 cake 
 caked 
 cakewalk 
 calabash 
 calaboose 
 Calabria 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix