URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sugar
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:18:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sugar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sugar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sugar 

 sugar (n.) 

 late 13c., sugre , "sweet crystalline substance from plant juices," from Old French sucre "sugar" (12c.), from Medieval Latin succarum , from Arabic sukkar , from Persian shakar , from Sanskrit sharkara "ground or candied sugar," originally "grit, gravel" (cognate with Greek kroke "pebble").

 The Arabic word also was borrowed in Italian ( zucchero ), Spanish ( azucar , with the Arabic article), and German (Old High German zucura , German Zucker ), and its forms are represented in most European languages (such as Serbian cukar , Polish cukier , Russian sakhar ).

 Its Old World home was India (Alexander the Great's companions marveled at "honey without bees") and it remained exotic in Europe until the Arabs began to cultivate it in Sicily and Spain; not until after the Crusades did it begin to rival honey as the West's sweetener. The Spaniards in the West Indies began raising sugar cane by 1506.

 The reason for the -g- in the English word is obscure (OED compares flagon , from French flacon ). The pronunciation shift from s- to sh- is probably from the initial long vowel sound syu- (as in sure ).

 As a general name for a type of chemical compound, from 1826. Slang use as a "euphemistic substitute for an imprecation" [OED] is attested by 1891. As a term of endearment, it is attested by 1930.

 Sugar-maple , the North American species that yields sugar, is from 1731. Sugar-tongs , for lifting small lumps, are attested from 1708.
 also from late 13c. 

 sugar (v.) 

 early 15c., sugren , "sweeten with sugar," also figuratively, "make more pleasing, mitigate the harshness of," from sugar (n.). Related: Sugared (late 14c. as a past-participle adjective, figuratively, of words, speech); sugaring .
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to sugar 

 flagon (n.) 

 "large bottle for wine or liquor," mid-15c., from Old French flacon , flascon "small bottle, flask" (14c.), from Late Latin flasconem (nominative flasco ) "bottle" (see flask ).

 sure (adj.) 

 mid-13c., seur , "safe against attack, secure, out of danger," later "reliable, fit or worthy to be depended upon" (c. 1300); "mentally certain, confident of one's positions" (mid-14c.); "firm, strong, resolute" (c. 1400). It is from Old French seur , sur "safe, secure; undoubted, dependable, trustworthy" (12c.), which is from Latin securus "free from care, untroubled, heedless, safe" (see secure (adj.)).

 The pronunciation development is that of sugar (n.). The colloquial pronunciation "sho" is attested by 1871 in representations of U.S. Black speech ( fo sho ); compare mo .

 As "certain to be or happen," 1560s. As an affirmative meaning "yes, certainly" it dates from 1803. This traces back to the Middle English meanings "firmly established; having no doubt," and to phrases such as to be sure (1650s), sure enough (1540s), and for sure (1580s).

 To make sure "establish beyond doubt" is from 14c.; be sure "be certain, do not fail" (colloquial, be sure to click the links ) is by 1590s. Figurative formulas of certainty beginning as sure as are attested from late 14c. ( as fire is red ); as sure as (one is) born is from 1640s. As sure as a gun is by 1759.

 The use as an adverb meaning "assuredly, certainly" is from early 14c. Sure thing "something beyond the possibility of failure, a certainty," is by 1836.

 saccharine 
 seersucker 
 sucrose 
 sugar-candy 
 sugar-cane 
 sugar-coat 
 sugar-daddy 
 sugar-free 
 sugar-loaf 
 sugar-plum 
 sugary 
 sucro- 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share sugar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sugar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sugar">Etymology of sugar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sugar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sugar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sugar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sugar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sugar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sugar. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sugar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sugar (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sugar 
 suffusion 
 suffusive 
 Sufi 
 Sufism 
 sug- 
 sugar 
 sugar-candy 
 sugar-cane 
 sugar-coat 
 sugar-daddy 
 sugar-free 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close