URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/caravan
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:21:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caravan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Caravan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of caravan 

 caravan (n.) 

 1590s, in reference to in North Africa or western Asia, "company of travelers, pilgrims, merchants, etc., going together for security," from French caravane , from Old French carvane , carevane "caravan" (13c.), or Medieval Latin caravana , words picked up during the Crusades, via Arabic qairawan from Persian karwan "group of desert travelers" (which Klein connects to Sanskrit karabhah "camel").

 Used in English for "any large number of persons traveling together with much baggage" (1660s), hence "a large covered carriage for conveying passengers" (1670s) or later for traveling shows or used as a house by Gypsies. In modern British use (from 1930s), often a rough equivalent of the U.S. camper or recreational vehicle .
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to caravan 

 camper (n.) 

 1630s, "soldier," agent noun from camp (v.). The meaning "attendee at a camp meeting" is from 1806; the meaning "one who sleeps in temporary quarters outdoors" is from 1856; that of "motor vehicle with sleeping quarters" is from 1960. Extended use of happy camper as "satisfied person" is by 1966, probably from Scouts use, which is by 1930; earlier the term could be used for anyone who was camping for pleasure (1865) as opposed to necessity.

 caravanserai (n.) 

 1590s, carvanzara , "Eastern inn (with a large central court) catering to caravans," ultimately from Persian karwan-sarai , from karwan (see caravan ) + sara'i "palace, mansion; inn," from Iranian base *thraya- "to protect" (from PIE root *tere- (2) "cross over, pass through, overcome").

 van (n.2) 

 1829, "covered truck or wagon," shortening of caravan (n.), in which the final element is from Persian. Century Dictionary suggests caravan was perhaps regarded as *carry-van . Originally especially for moving furniture and household goods; later also a motor vehicle with a covered rear compartment used by tradesmen for service and delivery, also hippies.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 train 

 early 14c., "a drawing out, delay;" late 14c., "trailing part of a skirt, gown, or cloak;" also "retinue, procession," from Old French train "tracks, path, trail (of a robe or gown); act of dragging," from trainer "to pull, drag, draw," from Vulgar Latin *traginare, extended from

 go 

 Old English gan "to advance, walk; depart, go away; happen, take place; conquer; observe, practice, exercise," from West Germanic *gaian (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian gan, Middle Dutch gaen, Dutch gaan, Old High German gan, German gehen), from PIE root *ghē- "to release,

 move 

 late 13c., meven, in various senses (see below), from Anglo-French mover, Old French movoir "to move, get moving, set out; set in motion; introduce" (Modern French mouvoir), from Latin movere "move, set in motion; remove; disturb" (past participle motus, frequentative motare), fr

 procession 

 late Old English, "set of persons walking or riding formally or with ceremonious solemnity; a religious procession; the triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem," from Old French procession "procession" (religious or secular), 11c., and directly from Late Latin processionem (nomin

 travel 

 late 14c., "to journey," from travailen (1300) "to make a journey," originally "to toil, labor" (see travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced 

 Conestoga 

 1690s, name of an Indian tribe in south-central Pennsylvania, probably from some Iroquoian language and sometimes said to mean "people of the cabin pole;" later a place in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. A characteristic type of covered wagon built there is called Conestoga wagon

 vehicle 

 1610s, "a medium through which a drug or medicine is administered," also "any means of conveying or transmitting," from French véhicule (16c.), from Latin vehiculum "means of transport, vehicle, carriage, conveyance," from vehere "to bear, carry, convey" (from PIE root *wegh- "to

 wagon 

 "four-wheeled vehicle to carry heavy loads," late 15c., from Middle Dutch wagen, waghen, from Proto-Germanic *wagna- (source also of Old English wægn, Modern English wain, Old Saxon and Old High German wagan, Old Norse vagn, Old Frisian wein, German Wagen), from PIE *wogh-no-, su

 sinister 

 early 15c., sinistre, "prompted by malice or ill-will; false, dishonest, intending to mislead," with suggestion, report, etc., from Old French senestre, sinistre "contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left" (14c.), from Latin sinister "left, on the left side" (opposite of dexter),

 trousers 

 "garment for men, covering the lower body and each leg separately," 1610s, earlier trouzes (1580s), extended from trouse (1570s), with plural ending typical of things in pairs, from Gaelic or Middle Irish triubhas "close-fitting shorts," of uncertain origin. Early recorded use of

 Share caravan 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/caravan Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/caravan">Etymology of caravan by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of caravan. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/caravan Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of caravan," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caravan. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of caravan." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caravan. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of caravan." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/caravan (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near caravan 
 caramba 
 caramel 
 caramelize 
 carapace 
 carat 
 caravan 
 caravansary 
 caravanserai 
 caravel 
 caraway 
 carb 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix