URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gasp
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:00:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gasp - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gasp - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gasp 

 gasp (v.) 

 late 14c., gaspen , "open the mouth wide; exhale," of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse geispa "to yawn," or its Danish cognate gispe "gasp," which probably are related to Old Norse gapa "open the mouth wide" (see gap (n.)). Related: Gasped ; gasping .
 also from late 14c. 

 gasp (n.) 

 1570s, from gasp (v.). Earliest attested use is in the phrase last gasp "final breath before dying." To gasp up the ghost "die" is attested from 1530s.
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to gasp 

 gap (n.) 

 early 14c., "an opening in a wall or hedge; a break, a breach," mid-13c. in place names, from Old Norse gap "chasm, empty space," related to gapa "to gape, open the mouth wide," common Proto-Germanic (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch gapen , German gaffen "to gape, stare," Swedish gapa , Danish gabe ), from PIE root *ghieh- "to yawn, gape, be wide open."

 From late 14c. as "a break or opening between mountains;" broader sense "unfilled space or interval, any hiatus or interruption" is from c. 1600. In U.S., common in place names in reference to a deep break or pass in a long mountain chain (especially one that water flows through), a feature in the middle Appalachians.

 *ghieh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to yawn, gape, be wide open." 

 It might form all or part of: chaos ; chasm ; dehiscence ; gap ; gasp ; gawp ; hiatus ; yawn .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit vijihite "to gape, be ajar;" Greek khainein , Latin hiare "to yawn, gape;" Old Church Slavonic zinoti "to open (one's mouth);" Russian razinut' , Serbo-Croatian zinuti , Lithuanian žioju, žioti , Czech zivati "to yawn;" Old English ginian, gionian "open the mouth wide, yawn, gape," Old Norse gina "to yawn," Dutch geeuwen , Old High German ginen "to be wide open," German gähnen "to yawn."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pant 

 mid-14c., panten, "breathe hard or rapidly," perhaps a shortening of Old French pantaisier "gasp, puff, pant, be out of breath, be in distress" (12c.), which is probably from Vulgar Latin *pantasiare "be oppressed with a nightmare, struggle for breathing during a nightmare," lite

 puff 

 c. 1200, puf, puffe, perhaps from Old English, pyf "short, quick blast of wind; act of puffing," from puff (v.). Meaning "type of light pastry" is recorded from late 14c.; that of "small pad of a downy or flossy texture for applying powder to skin or hair" is from 1650s. From 156

 heave 

 Old English hebban "to lift, raise; lift up, exalt" (class VI strong verb; past tense hof, past participle hafen), from Proto-Germanic *hafjan (source also of Old Norse hefja, Dutch heffen, German heben, Gothic hafjan "to lift, raise"), from PIE *kap-yo-, from root *kap- "to gras

 deer 

 perhaps from PIE *dheusom "creature that breathes," from root *dheu- (1) "cloud, breath" (source also of Lithuanian dusti "gasp...," dvėsti "gasp, perish;" Old Church Slavonic dychati "breathe")....

 choke 

 Meaning "gasp for breath" is from early 15c....

 inspiration 

 c. 1300, "immediate influence of God or a god," especially that under which the holy books were written, from Old French inspiracion "inhaling, breathing in; inspiration" (13c.), from Late Latin inspirationem (nominative inspiratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of La

 aspiration 

 late 14c., aspiracioun, "a spirant;" 1530s as "action of breathing into," from Latin aspirationem (nominative aspiratio) "a breathing on, a blowing upon; rough breathing; influence," noun of action from past-participle stem of aspirare "strive for, seek to reach," literally "brea

 blow 

 "move air, produce a current of air," Middle English blouen, from Old English blawan "to blow (of the wind, bellows, etc.), breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound" a wind instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-German

 bowl 

 "round, low vessel to hold liquids or liquid food," Old English bolla "pot, cup, bowl," from Proto-Germanic *bul- "a round vessel" (source also of Old Norse bolle, Old High German bolla), from PIE root *bhel- (2) "to blow, swell." Formerly also "a large drinking cup," hence figur

 James 

 masc. proper name, New Testament name of two of Christ's disciples, late 12c. Middle English vernacular form of Late Latin Jacomus (source of Old French James, Spanish Jaime, Italian Giacomo), altered from Latin Jacobus (see Jacob). The Welsh form was Iago, the Cornish Jago. Jame

 Share gasp 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gasp Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gasp">Etymology of gasp by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gasp. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gasp Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gasp," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gasp. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gasp." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gasp. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gasp." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gasp (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gasp 
 gaslight 
 gas-mask 
 gasohol 
 gasoline 
 gasometer 
 gasp 
 gassy 
 gast 
 gastrectomy 
 gastric 
 gastritis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix