URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pupil
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pupil - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pupil - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pupil 

 pupil (n.1) 

 [student], late 14c., "orphan child, ward, person under the care of a guardian," from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from Latin pupillus (fem. pupilla ) "orphan child, ward, minor," diminutive of pupus "boy" (fem. pupa "girl"), probably related to puer "child" (and thus probably from a suffixed form of PIE root *pau- (1) "few, little").

 Meaning "disciple, student youth or any person of either sex under the care of an instructor or tutor" is recorded by 1560s. Related: Pupillary; pupillarity; pupillage .
 also from late 14c. 

 pupil (n.2) 

 "center of the eye, orifice of the iris," early 15c. pupille (the word is in English in Latin form from late 14c.), from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from Latin pupilla , originally "little girl-doll," diminutive of pupa "girl; doll" (see pupil (n.1)).

 The eye region was so called from the tiny image one sees of oneself reflected in the eye of another. Greek used a single word, korē (literally "girl;" see Kore ), to mean both "doll" and "pupil of the eye;" and compare obsolete English baby "small image of oneself in another's pupil" (1590s), source of 17c. colloquial expression to look babies "stare lovingly into another's eyes."

 Self-knowledge can be obtained only by looking into the mind and virtue of the soul, which is the diviner part of a man, as we see our own image in another's eye. [Plato, 
 Alcibiades, I.133]
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to pupil 

 Kore 

 in Greek mythology, the daughter of Zeus and Demeter, also called Persephone in her aspect as Hades's wife, from Greek korē "maiden," from PIE *korwo- "growing" (hence "adolescent"), from suffixed form of root *ker- (2) "to grow."

 baby (n.) 

 late 14c., babi , "infant of either sex," diminutive of babe (q.v.) with -y (3).

 The meaning "childish adult person" is from c. 1600. The sense of "youngest of a group" is by 1897. As a term of endearment for one's lover it is attested perhaps as early as 1839, certainly by 1901 (OED writes, "the degree of slanginess in the nineteenth-century examples is not easily determinable"); its popularity perhaps was boosted by baby vamp "a popular girl" (see vamp (n.2)), student slang from c. 1922.

 The meaning "minute reflection of oneself seen in another's eyes" is from 1590s (compare pupil (n.2)). As an adjective by 1750. Baby food is from 1833. Baby blues for "blue eyes" recorded by 1892, perhaps for the reduplication as well as the fact that more infants have blue eyes than keep the color (the phrase also was used for "postpartum depression" 1950s-60s).

 To empty the baby out with the bath (water) is attested by 1909 (in G.B. Shaw; compare German das Kind mit dem Bade ausschütten , attested from 17c.). A baby's breath was noted for sweet smell, which also was supposed to attract cats, hence baby's breath as the name of a type of flower, attested from 1897.

 French bébé (19c.) is said to be from English, but there were similar words in the same sense in French dialects.

 pupa 
 puppet 
 *pau- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 student 

 late 14c., studient, "studious person, one who pursues knowledge," from Old French estudiant "student, scholar, one who is studying" (Modern French étudiant), noun use of present participle of estudiier, from Medieval Latin studiare "to study," from Latin studium (see study (v.))

 disciple 

 the twelve Apostles chosen or called by him to be his immediate associates," a Biblical borrowing from Latin discipulus "pupil...The pre-Christian Latin sense of "scholar, pupil, student" is rare in English....

 recitation 

 act of repeating aloud what has been committed to memory" is from 1620s; that of "repetition of a prepared lesson" by a pupil...

 auditor 

 .; Modern French auditeur), from Latin auditor "a hearer, a pupil, scholar, disciple," in Medieval Latin "a judge, examiner...

 dahlia 

 America, 1804, named 1791 by Spanish botanist Antonio José Cavanilles for Anders Dahl (1751-1789), Swedish botanist and pupil...

 puny 

 1570s, "inferior in rank" (1540s as a noun, "junior pupil, freshman"), senses now obsolete, from French puisné (Modern French...

 prefect 

 The meaning "administrative head of the Paris police" is from 1800; the sense of "senior pupil designated to keep order in...

 sparse 

 "thinly scattered, existing at considerable intervals, widely spaced between," 1727, from Latin sparsus "scattered," past participle of spargere "to scatter, spread, shower." This is, according to de Vaan, from Proto-Italic *sparg-, from PIE *sp(e)rg- "to strew," extended form of

 scholar 

 Middle English scolere, from Old English scolere "student, one who receives instruction in a school, one who learns from a teacher," from Medieval Latin scholaris, "a pupil, scholar," noun use of Late Latin scholaris "of a school," from Latin schola (see school (n.1), and compare

 neophyte 

 c. 1400, neophite, "new convert" (modern spelling from 16c.), from Church Latin neophytus, from Greek neophytos "a new convert; one newly initiated," noun use of adjective meaning "newly initiated, newly converted," literally "newly planted," from neos "new" (see new) + phytos "g

 Share pupil 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pupil Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pupil">Etymology of pupil by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pupil. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pupil Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pupil," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pupil. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pupil." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pupil. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pupil." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pupil (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pupil 
 puny 
 pup 
 pupa 
 pupate 
 pupation 
 pupil 
 puppet 
 puppeteer 
 puppetry 
 puppify 
 Puppis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix