URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhus
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:10:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Typhus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Typhus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of typhus 

 typhus (n.) 

 acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by severe prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785, from medical Latin, from Greek typhos "stupor caused by fever," literally "smoke," from typhein "to smoke," related to typhos "blind," typhon "whirlwind." Beekes rejects the derivation suggested in Watkins that these are from a PIE root *dheu- (1) "dust, vapor, smoke."

 The Greek term [typhos] 
 (smoke, mist, fog) was employed by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor 
 (stupor attonitus) ; and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever "typhus," and the name was adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as "Pestilential" or "Putrid Fever," or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the locality in which it appeared, as "Camp," "Jail," "Hospital," or "Ship Fever" (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford, ed., "A System of Medicine," New York, 1897] 

 Related: typhous (adj.). For distinction, see typhoid .
 also from 1785 

 Entries linking to typhus 

 typhoid (adj.) 

 1800, "resembling typhus," in reference to febrile illnesses characterized by delirious stupors, from typhus + -oid .

 The noun is attested by 1861, a shortened form of typhoid fever (1845), so called before researchers confirmed it as a different disease c.1880. Since then enteric fever often is preferred.

 Typhus is caused by Rickettsia bacteria and spread by fleas and other vermin; typhoid is caused by Salmonella bacteria and frequently spreads through human waste. Related: Typhoidal .

 Typhoid Mary (1909) was Mary Mallon (1869-1938), a typhoid carrier who worked as a cook round New York City and became notorious after it was learned she unwittingly had infected hundreds in U.S.

 typhoon (n.) 

 Tiphon "violent storm, whirlwind, tornado," 1550s, from Greek typh ō n "whirlwind," personified as a giant, father of the winds, a name probably [Beekes] from or related to typhein "to smoke" (see typhus ). According to Watkins from PIE *dheub- "deep, hollow," via notion of "monster from the depths." The god-name is in Middle English in Wycliffe's wynd Tiffonyk (c. 1384, via Latin typhonicus ).

 The meaning "cyclone, violent hurricane of India or the China Seas" is attested by 1588 in Thomas Hickock's translation of an account in Italian of a voyage to the East Indies by Caesar Frederick, a merchant of Venice:

 concerning which Touffon ye are to vnderstand, that in the East Indies often times, there are not stormes as in other countreys; but euery 10. or 12. yeeres there are such tempests and stormes, that it is a thing incredible, but to those that haue seene it, neither do they know certainly what yeere they wil come. ["The voyage and trauell of M. Caesar Fredericke, Marchant of Venice, into the East India, and beyond the Indies"] 

 This sense of the word, in reference to titanic storms in the East Indies, is found in Europe first in Portuguese in the mid-16th century. It apparently is from tufan , a word in Arabic, Persian, and Hindi meaning "big cyclonic storm." Yule ["Hobson-Jobson," London, 1903] writes that "the probability is that Vasco [da Gama] and his followers got the tufao ... direct from the Arab pilots."

 The Arabic word sometimes is said to be from Greek typhon , but other sources consider it purely Semitic, though the Greek word might have influenced the form of the word in English. Al-tufan occurs several times in the Koran for "a flood or storm" and also for Noah's Flood. Chinese (Cantonese) tai fung "a great wind" also might have influenced the form or sense of the word in English, and that term and the Indian one may have had some mutual influence; toofan still means "big storm" in India.

 From the thighs downward he was nothing but coiled serpents, and his arms which, when he spread them out, reached a hundred leagues in either direction, had countless serpents' heads instead of hands. His brutish ass-head touched the stars, his vast wings darkened the sun, fire flashed from his eyes, and flaming rocks hurtled from his mouth. [Robert Graves, "Typhon," in "The Greek Myths"] 

 *dheu- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "dust, vapor, smoke." 

 It might form all or part of: enthymeme ; fewmet ; fume ; fumigation ; funk ; perfume ; sfumato ; typhoid ; typhoon ; typhus .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dhuma- "smoke, fume;" Greek thymos "spirit, courage, anger," thymiao "fumigate," thymin "incense;" Latin fumus "smoke, steam, fume;" Lithuanian dūmai "smoke" (plural); Old Prussian dumis "smoke;" Old Church Slavonic dymu "smoke;" Middle Irish dumacha "fog;" perhaps Old High German toum "steam, vapor."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rickettsia 

 Ricketts (1871-1910), who first identified it in 1909 and died of typhus as a result of his contact with it, + abstract noun...The bacteria causes typhus and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, but is unrelated by pathology or etymology to rickets (q.v.)...

 cabin 

 Cabin fever is recorded by 1918 in the "need to get out and about" sense; earlier (1820s) it was a term for typhus....

 camp 

 Camp-fever (1758) is any epidemic fever incident to life in a camp, especially typhus or typhoid....

 fever 

 earlier also feaver, late Old English fefor, fefer "fever, temperature of the body higher than normal," from Latin febris "fever," related to fovere "to warm, heat," which is probably from PIE root *dhegh- "burn" (source also of Gothic dags, Old English dæg "day," originally "the

 satellite 

 1540s, "follower or attendant of a superior person" (but rare in this sense before late 18c.), from French satellite (14c.), from Latin satellitem (nominative satelles)  "an attendant" upon a distinguished person; "a body-guard, a courtier; an assistant," in Cicero often in 

 marry 

 c. 1300, marien, of parents or superiors, "to give (offspring) in marriage," also intransitive, "to enter into the conjugal state, take a husband or wife," from Old French marier "to get married; to marry off, give in marriage; to bring together in marriage," from Latin marītāre 

 divination 

 late 14c., divinacioun, "act of foretelling by supernatural or magical means the future, or discovering what is hidden or obscure," from Old French divination (13c.), from Latin divinationem (nominative divinatio) "the power of foreseeing, prediction," noun of action from past-pa

 authority 

 c. 1200, autorite, auctorite "authoritative passage or statement, book or quotation that settles an argument, passage from Scripture," from Old French autorité, auctorité "authority, prestige, right, permission, dignity, gravity; the Scriptures" (12c.; Modern French autorité), fr

 thank 

 Old English þancian, þoncian "to give thanks, thank, to recompense, to reward," from Proto-Germanic *thankōjanan (source also of Old Saxon thancon, Old Norse þakka, Danish takke, Old Frisian thankia, Old High German danchon, Middle Dutch, Dutch, German danken "to thank"), from *t

 waffle 

 "kind of batter-cake, baked crisp in irons and served hot," 1744, from Dutch wafel "waffle," from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German wafel, from Proto-Germanic *wabila- "web, honeycomb" (source also of Old High German waba "honeycomb," German Wabe), related to Old High German weba

 Share typhus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhus">Etymology of typhus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of typhus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of typhus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of typhus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhus. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of typhus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhus (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near typhus 
 typewrite 
 typewriter 
 typhoid 
 Typhon 
 typhoon 
 typhus 
 typical 
 typify 
 typing 
 typist 
 typo- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix