URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/poem
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:07:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Poem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Poem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of poem 

 poem (n.) 

 1540s, "written composition in metrical form, a composition arranged in verses or measures" (replacing poesy in this sense), from French poème (14c.), from Latin poema "composition in verse, poetry," from Greek poēma "fiction, poetical work," literally "thing made or created," early variant of poiēma , from poein , poiein , "to make or compose" (see poet ).

 From 1580s as "written composition, whether in verse or not, characterized by imaginative beauty in thought or language." Spelling pome , representing an ignorant pronunciation, is attested from 1856.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to poem 

 poesy (n.) 

 late 14c., poesie , "poetry; poetic language and ideas; literature; a poem, a passage of poetry," from Old French poesie (mid-14c.), from Vulgar Latin * poesia (source of Provençal, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian poesia ), from Latin poesis "poetry, a poem," from Greek poēsis "composition, poetry," literally "a making, fabrication," variant of poiēsis , from poein , poiein "to make or compose" (see poet ). Meaning "the art of poetic composition, skill in making poems" is from late 15c.

 A poem, as I have told you, is the work of the poet; the end and fruit of his labour and study. Poesy is his skill or craft of making; the very fiction itself, the reason or form of the work. [Ben Jonson, "Discoveries"]

 poet (n.) 

 "one endowed with the gift and power of imaginative invention and creation, attended by corresponding eloquence of expression, commonly but not necessarily in a metrical form" [Century Dictionary, 1895], early 14c., "a poet, an author of metrical compositions; one skilled in the art of making poetry; a singer" (c. 1200 as a surname), from Old French poete (12c., Modern French poète ) and directly from Latin poeta "a poet," from Greek poētēs "maker, author, poet," variant of poiētēs , from poein , poiein "to make, create, compose."

 This is reconstructed [Watkins] to be from PIE *kwoiwo- "making," from root *kwei- "to pile up, build, make" (source also of Sanskrit cinoti "heaping up, piling up," Old Church Slavonic činu "act, deed, order").

 A POET is as much to say as a maker. And our English name well comformes with the Greeke word : for of [poiein] to make, they call a maker Poeta. [Puttenham, "Arte of English Poesie," 1589] 

 It isn't what [a poet] 
 says that counts as a work of art, it's what he makes, with such intensity of perception that it lives with an intrinsic movement of its own to verify its authenticity. [William Carlos Williams, 1944] 

 It replaced Old English scop (which survives in scoff ). It was used in 14c., as in classical languages, in reference to all writers or composers of works of literature. In 16c.-17c. often Englished as maker .

 Poète maudit , "a poet insufficiently appreciated by his contemporaries," literally "cursed poet," is attested by 1930, from French (1884, Verlaine). For poet laureate see laureate .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 elegy 

 in classical poetry, a verse in elegiac meter; of later works, "a mournful or plaintive poem, a poem or song expressive of...elegie, from Latin elegia, from Greek elegeia ode "an elegaic song," from elegeia, fem. of elegeios "elegaic," from elegos "poem...or song of lament," later "poem written in elegiac verse," which is of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Phrygian word....In, and partly due to, Gray's "Elegy in a County Churchyard," it has also a sense of "a serious poem pervaded by a tone of...

 epic 

 1580s, "pertaining to or constituting a lengthy heroic poem," via French épique or directly from Latin epicus, from Greek...From 1706 as a noun in reference to an epic poem, "A long narrative told on a grand scale of time and place, featuring a...I believe the word 'epic' is usually understood by English readers to mean merely a long and grand poem instead of a short...It really means a poem in which story-telling, and philosophical reflection as its accompaniment, take the place of dramatic...

 envoy 

 "messenger," 1660s, from French envoyé "messenger; a message; a sending; the postscript of a poem," literally "one sent"...The same French word was borrowed in Middle English as envoi in the sense "stanza of a poem 'sending it off' to find readers...

 pamphlet 

 "small, unbound treatise," late 14c., pamflet, "brief written text; poem, tract, small book," from Anglo-Latin panfletus,...Latin love poem popular and widely copied in the Middle Ages; the name from Greek pamphilos "loved by all," from pan- "all...

 Edda 

 1771, by some identified with the name of the old woman (literally "grandmother") in the Old Norse poem "Rigsþul," by others...derived from Old Norse oðr "spirit, mind, passion, song, poetry" (cognate with Old Irish faith "poet," Welsh gwawd "poem...

 Don Juan 

 French and Italian before 1700; Used attributively in English for "ladies' man, womanizer" from the time of Byron's popular poem...

 prosody 

 modulation of voice," etymologically "a singing in addition to," from pros "to, forward, near" (see pros-) + ōidē "song, poem...

 rime 

 "hoarfrost, white frost," Old English hrim, from Proto-Germanic *khrima- (source also of Old Norse hrim, Dutch rijm, German Reif). Old French rime is of Germanic origin. Rare in Middle English and usually there as rime-frost; after c. 1500 it seems to have survived mainly in Scot

 lay 

 "to cause to lie or rest," Old English lecgan "to place on the ground (or other surface); place in an orderly fashion," also "put down" (often by striking), from Proto-Germanic *lagojanan (source also of Old Saxon leggian, Old Norse leggja, Old Frisian ledza, Middle Dutch legghan

 mantel 

 c. 1200, "short, loose, sleeveless cloak," variant of mantle (q.v.). Sense of "movable shelter for soldiers besieging a fort" is from 1520s. The meaning "timber or stone supporting masonry above a fireplace" is attested by 1510s; it is a shortened form of Middle English mantiltre

 Share poem 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/poem Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/poem">Etymology of poem by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of poem. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/poem Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of poem," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poem. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of poem." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poem. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of poem." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/poem (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near poem 
 podcast 
 podgy 
 podiatry 
 podium 
 Podunk 
 poem 
 poesy 
 poet 
 poetaster 
 poetess 
 poetic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close