URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/saccharin
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:18:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Saccharin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Saccharin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of saccharin 

 saccharin (n.) 

 white crystalline compound, odorless but intensely sweet, used as a sugar substitute, 1885, from German, coined 1879 by Russian-born chemist Constantin Fahlberg (1850-1910), who discovered it by accident, from Latin saccharon (see saccharine ); for ending see -in (2). Marketed from 1887 as saccharine .
 also from 1885 

 Entries linking to saccharin 

 saccharine (adj.) 

 1670s, "of or like sugar, having the qualities of sugar," from Medieval Latin saccharum "sugar," from Latin saccharon "sugar," from Greek sakkharon , from Pali sakkhara , from Sanskrit sarkara "gravel, grit" (see sugar ). The metaphoric sense of "overly sweet" is recorded by 1841. For the sugar substitute, see saccharin . Related: Saccharinity .

 -in (2) 

 word-forming element in chemistry, usually indicating a neutral substance, antibiotic, vitamin, or hormone; a modification and specialized use of -ine (2).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 facetious 

 "sportive, playful," 1590s, from French facétieux (16c.), from facétie "a joke" (15c.), from Latin facetiae "jests, witticisms" (singular facetia), from facetus "witty, elegant, fine, courteous," which is of unknown origin, perhaps related to facis "torch." Formerly often in a go

 poise 

 early 15c., pois, "weight, quality of being heavy," later "significance, importance" (mid-15c.), from Old French pois "weight, balance, consideration" (12c., Modern French poids, with -d- added 16c. on supposed derivation from Latin pondus "weight"), from Medieval Latin pesum "we

 boisterous 

 late 15c., boistreous, "rough, coarse," an unexplained alteration of Middle English boistous (c. 1300) "rough, coarse, clumsy, violent," which itself is of unknown origin, perhaps from Anglo-French bustous "rough (road)," itself perhaps from Old French boisteos "curved, lame; une

 heaven 

 Old English heofon "home of God," earlier "the visible sky, firmament," probably from Proto-Germanic *hibin-, a dissimilation of *himin- (source also of Low German heben, Old Norse himinn, Gothic himins, Old Frisian himul, Dutch hemel, German Himmel "heaven, sky"), which is of un

 consumption 

 late 14c., "wasting of the body by disease; wasting disease, progressive emaciation" (replacing Old English yfeladl "the evil disease"), from Old French consumpcion, from Latin consumptionem (nominative consumptio) "a using up, wasting," noun of state from past-participle stem of

 satyr 

 late 14c., satire, "one of a type of woodland deities part human or animal; demigod or spirit of the air or woods, companion of Bacchus," from Old French satire and directly from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, a word of unknown origin. "The etymology of [satyros] is unknown. 

 physiology 

 1560s, "study and description of natural objects, natural philosophy" (a sense now obsolete), from French physiologie (16c.) or directly from Latin physiologia "natural science, study of nature," from Greek physiologia "natural science, inquiry into nature," from physios "nature"

 emphasis 

 1570s, "intensity of expression," from Latin emphasis, from Greek emphasis "an appearing in, outward appearance;" in rhetoric, "significance, indirect meaning," from emphainein "to present, exhibit, display, let (a thing) be seen; be reflected (in a mirror), become visible," from

 Whig 

 British political party, 1657, in part perhaps a disparaging use of whigg "a country bumpkin" (1640s); but mainly a shortened form of Whiggamore (1649) "one of the adherents of the Presbyterian cause in western Scotland who marched on Edinburgh in 1648 to oppose Charles I." Perha

 forgive 

 Old English forgiefan "give, grant, allow; remit (a debt), pardon (an offense)," also "give up" and "give in marriage" (past tense forgeaf, past participle forgifen); from for-, here probably "completely," + giefan "to give" (from PIE root *ghabh- "to give or receive"). The sense

 Share saccharin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/saccharin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/saccharin">Etymology of saccharin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of saccharin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/saccharin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of saccharin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/saccharin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of saccharin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/saccharin. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of saccharin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/saccharin (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near saccharin 
 Sabrina 
 sabulous 
 sac 
 Sacagawea 
 saccade 
 saccharin 
 saccharine 
 sacerdotal 
 sachem 
 sachet 
 sack 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix