URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Easter
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:32:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Easter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Easter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Easter 

 Easter (n.) 

 Old English Easterdæg , "Easter day," from Eastre (Northumbrian Eostre ), from Proto-Germanic *austron- , "dawn," also possibly the name of a goddess whose feast was celebrated in Eastermonað (the Anglo-Saxon month corresponding with April ), from *aust- "east, toward the sunrise" (compare east), from PIE root *aus- (1) "to shine," especially of the dawn.

 Bede writes that Anglo-Saxon Christians adopted her name for their Mass of Christ's resurrection. Almost all neighboring languages use a variant of Latin Pascha to name this holiday (see paschal ).

 Easter egg is attested by 1825, earlier pace egg (1610s). Easter bunny is attested by 1904 in children's lessons; Easter rabbit is by 1888; the paganish customs of Easter seem to have grown popular c. 1900; before that they were limited to German immigrants.

 If the children have no garden, they make nests in the wood-shed, barn, or house. They gather colored flowers for the rabbit to eat, that it may lay colored eggs. If there be a garden, the eggs are hidden singly in the green grass, box-wood, or elsewhere. On Easter Sunday morning they whistle for the rabbit, and the children imagine that they see him jump the fence. After church, on Easter Sunday morning, they hunt the eggs, and in the afternoon the boys go out in the meadows and crack eggs or play with them like marbles. Or sometimes children are invited to a neighbor's to hunt eggs. [Phebe Earle Gibbons, "Pennsylvania Dutch," Philadelphia, 1882]

 Entries linking to Easter 

 April 

 fourth month, c. 1300, aueril , from Old French avril (11c.), from Latin (mensis) Aprilis , second month of the ancient Roman calendar, from a stem of uncertain origin and meaning, with month-name suffix -ilis as in Quintilis , Sextilis (the old names of July and August).

 Perhaps based on Apru , an Etruscan borrowing of Greek Aphrodite . Or perhaps *ap(e)rilis "the following, the next," from its place as the second month of the old Roman calendar, from Proto-Italic *ap(e)ro- , from PIE *apo- "away, off" (see apo- ; compare Sanskrit aparah "second," Gothic afar "after"). Old folk etymology connected it with Latin aperire "to open."

 The name was in English in Latin form from mid-12c.; it replaced Old English Eastermonað , which was named for a fertility goddess (see Easter ). It was re-spelled in Middle English on the Latin model (as apprile , a form first attested late 14c.).

 paschal (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to Passover or Easter," early 15c., from Old French paschal (12c.) and directly from Late Latin paschalis , from pascha "Passover, Easter," from Greek pascha "Passover," from Aramaic (Semitic) pasha "pass over," corresponding to Hebrew pesah , from pasah "he passed over" (see Passover ). Pasche was an early Middle English term for "Easter" (see Easter ), and the older Dutch form of the word, Paas , was retained in New York.

 *aus- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine," especially of the dawn. It might form all or part of: austral ; Australia ; Austria ; Austro- ; Aurora ; east ; Easter ; eastern ; eo- ; Ostrogoth .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit usah "dawn;" Greek ēōs "dawn;" Latin Aurora "goddess of dawn," auster "south wind;" Lithuanian aušra "dawn;" Old English east "east."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Lent 

 "period between Ash Wednesday and Easter," late 14c., short for Lenten (n.)..."the forty days of fasting before Easter" in the Christian calendar (early 12c.), from Old English lencten "springtime, spring...

 Florida 

 U.S. state, formerly a Spanish colony, probably from Spanish Pascua florida, literally "flowering Easter," a Spanish name...

 Maundy Thursday 

 Thursday before Easter, mid-15c., from Middle English maunde "the Last Supper" (c. 1300), also "ceremony of washing the feet...

 palm 

 in the local languages (such as Old Saxon palma, Old High German palma, Old Norse palmr); Palm Sunday, the Sunday before Easter...

 austral 

 aurion "tomorrow;" Lithuanian aušra "dawn;" Old Church Slavonic jutro "dawn, morning; tomorrow;" Old High German ostara "Easter...

 Monday 

 Black Monday (late 14c.) is the Monday after Easter day, though how it got its reputation for bad luck is a mystery (none...

 wind 

 "air in motion," Old English wind "wind," from Proto-Germanic *winda- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Dutch wind, Old Norse vindr, Old High German wind, German Wind, Gothic winds), from PIE *wē-nt-o‑ "blowing," suffixed (participial) form of root *we- "to bl

 egg 

 "the body formed in the females of all animals (with the exception of a few of the lowest type) in which by impregnation the development of the fetus takes place," mid-14c., egge, mostly in northern England dialect, from Old Norse egg, from Proto-Germanic *ajja(m) (source also of

 pace 

 late 13c., "a step in walking," also "rate of motion; the space traveled by the foot in one completed movement in walking," from Old French pas "a step, pace, trace," and directly from Latin passus, passum "a step, pace, stride," noun use of past participle of pandere "to stretch

 Share Easter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Easter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Easter">Etymology of Easter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Easter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Easter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Easter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Easter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Easter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Easter. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Easter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Easter (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Easter 
 easeful 
 easel 
 easement 
 easily 
 east 
 Easter 
 Easter Island 
 easterling 
 easterly 
 eastern 
 easterner 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix