URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/scarlet
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:04:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Scarlet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Scarlet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of scarlet 

 scarlet (n.) 

 mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), "rich cloth" (often, but not necessarily, bright red), from a shortened form of Old French escarlate "scarlet (color), top-quality fabric" (12c., Modern French écarlate ), which, with Medieval Latin scarlatum "scarlet, cloth of scarlet," Italian scarlatto , Spanish escarlate often is said to be from a Middle Eastern source, but perhaps is rather from a Germanic source akin to Old High German scarlachen , scharlachen (c. 1200), from scar "sheared" + lachen "cloth."

 In English it is attested as the name of a color, a highly chromatic and brilliant red, from late 14c. It was used as an adjective in reference to this color, or to gowns of this color, from c. 1300.

 Scarlet Lady is Biblical (Isaiah i.18, Revelation xvii.1-5); she has been variously identified by commentators. Scarlet woman "notoriously immoral woman, prostitute" (by 1924) perhaps is from notion of "red with shame or indignation." Earlier it was used in the same sense as Scarlet Lady .

 Scarlet fever is from 1670s, so called for its characteristic rash. It also was an old slang term for the condition of women irresistibly glamoured by men in uniform. Scarlet oak , a New World tree, is so called from 1590s. Scarlet letter in figurative use traces to Hawthorne's novel (1850), a red cloth "A" which convicted adulterers were condemned to wear. German Scharlach , Dutch scharlaken show influence of words cognate with English lake (n.2).
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to scarlet 

 lake (n.2) 

 "deep red coloring matter," 1610s, from French laque (15c., see lac ), from which the pigment originally was obtained.

 scarlatina (n.) 

 "scarlet fever," 1803, from Modern Latin scarlatina (Sydenham, 1676), from Italian scarlattina (Lancelotti, 1527), fem. of scarlattino (adj.), diminutive of scarlatto "scarlet" (see scarlet ). According to OED, often "misapprehended" as meaning a milder form of the disease. Related: Scarlattinal .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 red 

 "of a bright, warm color resembling that of blood or of the highest part of the primery rainbow" [Century Dictionary], Middle English rēd, redde, read, reid, from Old English rēad, used of various shades of purple, crimson, scarlet, pink, etc.; also red clothes, dye, ink, wine, o

 carmine 

 1712, "pure red dyestuff obtained from cochineal," from French carmin (12c.), from Medieval Latin carminium, from Arabic qirmiz "crimson" (see kermes, also compare crimson (n.)). The form was influenced in Latin by minium "red lead, cinnabar," a word said to be of Iberian origin.

 cherry 

 pulpy drupe of a well-known type of tree, c. 1300, earlier in surname Chyrimuth (1266, literally "Cherry-mouth"); from Anglo-French cherise, from Old North French cherise (Old French, Modern French cerise, 12c.), from Vulgar Latin *ceresia, from late Greek kerasian "cherry," from

 bluchers 

 1815 as "military (or half-boots), of royal purple, or dark blue morocco or kid leather, also of purple satin; a small scarlet...star, embroidered on the instep, and scarlet bound; red leather buttons (covered red); thin narrow soles, made right and...

 kermes 

 southern Europe on a species of small evergreen oak (kermes oak) and in ancient Europe were the main source of red and scarlet...This was passed to Latin as coccum, coccus "berry [sic] yielding scarlet dye," in late use "scarlet color, scarlet garment...So important was kermes (coccus) as a commercial source of scarlet dye that derivatives of the name for it have displaced...Cloths dyed with kermes are of a deep red colour; and though much inferior in brilliancy to the scarlet cloths dyed with...

 vermeil 

 "bright-red," late 14c., from Anglo-French and Old French vermail, vermeil "bright-red, scarlet, crimson" (11c. in Old French...

 cochineal 

 "scarlet-colored," from coccum "berry (actually an insect) yielding scarlet dye" (see kermes)....

 crimson 

 "highly chromatic deep red color," early 15c., cremesin, "cloth dyed deep purplish-red," also as an adjective, "of a crimson color," from Old Italian carmesi, cremesi (c. 1300), later carmisino, cremesinus, "crimson color; cochineal dye," from Arabic qirmizī (see kermes). For sim

 ruby 

 valuable precious gem, in modern understanding a clear, rich-red variety of corundum, c. 1300, rubi, rubie (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French rubi (12c.), from Medieval Latin rubinus lapis "red stone" (source also of Italian rubino), from Latin rubeus "red," which is relat

 bury 

 Old English byrgan "to raise a mound, hide, enclose in a grave or tomb, inter," akin to beorgan "to shelter," from Proto-Germanic *burzjan- "protection, shelter" (source also of Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga, Swedish berga, Old High German bergan "protect, shel

 Share scarlet 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/scarlet Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/scarlet">Etymology of scarlet by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of scarlet. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/scarlet Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of scarlet," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scarlet. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of scarlet." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scarlet. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of scarlet." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/scarlet (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near scarlet 
 scarification 
 scarify 
 scarily 
 scarious 
 scarlatina 
 scarlet 
 scarp 
 scarred 
 scary 
 scat 
 scathe 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix