URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tartar
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:15:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tartar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tartar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tartar 

 tartar (n.) 

 "bitartrate of potash, sediment of potassium tartarate" (a deposit left during fermentation), late 14c., from Old French tartre and directly from Medieval Latin tartarum , from late Greek tartaron "tartar encrusting the sides of wine casks," a word perhaps of Semitic origin, but if so the exact source has not been identified; Arabic is unlikely because of the early date of the word in Latin. The explanation of the name in Paracelsus probably is fanciful.

 The purified substance is cream of tartar . Used generally in 17c. of encrustations from liquid contact; the specific meaning "encrustation on teeth" (calcium phosphate) is recorded by 1806.
 also from late 14c. 

 Tartar 

 late 14c., "inhabitant of Tartary (late 13c. as a surname), via Medieval Latin Tartarus , etc., from Persian Tatar , first used 13c. in reference to the hordes of Genghis Khan (title of Temüjin, ca. 1160-1227), said to be ultimately from Tata , a name of the Mongols for themselves.

 The form of the word in the Western European languages was influenced from the start by association with Latin Tartarus "hell" (as in the letter attributed to St. Louis of France, 1270: "In the present danger of the Tartars either we shall push them back into the Tartarus whence they are come, or they will bring us all into heaven").

 The historical word for what now are called in ethnological works Tatars . A Turkic people, their native region was east of the Caspian Sea. Genghis Khan's horde was a mix of Tatars, Mongols, Turks, etc. Used figuratively for "savage, rough, irascible person" (1660s). To catch a Tartar "get hold of what cannot be controlled" is recorded from 1660s; original sense not preserved, but probably from some military story similar to the old battlefield joke:

 Irish soldier (shouting from within the brush): I've captured one of the enemy.

 Captain: Excellent! Bring him here.

 Soldier: He won't come.

 Captain: Well, then, you come here.

 Soldier: I would, but he won't let me.

 Among the adjectival forms that have been used are Tartary "of the nature of a Tartar" (early 15c.), Tartarian (16c.), Tartarous (Ben Jonson), Tartarean (1620s); Byron's Tartarly (1821) is a nonce-word (but a good one). Tartar sauce is attested by 1855, from French sauce tartare .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to tartar 

 tartan (n.) 

 mid-15c., "kind of woolen fabric," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps (OED, 1989) from French tiretaine "strong, coarse fabric" (mid-13c.), from Old French tiret "kind of cloth," from tire "silk cloth," from Medieval Latin tyrius "cloth from Tyre" (see Tyrian ).

 If this is the source, the spelling likely was influenced in Middle English by tartaryn "rich silk cloth" (mid-14c.), from Old French tartarin "Tartar cloth," from Tartare "Tartar," the Central Asian people (see Tartar ).

 The specific meaning "woolen or worsted cloth woven with crossing stripes of colors" is from c. 1500 in Scotland, Formerly tartan was a part of the distinctive dress of Scottish Highlanders, each clan having its particular pattern.

 tartaric (adj.) 

 1790, "of, pertaining to, or obtained from tartar," from tartar + -ic . With a capital T- , "of or pertaining to the Tartars or Tartary," by 1811, from Tartar . 

 Tartary 
 Tatar 
 tatterdemalion 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 calculus 

 mathematical method of treating problems by the use of a system of algebraic notation, 1660s, from Latin calculus "reckoning, account," originally "pebble used as a reckoning counter," diminutive of calx (genitive calcis) "limestone" (see chalk (n.)). The modern mathematical sens

 dragon 

 mid-13c., dragoun, a fabulous animal common to the conceptions of many races and peoples, from Old French dragon and directly from Latin draconem (nominative draco) "huge serpent, dragon," from Greek drakon (genitive drakontos) "serpent, giant seafish," apparently from drak-, str

 last 

 c. 1200, "latest, final, following all others," a contraction of Old English latost (adj.) "slowest, latest," superlative of læt (see late); in some uses from late (adv.). Cognate with Old Frisian lest, Dutch laatst, Old High German laggost, German letzt. Meaning "last in space, 

 salt 

 Old English sealt "salt, sodium chloride, abundant substance essential to life, used as a condiment and meat preservative," from Proto-Germanic *saltom (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Gothic salt, Dutch zout, German Salz), from PIE root *sal- "salt." Applied fr

 slat 

 late 14c., earlier sclat (c. 1300), "a roofing slate; a thin, flat stone," from Old French esclat "split piece, chip, splinter" (Modern French éclat), a back-formation from esclater "to break, splinter, burst," which probably is from Frankish *slaitan "to tear, slit" or some othe

 crust 

 early 14c., "hard outer part of bread," from Old French crouste (13c., Modern French croûte) and directly from Latin crusta "rind, crust, shell, bark," from PIE *krus-to- "that which has been hardened," suffixed form of root *kreus- "to begin to freeze, form a crust." From mid-15

 Mongolian 

 1738 (adj.) "pertaining to Mongols;" 1839 (n.) "the language of the Mongols," 1846 "a native of Mongolia;" from Mongol + -ian. As a racial classification for Asiatic peoples (including Chinese, Japanese, Turks, Vietnamese, Lapps, Eskimos, etc.) "belonging to the yellow-skinned st

 cream 

 early 14c., creyme, "the rich and buttery part of milk," from Old French cresme, craime, creme "chrism, holy oil" (13c., Modern French crème). This word is a blend of Late Latin chrisma "ointment" (from Greek khrisma "unguent;" from PIE root *ghrei- "to rub") and Late Latin cramu

 hydrogen 

 colorless, gaseous element, 1791, hydrogene, from French hydrogène (Modern Latin hydrogenium), coined 1787 by G. de Morveau, Lavoisier, Berthollet, and Fourcroy from Greek hydr-, stem of hydor "water" (from suffixed form of PIE root *wed- (1) "water; wet") + French -gène "produci

 warrant 

 c. 1200, "protector, defender," from Old North French warant "defender; surety, pledge; justifying evidence" (Old French garant), from Frankish *warand, from Proto-Germanic *war- "to warn, guard, protect" (source also of Old High German werento "guarantor," noun use of present pa

 Share tartar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tartar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tartar">Etymology of tartar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tartar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tartar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tartar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tartar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tartar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tartar. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tartar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tartar (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tartar 
 tarrying 
 tarsal 
 tarsus 
 tart 
 tartan 
 tartar 
 tartaric 
 Tartarus 
 Tartary 
 tartlet 
 Tartuffe 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix