URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/debris
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T13:55:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Debris - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Debris - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of debris 

 debris (n.) 

 "accumulation of loose matter or rubbish from some destructive operation or process," 1708, from French débris "remains, waste, rubbish" (16c.), from obsolete debriser "break down, crush," from Old French de- (see de- ) + briser "to break," from Late Latin brisare , which is possibly of Gaulish origin (compare Old Irish brissim "I break").
 also from 1708 

 Entries linking to debris 

 de- 

 active word-forming element in English and in many verbs inherited from French and Latin, from Latin de "down, down from, from, off; concerning" (see de ), also used as a prefix in Latin, usually meaning "down, off, away, from among, down from," but also "down to the bottom, totally" hence "completely" (intensive or completive), which is its sense in many English words.

 As a Latin prefix it also had the function of undoing or reversing a verb's action, and hence it came to be used as a pure privative — "not, do the opposite of, undo" — which is its primary function as a living prefix in English, as in defrost (1895), defuse (1943), de-escalate (1964), etc. In some cases, a reduced form of dis- .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dust 

 "fine, dry particles of earth or other matter so light that they can be raised and carried by the wind," Old English dust, from Proto-Germanic *dunstaz (source also of Old High German tunst "storm, breath," German Dunst "mist, vapor," Danish dyst "milldust," Dutch duist), from PI

 rubble 

 "rough, irregular stones broken from larger masses," especially "waste fragments from the demolition of a building, etc.," late 14c., robeyl, from Anglo-French *robel "bits of broken stone," which is of obscure origin, apparently related to rubbish "waste fragments" [OED], but al

 detritus 

 in geology, 1795, "process of erosion" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin detritus "a wearing away," from detri-, stem of detere "wear away," from de "away" (see de-) + terere "to rub, wear" (from PIE root *tere- (1) "to rub, turn"). Sense of "loose fragments of rock produced by 

 scree 

 "pile of debris at the base of a cliff or steep mountainside," 1781, a back-formation from screes (plural) "pebbles, small...

 talus 

 "slope, mound, small hill" (12c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *talutum, from Latin talutium "a slope or outcrop of rock debris...

 litter 

 The sense of "scattered oddments, disorderly debris" is first attested 1730 and probably is from litter (v.)...

 slack 

 Middle English slak, of persons, "indolent, lazy;" also (from c. 1300), of things or parts, "loose, not tight or taut;" from Old English slæc "remiss, lax, characterized by lack of energy, sluggish, indolent, languid; slow in movement, gentle, easy," from Proto-Germanic *slakas (

 scarp 

 1580s, of fortifications, "interior slope of a ditch," hence any sharp, steep slope, from Italian scarpa "slope," which is probably from a Germanic source, perhaps Gothic skarpo "pointed object," from Proto-Germanic *skarpa- "cutting, sharp," source also of Middle High German sch

 scrap 

 [small piece, fragment] late 14c., scrappe, "piece of food remaining after a meal" (usually plural), from Old Norse skrap "scraps; trifles," from skrapa "to scrape, scratch, cut" (see scrape (v.)). Hence, "any remnant or small, detached piece" (1580s), typically negative (not a s

 lubber 

 mid-14c., "big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness," from lobre, earlier lobi "lazy lout," probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber "a plump, lazy fellow"). But OED suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor "swindler, parasite," with 

 Share debris 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/debris Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/debris">Etymology of debris by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of debris. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/debris Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of debris," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/debris. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of debris." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/debris. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of debris." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/debris (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near debris 
 debonair 
 Deborah 
 deboshed 
 debridement 
 debrief 
 debris 
 debt 
 debtor 
 debug 
 debunk 
 debut 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix