URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/shawl
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:27:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Shawl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Shawl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of shawl 

 shawl (n.) 

 1660s, originally of an article of dress worn in Asia, from Urdu and other Indian languages, from Persian shal , sometimes said to be named for Shaliat , town in India where it was first manufactured [Klein]. French châle , Spanish chal , Italian scialle , German Shawl (from English), Russian shal all are ultimately from the same source. As the name of an article of clothing worn by Western women, it is recorded from 1767.
 also from 1660s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Afghan 

 In English, attested from 1833 as a type of blanket or wrap (short for Afghan shawl); by 1877 as a type of carpet; by 1895...

 hack 

 The term hack is also frequently applied by women to any article of dress, as a bonnet, shawl, &c., which is kept for...

 tacky 

 A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be...

 cloak 

 late 13c., "long, loose outer garment without sleeves," from Old North French cloque (Old French cloche, cloke) "traveling cloak," from Medieval Latin clocca "travelers' cape," literally "a bell," so called from the garment's bell-like shape (the word is thus a doublet of clock (

 alchemy 

 "medieval chemistry; the supposed science of transmutation of base metals into silver or gold" (involving also the quest for the universal solvent, quintessence, etc.), mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic al-kimiya,

 oligarchy 

 "form of government in which supreme power is vested in a small exclusive class," 1570s, from French oligarchie (14c.), from Latinized form of Greek oligarkhia "government by the few," from stem of oligos "few, small, little" (a word of uncertain origin) + -arkhia, from arkhein "

 mirror 

 mid-13c., mirour, "polished surface (of metal, coated glass, etc.) used to reflect images of objects," especially the face of a person, from Old French mireoir "a reflecting glass, looking glass; observation, model, example," earlier miradoir (11c.), from mirer "look at" (oneself

 freedom 

 Old English freodom "power of self-determination, state of free will; emancipation from slavery, deliverance;" see free (adj.) + -dom. Meaning "exemption from arbitrary or despotic control, civil liberty" is from late 14c. Meaning "possession of particular privileges" is from 157

 blue-blood 

 1809 in reference to the blood that flows in the veins of the old and aristocratic families of Spain, translating Spanish sangre azul, claimed by certain families of Castile that held themselves uncontaminated by Moorish or Jewish admixture; the term probably is from the notion o

 fall 

 Old English feallan (class VII strong verb; past tense feoll, past participle feallen) "to drop from a height; fail, decay, die," from Proto-Germanic *fallanan (source also of Old Frisian falla, Old Saxon fallan, Dutch vallen, Old Norse falla, Old High German fallan, German falle

 Share shawl 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/shawl Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/shawl">Etymology of shawl by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of shawl. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/shawl Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of shawl," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shawl. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of shawl." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shawl. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of shawl." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/shawl (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near shawl 
 shaver 
 Shavian 
 shaving 
 shavuot 
 shaw 
 shawl 
 shawm 
 Shawnee 
 shay 
 shazam 
 she 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix