URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/persuade
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Persuade - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Persuade - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of persuade 

 persuade (v.) 

 "lead to the opinion or conclusion (that), make (one) believe or think, successfully urge the acceptance or practice of," 1510s, from French persuader (14c.), from Latin persuadere "to bring over by talking," (see persuasion ). From 1530s as "prevail upon, as by demonstration, arguments, etc." Related: Persuaded ; persuading .
 also from 1510s 

 Entries linking to persuade 

 persuasion (n.) 

 late 14c., persuasioun , "action of inducing (someone) to believe (something) by appeals to reason (not by authority, force, or fear); an argument to persuade, inducement," from Old French persuasion (14c.) and directly from Latin persuasionem (nominative persuasio ) "a convincing, persuading," noun of action from past-participle stem of persuadere "persuade, convince," from per "thoroughly, strongly" (see per ) + suadere "to urge, persuade," from PIE root *swād- "sweet, pleasant" (see sweet (adj.)).

 Meaning "state of being convinced" is from 1530s; that of "religious belief, creed" is from 1620s. Colloquial or humorous sense of "kind, sort, nationality" is by 1864.

 persuadable (adj.) 

 1520s, "having the quality of persuading" (a sense now obsolete); 1590s, "capable of being persuaded or prevailed upon," from persuade + -able . Fowler recommends this over the older adjective, persuasible (c. 1400). Related: Persuadableness .

 persuasible (adj.) 

 c. 1400, "plausible, convincing, having the power to persuade," from Latin persuasibilis "convincing, persuasive," from past-participle stem of persuadere (see persuade ). The sense of "capable of being persuaded" is from c. 1500, and the older sense then became obsolete. Related: Persuasibility .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 carry 

 early 14c., "to bear or convey, take along or transport," from Anglo-French carier "transport in a vehicle" or Old North French carrier "to cart, carry" (Modern French charrier), from Gallo-Roman *carrizare, from Late Latin carricare, from Latin carrum originally "two-wheeled Cel

 sway 

 early 14c., sweien, "move, go, go quickly;" also transitive, "move (something) along, carry," probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse sveigja "to bend, swing, give way," Old Danish svegja) and perhaps merged with an unrecorded Old English cognate. The whole group m

 convince 

 Meaning "to firmly persuade or satisfy by argument or evidence" is from c. 1600....To convince a person is to satisfy his understanding as to the truth of a certain statement; to persuade him is, by derivation...There is a marked tendency now to confine persuade to its own distinctive meaning. [Century Dictionary, 1897]...

 teach 

 past participle tæht) "to show, point out, declare, demonstrate," also "to give instruction, train, assign, direct; warn; persuade...[kicks him] The usual sense of Old English tæcan was "show, declare, warn, persuade" (compare German zeigen "to show," from...

 diffident 

 mistrust, lack confidence," from dis- "away" (see dis-) + fidere "to trust" (from PIE root *bheidh- "to trust, confide, persuade...

 confident 

 form of com, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + fidere "to trust" (from PIE root *bheidh- "to trust, confide, persuade...

 confide 

 form of com, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + fidere "to trust" (from PIE root *bheidh- "to trust, confide, persuade...

 influence 

 late 14c., an astrological term, "streaming ethereal power from the stars when in certain positions, acting upon character or destiny of men," from Old French influence "emanation from the stars that acts upon one's character and destiny" (13c.), also "a flow of water, a flowing 

 drag 

 late 14c., draggen, "to draw a grapnel along the bottom of a river, lake, etc., in search of something;" late 15c., "to draw away by force, pull haul," from Old Norse draga, or a dialectal variant of Old English dragan "to draw," both from Proto-Germanic *draganan "to draw, pull,

 make 

 Old English macian "to give being to, give form or character to, bring into existence; construct, do, be the author of, produce; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform," from West Germanic *makōjanan "to fashion, fit" (source also of Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia "

 Share persuade 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/persuade Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/persuade">Etymology of persuade by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of persuade. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/persuade Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of persuade," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/persuade. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of persuade." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/persuade. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of persuade." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/persuade (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near persuade 
 perspicuity 
 perspicuous 
 perspiration 
 perspire 
 persuadable 
 persuade 
 persuasible 
 persuasion 
 persuasive 
 pert 
 pertain 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix