URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ripple
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:30:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ripple - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ripple - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ripple 

 ripple (v.) 

 early 15c., riplen , "to crease, wrinkle;" 1660s, "to present a ruffled surface," of obscure origin, perhaps a frequentative of rip (v.), and compare rip (n.2) and rumple . Transitive sense, in reference to the surface of water, "cause to ripple, agitate lightly," is from 1786. Related: Rippled ; rippling .
 also from early 15c. 

 ripple (n.) 

 "very small wave," 1798, from earlier meaning "stretch of shallow, rippling water" (1755), from ripple (v.). The meaning "light ruffling of the surface suggestive of a ripple" is from 1843.

 The meaning "ice cream streaked with colored syrup" is attested by 1939, so called from its appearance. In reference to the ripple-rings in water from a cast stone, by 1884. (Chaucer, late 14c., used roundel "a little circle" for that.) As the name of a brand of inexpensive wine sold by E&J Gallo Winery, from 1960 to 1984. In geology, ripple-mark "wavy surface on sand formed by wind or water" is by 1833. Ripple effect "continuous spreading results of an event or action" is from 1950.
 also from 1798 

 Entries linking to ripple 

 rip (v.) 

 "tear apart, cut open or off," c. 1400, rippen , "pull out sutures," probably from a North Sea Germanic language (compare Flemish rippen "strip off roughly," Frisian rippe "to tear, rip;" also Middle Dutch reppen , rippen "to rip") or else from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish reppa , Danish rippe "to tear, rip"). Likely most or all of them are from a Proto-Germanic *rupjan- (from PIE root *reup- , *reub- "to snatch"). "Of somewhat obscure origin and history; it is not quite certain that all the senses really belong to the same word" [OED].

 The meaning "to slash with a sharp instrument" is from 1570s. Intransitive sense of "be torn or split open" is by 1840. Related: Ripped ; ripping . In old U.S. slang, "to utter strong language" (1772), often with out ; hence "break forth with sudden violence." The meaning "to move with slashing force" (1798) is the sense in let her rip "allow something to go or continue unrestrained," an American English colloquial phrase attested by 1846.

 At another time, when a charge was ordered one of the officers could not think of the word, and he shouted—'Let 'er rip!'—when the whole line burst out with a yell—'Let 'er rip!' and dashed in among the Mexicans, laughing and shouting this new battle cry. [from an account of Illinois volunteers in the Mexican-American War, in the Pensacola Gazette, March 29, 1851] 

  In garments we 
 rip  along the line at which they were sewed ; we 
 tear the texture of the cloth; we say, "It is not 
 torn ; it is only 
 ripped ." More broadly, 
 rip , especially with 
 up , stands for a cutting open or apart with a quick, deep strike: as, to 
 rip up a body or a sack of meal. 
 Rend implies great force or violence. [Century Dictionary]

 roundel (n.) 

 c. 1300, "a circle, anything round;" early 14c., "a round slice;" from Old French rondel, rondeaul "round dance; dance lyric; roundel," from rond "round" (see round (n.)). From late 14c. as "an ornamental ball or knob;" also "a short poem on two rhymes."

 rumple (v.) 

 "to wrinkle, make uneven," c. 1600, in rumpled , of uncertain origin, perhaps a variant of rimple "to wrinkle" (c. 1400), from Old English hrympel "wrinkle" (possibly influenced by Middle Dutch rumpelen ), related to Old English hrimpan "to fold, wrinkle" (see ramp (v.)). Related: Rumpled ; rumpling . As a noun from c. 1500, "a wrinkle, a fold."

 Also compare Middle English runkle "become wrinkled" (late 14c.), runkel (n.) "a wrinkle" (early 14c.), probably from Old Norse hrukka .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ruffle 

 early 14c., ruffelen, "to disturb the smoothness or order of," a word of obscure origin. Similar forms are found in Scandinavian (such as Old Norse hrufla "to scratch") and Low German (ruffelen "to wrinkle, curl;" Middle Low German ruffen "to fornicate"), but the exact relation a

 babble 

 mid-13c., babeln "to prattle, utter words indistinctly, talk like a baby," akin to other Western European words for stammering and prattling (Swedish babbla, Old French babillier, etc.) attested from the same era (some of which probably were borrowed from others), all probably ul

 bubble 

 "small vesicle of water or some other fluid inflated with air or gas," early 14c., perhaps from Middle Dutch bobbel (n.) and/or Middle Low German bubbeln (v.), all probably of echoic origin. Figurative use in reference to anything wanting firmness, substance, or permanence is fro

 lubber 

 mid-14c., "big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness," from lobre, earlier lobi "lazy lout," probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber "a plump, lazy fellow"). But OED suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor "swindler, parasite," with 

 rubble 

 "rough, irregular stones broken from larger masses," especially "waste fragments from the demolition of a building, etc.," late 14c., robeyl, from Anglo-French *robel "bits of broken stone," which is of obscure origin, apparently related to rubbish "waste fragments" [OED], but al

 oscillation 

 "kind of vibration in which a body swings backward and forward," 1650s, from French oscillation and directly from Latin oscillationem (nominative oscillatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of oscillare "to swing," from oscillum "a swing," which usually is identified wi

 gurgle 

 early 15c., medical term for "gurgling heard in the abdomen," a native, echoic formation, or ultimately from Latin gurguliare, perhaps via Dutch, German gurgeln. Extended (non-anatomical) use, in reference to water over stones, etc., is first recorded 1713. "This phenomenon of lo

 flow 

 Old English flowan "to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow" (class VII strong verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flowan "to flow" (source also of Middle Dutch vloyen, Dutch vloeien, vloeijen "to flow," Old Norse floa "to d

 wolf 

 Old English wulf "wolf, wolfish person, devil," from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (source also of Old Saxon wulf, Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root *wlkwo- "wolf" (source also of Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k

 fowl 

 Old English fugel "bird, feathered vertebrate," from Proto-Germanic *fuglaz, the general Germanic word for "bird" (source also of Old Saxon fugal, Old Frisian fugel, Old Norse fugl, Middle Dutch voghel, Dutch vogel, German vogel, Gothic fugls "a fowl, a bird"), perhaps a dissimil

 Share ripple 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ripple Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ripple">Etymology of ripple by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ripple. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ripple Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ripple," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ripple. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ripple." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ripple. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ripple." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ripple (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ripple 
 ripeness 
 rip-off 
 riposte 
 ripper 
 ripping 
 ripple 
 rip-rap 
 riproaring 
 rip-saw 
 ripsnorter 
 rip-tide 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix