URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocodile
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:18:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Crocodile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Crocodile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of crocodile 

 crocodile (n.) 

 large amphibious reptile, reptile of the order Crocodilia , 1560s, a respelling (to conform to Latin and French) of Middle English cokedrille , cocodril , kokedrille , etc. (c. 1300), from Old French cocodrille (13c.) and Medieval Latin cocodrillus , from classical Latin crocodilus , from Greek krokodilos , a word of unknown origin. According to Herodotus, it was an Ionic name for a kind of lizard, transferred to the crocodile. Beekes writes that "Frisk's etymology as a compound from [ krokē ] 'gravel' and [ drilos ] 'worm' (with dissimilation) should be forgotten."

 The name later was extended to related species in India, the Americas, etc. The crocodile tears story, figurative of false or simulated grief, was in English from at least c. 1400. Related: Crocodilian; crocodiline .

 The word also figures in logic, as the name of a sophism of counter-questioning.

 Thus, in the old example, a crocodile has stolen a child, and promises to restore it to the father if the latter answers correctly his question, Am I going to restore child? If the father says Yes, the crocodile eats the child and tells the father he is wrong. If the father says No, the reply is that in that case the child cannot be restored, for to do so would violate the agreement, since the father's answer would then be incorrect. [Century Dictionary]
 also from 1560s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 caiman 

 type of tropical American alligator, also cayman, 1570s, from Portuguese or Spanish caiman, from Carib acayouman "crocodile...

 leviathan 

 It is described in Job xli. apparently as a crocodile; in Isa. xxvii 1 it is called a piercing and a crooked serpent; and...

 naturalist 

 [The naturalist on expedition, pursued by a Nile crocodile, has climbed a palm tree for safety.]...

 flesh 

 Old English flæsc "flesh, meat, muscular parts of animal bodies; body (as opposed to soul)," also "living creatures," also "near kindred" (a sense now obsolete except in phrase flesh and blood), from Proto-Germanic *flaiska-/*fleiski- (source also of Old Frisian flesk, Middle Low

 shift 

 Middle English shiften, from Old English sciftan, scyftan "arrange, place, put in order" (a sense now obsolete), also "divide, separate, partition; distribute, allot, share" (now obsolete or provincial), from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (source also of Old Norse skipta "to divide, ch

 obvious 

 1580s, "frequently met with" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin obvius "that is in the way, presenting itself readily, open, exposed, commonplace," from obviam (adv.) "in the way," from ob "in front of, against" (see ob-) + viam, accusative of via "way" (from PIE root *wegh- "to 

 talent 

 late 13c., "inclination, disposition, will, desire;" c. 1300, "feeling, emotion, passion," senses now obsolete, from Old French talent (12c.), from Medieval Latin talenta, plural of talentum "inclination, leaning, will, desire" (11c.), in classical Latin "balance, weight; sum of 

 cat 

 Old English catt (c. 700) "domestic cat," from West Germanic (c. 400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (source also of Old Frisian katte, Old Norse köttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late Latin cattus. The near-universal European word now, it appeared in

 coincidence 

 c. 1600, "exact correspondence in substance or nature," from French coincidence, from coincider, from Medieval Latin coincidere, literally "to fall upon together," from assimilated form of  Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + incidere "to fall upon" (from in- "upon" + co

 Druid 

 "one of the order of priests among the ancient Celts of Gaul, Britain, and Ireland," 1560s, from French druide (16c.), from Latin druis, fem. druias (plural druidae), from Gaulish Druides, from Celtic compound *dru-wid- "strong seer," from Old Celtic *derwos "true" (from PIE root

 Share crocodile 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocodile Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocodile">Etymology of crocodile by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of crocodile. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocodile Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of crocodile," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocodile. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of crocodile." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocodile. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of crocodile." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocodile (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near crocodile 
 Croatia 
 crochet 
 crock 
 crockery 
 crocket 
 crocodile 
 crocus 
 Croesus 
 croft 
 Crohn's disease 
 croissant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix