URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gun
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:03:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gun - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gun - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gun 

 gun (n.) 

 mid-14c., gunne "an engine of war that throws rocks, arrows or other missiles from a tube by the force of explosive powder or other substance," apparently a shortening of woman's name Gunilda , found in Middle English gonnilde "cannon" and in an Anglo-Latin reference to a specific gun from a 1330 munitions inventory of Windsor Castle ( "... una magna balista de cornu quae Domina Gunilda ..." ). Also compare gonnilde gnoste "spark or flame used to fire a cannon" (early 14c.).

 The woman's name is from Old Norse Gunnhildr , a compound of gunnr and hildr , both meaning "war, battle." First element from PIE *gwhen- "to strike, kill" (see bane ); for second, see Hilda .

 The identification of women with powerful weapons is common historically ( Big Bertha , Brown Bess , Mons Meg , etc.).

 Or perhaps gun is directly from Old Norse gunnr "battle." The word also was perhaps influenced by or confirmed by (or possibly from) Old French engon , dialectal variant of engin "engine."

 The meaning grew with technology, from cannons to firearms as they developed 15c.; popularly applied to pistols and revolvers from 1744. In modern military use the word is restricted to cannons (which must be mounted), especially long ones used for high velocity and long trajectory. Hence great guns (1884 as an exclamation) distinguished from small guns (such as muskets) from c. 1400.

 The meaning "thief, rascal" is from 1858. For son of a gun , see son . To jump the gun (1912, American English) is a figurative use from track and field.

 [G]un covers firearms from the heaviest naval or siege guns (but in technical use excluding mortars and howitzers) to the soldier's rifle or the sportsman's shotgun, and in current U.S. use even the gangster's revolver. In the other European languages there is no such comprehensive word, but different terms for the small or hand gun of the soldier or sportsman (even these, sometimes differentiated) and the heavy naval guns or artillery pieces .... [Buck, 1949]
 also from mid-14c. 

 gun (v.) 

 "shoot with a gun," 1620s, from gun (n.). Related: Gunned ; gunning . The sense of "accelerate an engine" is from 1930, from earlier phrase give (her) the gun (1917), which appears to have originated in pilots' jargon in World War I; perhaps from the old military expression give a gun "order a gun to be fired" (c. 1600).
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to gun 

 bane (n.) 

 Middle English bane , from Old English bana "killer, slayer, murderer, a worker of death" (human, animal, or object), also "the devil," from Proto-Germanic *banon , cognate with *banja- "wound" (source also of Old Frisian bona "murderer," Old Norse bani "death; that which causes death," Old High German bana "death, destruction," Old English benn "wound," Gothic banja "stroke, wound"), a word of no certain IE etymology. The sense of "that which causes ruin or woe" is attested from 1570s. Related: Baneful .

 gunning (n.) 

 1560s, "science of firing guns;" 1620s, "shooting," verbal noun from gun (v.).

 Hilda 
 son 
 air-gun 
 blow-gun 
 gun moll 
 gunboat 
 gunfight 
 gunman 
 gun-metal 
 gunner 
 gunnery 
 gunplay 
 gunpowder 
 guns 
 gunshot 
 gun-shy 
 gun-slinger 
 gunsmith 
 See All Related Words (27) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 son 

 "male child in relation to either or both parents," Old English sunu "son, male child," also broadly "male descendant;" also "second person of the Trinity," from Proto-Germanic *sunus (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian sunu, Old Norse sonr, Danish søn, Swedish son, Middle 

 gas 

 1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos "empty space" (see chaos). The sound of Dutch "g" is roughly equivalent to that of Greek "kh." First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644), probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of "pro

 artillery 

 late 14c., "warlike munitions," especially ballistic engines, from Anglo-French artillerie, Old French artillerie (14c.), from artillier "to provide with engines of war" (13c.), which probably is from Medieval Latin articulum "art, skill," a diminutive of Latin ars (genitive arti

 Mauser 

 the whole of the German army—with the exception of the Bavarians, who have a most excellent weapon already in the Werder gun—with...a gun of a new pattern, made by a Würtemberg gunsmith of the name of Mauser, who lives at Oberndorf....This new pattern is called the Mauser gun or rifle....This Mauser gun is said to be in every way vastly superior to the chassepot. [G.L.M....

 Hotchkiss 

 1878, type of machine gun named for its inventor, U.S. armaments-maker Benjamin B. Hotchkiss (1826-1885)....and prominent manufacturer of staplers (incorporated 1895, name from 1897), which apparently was run by relatives of the gun...

 bore 

 The meaning "cylindrical hole through a tube, gun, etc." is from 1570s; that of "interior diameter of a tube, caliber of...a gun" (whether bored or not) is from 1580s....

 ray 

 [OED] Science fiction's ray-gun is recorded by 1931 (in Amazing Stories; electric ray gun as an imaginary weapon is from...1924; death-ray gun from 1926 as a prop in a vaudeville act), but the Martians had a Heat-Ray weapon in "War of the Worlds...

 torpedo 

 1520s, "electric ray" (flat fish that produces an electric charge to stun prey or for defense), from Latin torpedo "electric ray," originally "numbness, sluggishness" (the fish so called from the effect of being jolted by the ray's electric discharges), from torpere "be numb" (fr

 ram 

 Old English ramm "male sheep," also "battering ram, instrument for crushing or driving by impact," and the zodiac sign; earlier rom "male sheep," a West Germanic word (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German ram), of unknown origin. Perhaps [Klein] conne

 mar 

 Middle English merren "to deface, disfigure; impair in form or substance" (early 13c.), from Old English merran (Anglian), mierran (West Saxon) "to waste, spoil," from Proto-Germanic *marzjan (source also of Old Frisian meria, Old High German marren "to hinder, obstruct," Gothic 

 Share gun 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gun Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gun">Etymology of gun by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gun. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gun Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gun," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gun. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gun." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gun. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gun." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gun (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gun 
 gum-drop 
 gummy 
 gump 
 gumption 
 gumshoe 
 gun 
 gun moll 
 gunboat 
 gunfight 
 gung ho 
 gunk 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close