URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pretzel
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:46:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pretzel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pretzel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pretzel 

 pretzel (n.) 

 1836, "small, crisp biscuit in the form of a knot, salted on the outside," from German Prezel , also Brezel , from Middle High German brezel , prezel , from Old High German brezitella , brecedela , from Medieval Latin *brachitella , presumably a kind of biscuit baked in the shape of folded arms (source also of Italian bracciatella , Old Provençal brassadel ), diminutive of Latin bracchiatus "with branches, with arms," from bracchium "an arm, a forearm," from Greek brakhion "an arm" (see brachio- ).

 The figurative sense of "a thing much twisted" is by 1945. Soft pretzels are attested by 1893 in the German regions of Pennsylvania, but did not become widely popular until mid-20c.
 also from 1836 

 Entries linking to pretzel 

 brachio- 

 before a vowel, brachi- , word-forming element meaning "arm, of the upper arm, pertaining to the upper arm and," from Latinized form of Greek brakhion "arm," perhaps originally "upper arm," literally "shorter," from brakhys "short" (from PIE root *mregh-u- "short"), in contrast to the longer forearm.

 *mregh-u- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "short."

 It might form all or part of: abbreviate ; abbreviation ; abridge ; amphibrach ; brace ; bracelet ; brachio- ; brachiopod ; brachiosaurus ; brachy- ; brassiere ; breviary ; brevity ; brief ; brumal ; brume ; embrace ; merry ; mirth ; pretzel ; vambrace .

 It might also be the source of: Greek brakhys "short;" Latin brevis "short, low, little, shallow;" Old Church Slavonic bruzeja "shallow places, shoals;" Gothic gamaurgjan "to shorten."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 burgeon 

 early 14c., "grow, sprout, blossom," from Anglo-French burjuner, Old French borjoner "to bud, sprout," from borjon "a bud, shoot, pimple" (Modern French bourgeon), a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *burrionem (nominative *burrio), from Late Latin burra "flock 

 rogue 

 1560s, "idle vagrant, sturdy beggar, one of the vagabond class," a word of shadowy origin, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an agent noun in Engl

 crucible 

 early 15c., crusible, "vessel or melting pot for chemical purposes, so tempered as to endure extreme heat," from Medieval Latin crucibulum "melting pot for metals," originally "night lamp." First element might be Middle High German kruse "earthen pot." Or perhaps it is from Latin

 indict 

 formerly also endict, c. 1300, enditen, inditen, "bring formal charges against (someone); accuse of a crime," from Anglo-French enditer "accuse, indict, find chargeable with a criminal offense" (late 13c.), Old French enditier, enditer "to dictate, write, compose; (legally) indic

 denizen 

 early 15c., "a citizen, a dweller, an inhabitant," especially "legally established inhabitant of a city or borough, a citizen as distinguished from a non-resident native or a foreigner," from Anglo-French deinzein, denzein, (Old French deinzein) "one within" (the privileges of a 

 expert 

 late 14c., "having had experience; skillful," from Old French expert, espert "experienced, practiced, skilled" and directly from Latin expertus (contracted from *experitus), "tried, proved, known by experience," past participle of experiri "to try, test," from ex "out of" (see ex

 shark 

 "large, voracious fish," by 1560s, perhaps mid-15c., if an isolated instance in a diary quoted in Middle English Compendium is the same word, of uncertain origin. The meaning "dishonest person who preys on others," though attested from 1599 (sharker "artful swindler" in this sens

 native 

 late 14c., natif, "natural, inborn, hereditary, connected with something in a natural way," from Old French natif "native, born in; raw, unspoiled" (14c.) and directly from Latin nativus "innate, produced by birth," from natus, past participle of nasci (Old Latin gnasci) "be born

 democracy 

 "government by the people, system of government in which the sovereign power is vested in the people as a whole exercising power directly or by elected officials; a state so governed," 1570s, from French démocratie (14c.), from Medieval Latin democratia (13c.), from Greek dēmokra

 rosary 

 mid-15c., rosarie, "rose garden, ground set apart for the cultivation of roses," a sense now obsolete, from Latin rosarium "rose garden," in Medieval Latin also "garland; string of beads; series of prayers," from noun use of neuter of rosarius "of roses," from rosa "rose" (see ro

 Share pretzel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pretzel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pretzel">Etymology of pretzel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pretzel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pretzel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pretzel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pretzel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pretzel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pretzel. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pretzel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pretzel (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pretzel 
 prettily 
 prettiness 
 pretty 
 pretty-boy 
 prettyish 
 pretzel 
 prevail 
 prevailing 
 prevalence 
 prevalent 
 prevaricate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix