URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sterile
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:12:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sterile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sterile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sterile 

 sterile (adj.) 

 mid-15c., of a tree, "unfruitful, barren," from Old French stérile "not producing fruit" and directly from Latin sterilis "barren, unproductive, unfruitful; unrequited; unprofitable."

 This is held to be from PIE *ster- "lacking, sterile," source also of Sanskrit starih "a barren cow," Greek steira "sterile, infertile" (of a cow, goat, woman), Armenian sterj "infertile," and it is perhaps ultimately from the root *ster- (1) "stiff."

 It is attested by 1570s in reference to soil, "unproductive of vegetation." In reference to persons (chiefly female), by 1530s. The figurative sense of "leading to no result, profitless" is by 1650s. Of writing, etc., "lacking richness of thought or expression," 1640s.

 The bacteriological sense of "sterilized, free from living germs" is recorded by 1877.
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to sterile 

 sterility (n.) 

 early 15c., sterilite , "infertility, barrenness, incapacity to produce children," from Old French sterilite , from Latin sterilitatem (nominative sterilitas ) "unfruitfulness, barrenness," from sterilis "barren, unproductive, unfruitful" (see sterile ).

 Of land, the earth, "unproductiveness," early 15c. By 1660s in the figurative sense of "deficiency of ideas or expression."

 sterilize (v.) 

 1690s, in reference to soil, "destroy the fertility of, render unproductive, cause to be unfruitful," from French stériliser or else from sterile + -ize .

 In reference to living things by 1828. The bacteriological meaning "render free of living micro-organisms" is by 1878. Related: Sterilized ; sterilizing .

 *ster- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "stiff."

 It might form all or part of: cholesterol ; redstart ; starch ; stare ; stark ; stark-naked ; start ; startle ; starve ; stere ; stereo- ; stern (adj.); stork ; strut ; torpedo ; torpid ; torpor .

 It might also be the source of: Greek stereos "solid," sterizein "to support," sterphnios "stiff, rigid," sterphos "hide, skin;" Sanskrit sthirah "hard, firm," Persian suturg "strong;" Lithuanian storas "thick," strėgti "to become frozen;" Old Church Slavonic trupeti , Lithuanian tirpstu, tirpti "to become rigid;" Old Church Slavonic strublu "strong, hard," staru "old" (hence Russian stary "old"); Old English starian "to stare," stearc "stiff, strong, rigid," steorfan "to die," literally "become stiff," styrne "severe, strict."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fertile 

 mid-15c., fertil, "bearing or producing abundantly," from Old French fertil (15c.) and directly from Latin fertilis "bearing in abundance, fruitful, productive," from ferre "to bear" (from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear children"). Fertile Crescent (1914) was coine

 barren 

 c. 1200, "incapable of producing its kind" (of female animals, plants), from Old French baraigne, baraing "sterile, barren...

 frustration 

 "act of frustrating, disappointment, defeat," 1550s, from Latin frustrationem (nominative frustratio) "a deception, a disappointment," noun of action from past-participle stem of frustrari "to deceive, disappoint, make vain," from frustra (adv.) "in vain, in error," which is rela

 baffle 

 1540s, "to disgrace," of uncertain origin. Perhaps a Scottish respelling of bauchle "to disgrace publicly" (especially a perjured knight), which is probably related to French bafouer "to abuse, hoodwink" (16c.), possibly from baf, a natural sound of disgust, like bah (compare Ger

 giddy-up 

 command to a horse to go, 1909, probably an extended form of earlier giddap (1867), itself probably from get up. Compare gee. The terms used to start horses in harness and to urge them to a better appreciation of the value of time comprise vulgar corruptions of ordinary speech a

 curtail 

 late 15c., "restrict or limit," a word based on Old French courtault "made short," from court "short" (Old French cort, from Latin curtus, from PIE root *sker- (1) "to cut") + -ault, a pejorative suffix of Germanic origin. From 1550s as "cut short, cut off the end of." General se

 Whig 

 British political party, 1657, in part perhaps a disparaging use of whigg "a country bumpkin" (1640s); but mainly a shortened form of Whiggamore (1649) "one of the adherents of the Presbyterian cause in western Scotland who marched on Edinburgh in 1648 to oppose Charles I." Perha

 pirate 

 c. 1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), "a sea-robber, sea-plunderer, one who without authority and by violence seizes or interferes with the ship or property of another on the sea," especially one who is habitually engaged in such robbery or sails the seas for the robbery and plunder o

 comprehensive 

 "containing much in comparatively small limits," 1610s, from French comprehénsif, from Late Latin comprehensivus, from comprehens-, past participle stem of Latin comprehendere "to take together, to unite; include; to comprehend, perceive" (to seize or take in the mind), from com 

 caterpillar 

 "larva of a butterfly or moth," mid-15c., catyrpel, probably altered (by association with Middle English piller "plunderer;" see pillage (n.)) from Old North French caterpilose "caterpillar" (Old French chatepelose), literally "shaggy cat" (probably in reference to the "wooly-bea

 Share sterile 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sterile Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sterile">Etymology of sterile by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sterile. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sterile Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sterile," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sterile. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sterile." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sterile. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sterile." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sterile (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sterile 
 stereoscope 
 stereoscopic 
 stereotype 
 stereotypical 
 stereotyping 
 sterile 
 sterilise 
 sterility 
 sterilization 
 sterilize 
 sterling 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix