URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/apt
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T22:54:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Apt - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Apt - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of apt 

 apt (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "inclined, disposed;" late 14c., "suited, fitted, adapted, possessing the necessary qualities for the purpose," from Old French ate "fitting, suitable, appropriate" (13c., Modern French apte ), or directly from Latin aptus "fit, suited, proper, appropriate," adjectival use of past participle of *apere "to attach, join, tie to." This is reconstructed to be from PIE root *ap- (1) "to grasp, take, reach" (source also of Sanskrit apnoti "he reaches," Latin apisci "to reach after, attain," Hittite epmi "I seize"). The elliptical sense of "becoming, appropriate" is from 1560s.
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to apt 

 adapt (v.) 

 early 15c. (implied in adapted ) "to fit (something, for some purpose)," from Old French adapter (14c.), from Latin adaptare "adjust, fit to," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + aptare "to join," from aptus "fitted" (see apt ). Intransitive meaning "to undergo modification so as to fit new circumstances" is from 1956. Related: Adapting .

 adaptation (n.) 

 c. 1600, "action of adapting (something to something else)," from French adaptation , from Late Latin adaptationem (nominative adaptatio ), noun of action from past-participle stem of adaptare "to adjust," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + aptare "to join," from aptus "fitted" (see apt ).

 The meaning "condition of being adapted, state of being fitted to circumstances or relations" is from 1670s. The sense of "modification of a thing to suit new conditions" is from 1790. The biological sense of "variations in a living thing to suit changed conditions" is by 1859, in Darwin's writings.

 adept 
 apex 
 aptitude 
 aptly 
 aptness 
 copulate 
 inapt 
 inept 
 lariat 
 unapt 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 adept 

 1690s, "completely skilled, well-versed," from Latin adeptus "having reached or attained," past participle of adipisci "to come up with, arrive at," figuratively "to attain to, acquire," from ad "to" (see ad-) + apisci "to grasp, attain" (related to aptus "fitted," from PIE root 

 apex 

 "the tip, point, or summit" of anything, c. 1600, from Latin apex "summit, peak, tip, top, extreme end;" which is plausibly related to apere "to fasten, fix," hence "the tip of anything" (one of the meanings of apex in Latin was "small rod at the top of the flamen's cap"), and th

 given 

 late 14c., "allotted, predestined," past-participle adjective from give (v.). From 1560s as "admitted, supposed, allowed as a supposition." From late 14c. as "disposed, addicted." Middle English also had a noun give, yeve "that which is given or offered freely." The modern noun s

 habiliment 

 abiller "prepare or fit out," probably from abile, habile "fit, suitable," from Latin habilem, habilis "easily handled, apt...

 contagious 

 Figuratively applied to anything apt to spread from one to another (rumor, etc.) from 1650s....

 pseudo-science 

 Pseudognosy would be better etymology, but the unlearned might be apt to association with it the idea of a dog's nose, and...

 deft 

 "apt or dexterous, subtly clever or skillful," mid-15c., from Old English gedæfte, which meant "mild, gentle, simple, meek...

 liable 

 mid-15c., "bound or obliged by law," from Old French lier, liier "to bind, tie up, fasten, tether; bind by obligation" (12c.), from Latin ligare "to bind, to tie" (from PIE root *leig- "to tie, bind"). With -able. Perhaps it is from an Anglo-French *liable, or from an unattested 

 clever 

 1580s, "handy, dexterous, having special manual ability," apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver "expert at seizing," perhaps from East Frisian klüfer "skillful," or Norwegian dialectic klover "ready, skillful," and perhaps influenced by Old English clifer "claw, hand" (ea

 bimbo 

 a word of vague etymology, perhaps a convergence of two or more words, given wide application in late 19c. and settling into its main modern meaning "floozie" from early 1920s, with a revival in 1980s. Bimbo first appears as the name of an alcoholic punch, mentioned in newspapers

 Share apt 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/apt Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/apt">Etymology of apt by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of apt. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/apt Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of apt," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/apt. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of apt." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/apt. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of apt." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/apt (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near apt 
 April fool 
 apron 
 apropos 
 apse 
 apsis 
 apt 
 apterous 
 apteryx 
 aptitude 
 aptly 
 aptness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix