URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mark
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:24:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mark - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mark - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mark 

 mark (n.1) 

 "trace, impression," Old English mearc (West Saxon), merc (Mercian) "boundary, limit; sign, landmark," from Proto-Germanic *markō (source also of Old Norse merki "boundary, sign," mörk "forest," which often marked a frontier; Old Frisian merke , Gothic marka "boundary, frontier," Dutch merk "mark, brand," German Mark "boundary, boundary land"), from PIE root *merg- "boundary, border." Influenced by, and partly from, Scandinavian cognates. The Germanic word was borrowed widely and early in Romanic (compare marque ; march (n.2), marquis ).

 The primary sense "boundary" had evolved by Old English through "pillar, post, etc. as a sign of a boundary," through "a sign in general," then to "impression or trace forming a sign." Meaning "any visible trace or impression" is recorded by c. 1200. Meaning "a cross or other character made by an illiterate person as a signature" is from late Old English. Sense of "line drawn to indicate the starting point of a race" (as in on your marks ... , which is by 1890) is attested by 1887.

 The Middle English sense of "target" (c. 1200) is the notion in marksman and slang sense "victim of a swindle" (1883). The notion of "sign, token" is behind the meaning "a characteristic property, a distinctive feature" (1520s), also that of "numerical award given by a teacher" (by 1829). To make (one's) mark "attain distinction" is by 1847.

 In medieval England and in Germany, "a tract of land held in common by a community," hence Mark of Brandenburg , etc.

 mark (n.2) 

 "unit of money or weight," late Old English marc , a unit of weight (chiefly for gold or silver) equal to about eight ounces, probably from Old Norse mörk "unit of weight," cognate with German Mark and probably ultimately a derivative of mark (n.1), perhaps in a sense of "imprinted weight or coin." It was a unit of account in England into 18c., perhaps originally introduced by the Danes, but never the name of a particular coin.

 The word is found in all the Germanic and Romanic languages (compare Old Frisian merk , Dutch mark , Medieval Latin marca , French marc (11c.), Spanish and Italian marco ); in English it was used from 18c. in reference to various continental coinages, especially the silver money of Germany first issued 1875.

 Mark 

 masc. proper name, variant of Marcus (q.v.). Among the top 10 names given to boy babies born in the U.S. between 1955 and 1970.

 Mark Twain is the pseudonym of American writer and humorist Samuel Langhorne Clemens (1835-1910), who had been a riverboat pilot; he took his pen name from the cry mark twain , the call indicating a depth of two fathoms, from mark (n.1) in a specialized sense of "measured notification (a piece of knotted cloth, etc.) on a lead-line indicating fathoms of depth" (1769) + twain .

 mark (v.) 

 "to put a mark on," Old English mearcian (West Saxon), merciga (Anglian) "to trace out boundaries;" in late Old English "make a mark or marks on," from Proto-Germanic *markojan (source also of Old Norse merkja , Old Saxon markon "appoint, observe, remark," Old Frisian merkia , Old High German marchon "to limit, plan out," German merken "to mark, note," Middle Dutch and Dutch merken "to set a mark on"), from the root of mark (n.1).

 Influenced by the Scandinavian cognates. Meaning "to have a mark" is from c. 1400; that of "to notice, observe" is late 14c. Figurative sense of "designate as if by placing a mark on," hence "to destine," is from late Old English. Meaning "be a noteworthy feature of" is by 1660s. To mark time (1833) is from military drill, originally "move the feet as if marching but remain in place."

 The verbs in Romanic are from the nouns, which are early borrowings from Germanic: Old French merchier "to mark, note, stamp, brand," French marquer "to mark," Spanish marcar , Italian marcare .

 Entries linking to mark 

 march (n.2) 

 "a frontier, boundary of a country; border district," early 13c., from Old French marche "boundary, frontier," from Frankish *marka or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon marka , Old English mearc ; Old High German marchon "to mark out, delimit," German Mark "boundary"), from Proto-Germanic *markō ; see mark (n.1)). Now obsolete. Related: Marches .

 In early use often in reference to the borderlands beside Wales, sometimes rendering Old English Mercia ; later especially of the English border with Scotland. There was a verb marchen in Middle English (c. 1300), "to have a common boundary," from Old French marchier "border upon, lie alongside," which survived in dialect.

 This is the old Germanic word for "border, boundary," but as it came to mean "borderland" in many languages, other words were shifted or borrowed to indicate the original sense (compare border (n.), bound (n.)"border, boundary"). Modern German Grenze is from Middle High German grenize (13c., replacing Old High German marcha ), a loan-word from Slavic (compare Polish and Russian granica ). Dutch grens , Danish groense , Swedish gräns are from German.

 Marcus 

 masc. proper name, from Latin Marcus , Roman praenomen, traditionally said to be related to Mars , Roman god of war.

 marksman 
 marque 
 marquis 
 twain 
 benchmark 
 birth-mark 
 bookmark 
 chalk-mark 
 demarcation 
 demark 
 Denmark 
 earmark 
 hallmark 
 hoof-mark 
 landmark 
 margrave 
 mark-down 
 marked 
 See All Related Words (34) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 marque 

 "action or right of seizure of persons or of property of subjects of a foreign ruler or state by way of reprisal for injuries committed by such persons," early 15c., in letters of marque "official permission to capture enemy merchant ships," from Anglo-French mark (mid-14c.), via

 marquis 

 also marquess, c. 1300, marchis, title of nobility, from Old French marchis, marcheis, marquis, etymologically "a prefect of the marches, ruler of a border area," from Old French marche "frontier," from Medieval Latin marca "frontier, frontier territory" (see march (n.1)). Origin

 twain 

 Old English twegen "two" (masc. nominative and accusative), from Proto-Germanic *twa- "two," from PIE root *dwo- "two." It corresponds to Old Frisian twene, Dutch twee, Old High German zwene, Danish tvende. The word outlasted the breakdown of gender in Middle English and survived

 stigma 

 1590s (earlier stigme, c. 1400), "mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron," from Latin stigma (plural stigmata), from...Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) "mark of a pointed instrument, puncture, tattoo-mark, brand," which is related to stizein..."to mark, tattoo" (from PIE root *steig- "to stick; pointed" (see stick (v.))....The figurative meaning "mark of disgrace or infamy which attaches to a person on account of evil conduct" is in English is...

 sign 

 signen, "to make the sign of the cross," from Old English segnian and Old French signier "to make a sign (to someone); to mark...," both of them from Latin signare "to set a mark upon, mark out, designate; mark with a stamp; distinguish, adorn;" figuratively..."to point out, signify, indicate," from signum "identifying mark, sign" (see sign (n.))....The sense of "to mark, stamp" is attested from mid-14c.; that of "affix one's name or signature to" is from late 15c....

 note 

 c. 1200, noten, "observe, take mental note of, mark carefully," from Old French noter "indicate, designate; take note of,...write down," from Latin notare "to mark, note, make a note," from nota "mark, sign, note, character, letter" (see note (...

 apostrophe 

 "mark indicating an omitted letter," 1580s, from French apostrophe, from Late Latin apostrophus, from Greek apostrophos (...prosoidia) "(the accent of) turning away," thus, a mark showing where a letter has been omitted, from apostrephein "avert...In English, the mark often represents loss of -e- in -es, possessive ending....

 gum 

 c. 1300, "resin from dried sap of plants," from Old French gome "(medicinal) gum, resin," from Late Latin gumma, from Latin gummi, from Greek kommi "gum," from Egyptian kemai. As the name of a hardened, sweetened gelatine mixture as a candy, 1827. As a shortened form of chewing g

 mug 

 "small, cylindrical drinking vessel, often with a handle," 1560s, "bowl, pot, jug," a word of unknown origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish mugg "earthen cup, jug," Norwegian mugge "pitcher, open can for warm drinks"), or Low German mokke, mukke "mug," also of unknow

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 Share mark 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mark Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mark">Etymology of mark by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mark. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mark Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mark," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mark. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mark." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mark. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mark." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mark (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mark 
 marish 
 marital 
 maritime 
 Marius 
 marjoram 
 mark 
 mark-down 
 marked 
 markedly 
 marker 
 market 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix