URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/emerald
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Emerald - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Emerald - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of emerald 

 emerald (n.) 

 "bright green precious stone," c. 1300, emeraude , from Old French esmeraude (12c.), from Medieval Latin esmaraldus , from Latin smaragdus , from Greek smaragdos "green gem" (emerald or malachite), from Semitic baraq "shine" (compare Hebrew bareqeth "emerald," Arabic barq "lightning").

 Sanskrit maragata "emerald" is from the same source, as is Persian zumurrud , whence Turkish zümrüd , source of Russian izumrud "emerald." For the unetymological e- , see e- .

 In early examples the word, like most other names of precious stones, is of vague meaning; the mediæval references to the stone are often based upon the descriptions given by classical writers of the 
 smaragdus , the identity of which with our emerald is doubtful. [OED]

 Emerald Isle for "Ireland" is from 1795.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to emerald 

 Esmerelda 

 fem. proper name, from Spanish, literally " emerald ."

 e- 

 the later Romans evidently found words beginning in sc- , sp- , st- difficult or unpleasant to pronounce; in Late Latin forms begin to emerge in i- (such as ispatium , ispiritu ), and from 5c. this shifted to e- . The development was carried into the Romanic languages, especially Old French, and the French words were modified further after 15c. by natural loss of -s- (the suppression being marked by an acute accent on the e- ), while in other cases the word was formally corrected back to the Latin spelling (for example spécial ). Hence French état for Old French estat for Latin status , etc. It also affected Romanic borrowings from Germanic (such as espy , eschew ).

 A different e- is a reduced form of Latin ex- before consonants (see ex- ), and the e- in enough is an unfelt survival of an Old English alternative form of ge- .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sapphire 

 Some linguists propose an origin in Sanskrit sanipriya, a dark precious stone (perhaps sapphire or emerald), literally "sacred...

 beryl 

 hard, lustrous mineral occurring in hexagonal prisms, c. 1300, from Old French beryl (12c., Modern French béryl), from Latin beryllus, from Greek bēryllos, which is perhaps from Prakrit veruliya, from Sanskrit vaidurya-, of Dravidian origin, which might be from the city of Velur 

 gem 

 "a precious stone" (especially when cut or polished), c. 1300, probably from Old French gemme (12c.), from Latin gemma "precious stone, jewel," originally "bud," from Proto-Italic *gebma- "bud, sprout," from PIE *geb-m- "sprout, bud" (source also of Lithuanian žembėti "to germina

 genre 

 1770, "particular style of art," a French word in English (nativized from c. 1840), from French genre "kind, sort, style" (see gender (n.)). Used especially in French for "independent style." In painting, as an adjective, "depicting scenes of ordinary life" (a domestic interior o

 green 

 Old English grene, Northumbrian groene "green, of the color of living plants," in reference to plants, "growing, living, vigorous," also figurative, of a plant, "freshly cut," of wood, "unseasoned" earlier groeni, from Proto-Germanic *grōni- (source also of Old Saxon grani, Old F

 jewel 

 late 13c., "article of value used for adornment," from Anglo-French juel, Old French jouel "ornament; present; gem, jewel" (12c.), which is perhaps [Watkins] from Medieval Latin jocale, from Latin jocus "pastime, sport," in Vulgar Latin "that which causes joy" (see joke (n.)). An

 rest 

 [sleep, repose, slumber] Old English ræste, reste "rest; a bed or couch; intermission of labor; mental peace, state of quiet or repose," from Proto-Germanic *rasto- (source also of Old Saxon resta "resting place, burial-place," Dutch rust, Old High German rasta, German Rast "rest

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 theme 

 early 14c., "subject or topic on which a person writes or speaks," from Old French tesme (13c., with silent -s- "indicating vowel length" [OED], Modern French thème) and directly from Latin thema "a subject, thesis," from Greek thema "a proposition, subject, deposit," literally "

 advocate 

 mid-14c., "one whose profession is to plead cases in a court of justice," a technical term from Roman law, from Old French avocat "barrister, advocate, spokesman," from Latin advocatus "one called to aid (another); a pleader (on one's behalf), advocate," noun use of past particip

 Share emerald 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/emerald Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/emerald">Etymology of emerald by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of emerald. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/emerald Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of emerald," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/emerald. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of emerald." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/emerald. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of emerald." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/emerald (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near emerald 
 embryonic 
 emcee 
 -eme 
 emend 
 emendation 
 emerald 
 emerge 
 emergence 
 emergency 
 emergent 
 emeritus 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix