URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/don
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:00:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Don - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Don - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of don 

 don (n.) 

 title of respect, 1520s, from Spanish or Portuguese Don , a title of respect prefixed to a man's Christian name, from Latin dominus "lord, master, owner" (from domus "house," from PIE root *dem- "house, household").

  It took on a general sense of "person of high importance or leading position," hence the English university sense "fellow of a college, any college authority" (c. 1660), originally student slang. The underworld sense is by 1952, from Italian don . The fem. form is Portuguese Dona , Spanish Doña , Italian Donna .
 also from 1520s 

 don (v.) 

 "to put on (articles of clothing)," mid-14c. contraction of do on (compare doff ). "After 1650 retained in popular use only in north. dialect; as a literary archaism it has become very frequent in 19th c." [OED]. Related: Donned ; donning .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to don 

 doff (v.) 

 "put or take off" an article of clothing, especially a hat or cap, late 14c., doffen , a contraction of do off , preserving the original sense of do as "put." At the time of Johnson's Dictionary [1755] the word was "obsolete, and rarely used except by rustics," and also in literature as a conscious archaism, but it was saved from extinction (along with don (v.)) by Sir Walter Scott. However, dout and dup did not survive. Related: Doffed ; doffing .

 donna (n.) 

 "a lady," 1660s, from the common title of respect for Italian and Portuguese ladies, equivalent to Spanish doña , prefixed to the Christian name. The fem. equivalent of don (n.).

 Donna 
 donnish 
 *dem- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wear 

 Old English werian "to clothe, put on, cover up," from Proto-Germanic *wasīn- (source also of Old Norse verja, Old High German werian, Gothic gawasjan "to clothe"), from PIE *wos-eyo-, suffixed form of *wes- (2) "to clothe," extended form of root *eu- "to dress." The Germanic for

 assume 

 early 15c., "to arrogate, take upon oneself," from Latin assumere, adsumere "to take up, take to oneself, take besides, obtain in addition," from ad "to, toward, up to" (see ad-) + sumere "to take," from sub "under" (see sub-) + emere "to take" (from PIE root *em- "to take, distr

 father 

 Middle English fader, from Old English fæder "he who begets a child, nearest male ancestor;" also "any lineal male ancestor; the Supreme Being," and by late Old English, "one who exercises parental care over another," from Proto-Germanic *fader (source also of Old Saxon fadar, Ol

 quixotic 

 extravagantly chivalrous, absurdly romantic," abstractly, "striving for an unattainable or impractical ideal," 1791, from Don...Quixote, the romantic, impractical hero of Cervantes' satirical novel "Don Quixote de la Mancha" (1605; in English translation...Don Quixote as the type of anyone attempting the impossible or holding visionary but impossible ideals is in English from...  [Byron, "Don Juan"]...

 have-not 

 Earliest in translation of "Don Quixote: 'There are but two families in the world, as my grandmother used to say; "the Have's...and the Have-not's," and she stuck to the former; and now-a-days, master Don Quixote, people are more inclined to feel the...["Don Quixote de la Mancha," transl. Charles Jarvis, London, 1742]...

 derring-do 

 "daring deeds, daring action," 1570s, originally (late 14c.) dorrying don, literally "daring (to) do," from durring "daring...," present participle of Middle English durren "to dare" (see dare (v.)) + don, infinitive of do (v.)....

 Byronic 

 bowers, Where all was peace, and innocence, and bliss   (I wonder how they got through the twelve hours), Don...[from "Don Juan"] It was on the Continent that Byron was influential, and it is not in England that his spiritual progeny...

 Russia 

 nation in Eastern Europe with a large possession in north Asia, 1530s, from Medieval Latin Russi "the people of Russia," from Rus, the native name of the people and the country (source of Arabic Rus, Medieval Greek Rhos), originally the name of a group of Swedish merchant/warrior

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 scarf 

 [band of silk, strip of cloth], 1550s, "a band worn across the body or over the shoulders," probably from Old North French escarpe "sash, sling," which probably is identical with Old French escherpe "pilgrim's purse suspended from the neck," perhaps from Frankish *skirpja or some

 Share don 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/don Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/don">Etymology of don by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of don. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/don Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of don," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/don. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of don." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/don. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of don." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/don (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near don 
 Dominican 
 dominion 
 domino 
 dominoes 
 domitable 
 don 
 Don Juan 
 don't 
 Donald 
 donate 
 donation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix