URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/telescope
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Telescope - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Telescope - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of telescope 

 telescope (n.) 

 "optical instrument by means of which distant objects appear nearer and larger," 1640s, from Italian telescopio (Galileo, 1611), and Modern Latin telescopium (Kepler, 1613), both from Greek t ē leskopos "far-seeing," from tēle- "far" (from PIE root *kwel- (2) "far" in space or time) + -skopos "watcher" (from PIE root *spek- "to observe").

 Said to have been coined by Prince Cesi, founder and head of the Roman Academy of the Lincei (Galileo was a member).

 Used in English in Latin form from 1619. An earlier English term for a telescope was trunk (1610s) in the "box, case" sense, short for perspective trunk , The dim constellation Telescopium was added to the sky atlases by La Caille (1752).
 also from 1640s 

 telescope (v.) 

 "force together one inside the other" (in the manner of the sliding tubes of some telescopes), 1867, from telescope (n.). Related: Telescoped (1861); telescoping .
 also from 1867 

 Entries linking to telescope 

 kaleidoscope (n.) 

 "optical instrument creating and exhibiting, by reflection, a variety of beautiful colors and symmetrical forms," 1817, literally "observer of beautiful forms," coined by its inventor, Scottish scientist David Brewster (1781-1868), from Greek kalos "beautiful, beauteous" (see Callisto ) + eidos "shape" (see -oid ) + -scope , on model of telescope , etc. They sold by the thousands in the few years after their invention, but Brewster failed to secure a patent.

 Figurative meaning "constantly changing pattern" is first attested 1819 in Lord Byron, whose publisher had sent him one of the toys. As a verb, from 1891. A kaleidophone (1827) was invented by English inventor Charles Wheatstone (1802-1875) to make sound waves visible.

 scope (n.2) 

 [instrument for viewing] 1872, shortened from telescope , microscope , etc., in which the element (Latinized) is from Greek skopein "to look" (from PIE root *spek- "to observe"). Earlier used as a shortening of horoscope (c. 1600). Extended to radar screens, etc., by 1945 as a shortening of oscilloscope .

 telescopic 
 telescopy 
 *kwel- 
 *spek- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Milky Way 

 it was a vast assemblage of stars (Democrates, Pythagoras, even Ovid); the question was settled when Galileo, using his telescope...

 magnify 

 Meaning "increase the apparent size of by use of a telescope or microscope" is from 1660s, said to be a development peculiar...

 prospective 

 Also used as a noun in various senses: "outlook, prospect, view" (1590s); "spy glass, telescope" (17c.), from the adjectival...

 nebula 

 Wilson telescope....

 Pleiades 

 six now are visible to most people; on a clear night a good eye can see nine (in 1579, well before the invention of the telescope...

 squeeze 

 c. 1600, "press forcibly" (transitive), perhaps an alteration of quease (Middle English quisen), from Old English cwysan "to squeeze," a word of unknown origin, perhaps imitative (compare German quetschen "to squeeze"). It perhaps also has been altered by influence of many words 

 crush 

 mid-14c., "smash, shatter, break into fragments or small particles; force down and bruise by heavy weight," also figuratively, "overpower, subdue," from Old French cruissir (Modern French écraser), variant of croissir "to gnash (teeth), crash, smash, break," which is perhaps from

 condense 

 early 15c., "thicken, make more dense or compact" (implied in condensed), from Old French condenser (14c.) or directly from Latin condensare "to make dense," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + densare "make thick," from densus "dense, th

 concentrate 

 1630s, "to bring or come to a common center," from concenter (1590s), from Italian concentrare, from assimilated form of Latin com "with, together" (see con-) + centrum "center" (see center (n.)). Meaning "condense" is from 1680s; that of "intensify the action of" is from 1758. S

 prism 

 1560s, in geometry, "a solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane polygons, and whose sides are parallelograms" (not always triangular), from Late Latin prisma, from Greek prisma "a geometrical prism, trilateral column," (Euclid), literally "something sa

 Share telescope 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/telescope Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/telescope">Etymology of telescope by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of telescope. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/telescope Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of telescope," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/telescope. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of telescope." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/telescope. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of telescope." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/telescope (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near telescope 
 telephony 
 telephoto 
 teleport 
 teleportation 
 teleprompter 
 telescope 
 telescopic 
 telescopy 
 Teletex 
 telethon 
 Teletype 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix