URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/geyser
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:23:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Geyser - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Geyser - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of geyser 

 geyser (n.) 

 1780, extended from Icelandic Geysir , name of a specific hot spring in the valley of Haukadal, literally "the gusher," from Old Norse geysa "to gush," from Proto-Germanic *gausjan , suffixed form of PIE *gheus- , extended form of the root *gheu- "to pour." Taken by foreign writers as the generic name for spouting hot springs, for which the native Icelandic words are hverr "a cauldron," laug "a hot bath."
 also from 1780 

 Entries linking to geyser 

 gush (v.) 

 c. 1400, gushen , "to rush out suddenly and forcefully" (of blood, water, etc.), probably formed imitatively in English or from Low German, or from or based on Old Norse gusa "to gush, spurt" (from PIE *gus- , from root *gheu- "to pour") and thus related to geyser . The metaphoric sense of "speak in an effusive manner" is recorded by 1873. Related: Gushed ; gushing . The noun is 1680s, from the verb.

 *gheu- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to pour, pour a libation."

 It might form all or part of: alchemy ; chyle ; chyme ; confound ; confuse ; diffuse ; diffusion ; effuse ; effusion ; effusive ; fondant ; fondue ; font (n.2) "complete set of characters of a particular face and size of type;" found (v.2) "to cast metal;" foundry ; funnel ; fuse (v.) "to melt, make liquid by heat;" fusible ; fusion ; futile ; futility ; geyser ; gush ; gust (n.) "sudden squall of wind;" gut ; infuse ; ingot ; parenchyma ; perfuse ; perfusion ; profuse ; refund ; refuse (v.) "reject, disregard, avoid;" refuse (n.) "waste material, trash;" suffuse ; suffusion ; transfuse ; transfusion .

 It might also be the source of: Greek khein "to pour," khoane "funnel," khymos "juice;" Latin fundere (past participle fusus ) "melt, cast, pour out;" Gothic giutan , Old English geotan "to pour;" Old English guttas (plural) "bowels, entrails;" Old Norse geysa "to gush;" German Gosse "gutter, drain."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 faithful 

 Old Faithful geyser named 1870 by explorer Gen....

 spring 

 Middle English springen, from Old English springan "to leap, leap up, jump;" of a fountain, spring, etc., "burst forth;" also "fly up; spread, grow" (class III strong verb; past tense sprang, past participle sprungen). This is from Proto-Germanic *sprenganan (source also of Old N

 fountain 

 early 15c., "spring of water that collects in a pool," from Old French fontaine "natural spring" (12c.), from Medieval Latin fontana "fountain, a spring" (source of Spanish and Italian fontana), from post-classical noun use of fem. of Latin fontanus "of a spring," from fons (geni

 overrun 

 also over-run, Middle English overrennen, from Old English oferyrnan "to run across, pass over;" see over- + run (v.). Meaning "continue beyond a specified time" is from early 14c. Meaning "to ravage (a land), maraud, plunder" is by mid-14c. Of weeds, etc., "to grow over, cover a

 binge 

 1854, "drinking bout," also (v.) "drink heavily, soak up alcohol;" dialectal use of binge "soak" (a wooden vessel). Said to have been originally as a dialect word. Binge is noted in Evans' "Leicestershire Words, Phrases and Proverbs" (London, 1848) as a dialect verb for "To soak 

 Annuit Coeptis 

 words on the Great Seal of the United States of America, condensed by Charles Thompson, designer of the seal in its final form, from Latin Juppiter omnipotes, audacibus annue coeptis "All-powerful Jupiter favor (my) daring undertakings," line 625 of book IX of Virgil's "Aeneid." 

 companion 

 c. 1300, "one who accompanies or associates with another," from Old French compagnon "fellow, mate, friend, partner" (12c.), from Late Latin companionem (nominative companio), literally "bread fellow, messmate," from Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + panis "bread," from PIE

 intuition 

 mid-15c., intuicioun, "insight, direct or immediate cognition, spiritual perception," originally theological, from Late Latin intuitionem (nominative intuitio) "a looking at, consideration," noun of action from past participle stem of Latin intueri "look at, consider," from in- "

 pardon 

 c. 1300, pardoun, "papal indulgence, forgiveness of sins or wrongdoing," from Old French pardon, from pardoner "to grant; forgive" (11c., Modern French pardonner), "to grant, forgive," and directly from Medieval Latin perdonum, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare "to give wholeheartedly

 emancipate 

 1620s, "set free from control," from Latin emancipatus, past participle of emancipare "put (a son) out of paternal authority, declare (someone) free, give up one's authority over," in Roman law, the freeing of a son or wife from the legal authority (patria potestas) of the pater 

 Share geyser 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/geyser Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/geyser">Etymology of geyser by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of geyser. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/geyser Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of geyser," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/geyser. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of geyser." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/geyser. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of geyser." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/geyser (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near geyser 
 Gettysburg 
 get-up 
 *geus- 
 gewgaw 
 gey 
 geyser 
 *ghabh- 
 Ghana 
 ghastly 
 ghat 
 ghawazee 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix