URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/serene
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:38:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Serene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Serene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of serene 

 serene (adj.) 

 mid-15c., of a day, "clear, fair, calm," from Old French serein and directly from Latin serenus "peaceful, calm, clear, unclouded" (of weather); figuratively "cheerful, glad, tranquil"(from PIE root *ksero- "dry," source also of Greek xeros "dry, arid;" see xerasia ).

 In English, the word has been applied to persons, characters, etc. since 1630s: "tranquil, unruffled." Related: Serenely . Middle English also had serenous (mid-15c.), of places, "having clear, fair weather."
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to serene 

 xerasia (n.) 

 "excessive dryness of hair," 1706, medical Latin, from Greek xerasia "dryness," from xeros "dry, withered" (see xero- ).

 Serena 

 fem. proper name, from Latin serena, fem. of serenus "clear, bright, fair, joyous" (see serene ).

 serenade 
 serenity 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 serenade 

 1640s, "a musical performance at night in open air" (especially "one given by a lover under the window of his lady" [OED]), from French sérénade (16c.), from Italian serenata "an evening song," literally "calm sky," from sereno "the open air," noun use of sereno "clear, calm," fr

 serenity 

 mid-15c., serenite, "fair, calm, clear weather," from Old French (Modern French sérénité) and directly from Latin serenitatem (nominative serenitas) "clearness, serenity," from serenus (see serene). Of persons, "tranquility of mind or temper," by 1590s. Also formerly used as a ti

 calm 

 late 14c., of the sea, "windless, without motion or agitation;" of a wind, "light, gentle," perhaps via Old French calme "tranquility, quiet," or directly from Old Italian calma "quiet, fair weather," which probably is from Late Latin cauma "heat of the mid-day sun" (in Italy, a 

 smelt 

 Century Dictionary speculates ("perhaps") it means "smooth" and compares Old English smeolt, smylt "serene, smooth."...

 weather 

 Weather-breeder "fine, serene day which precedes and seems to prepare a storm" is from 1650s....

 clam 

 bivalve mollusk, c. 1500 (in clam-shell), originally Scottish, apparently a particular use of Middle English clam "pincers, vice, clamp" (late 14c.), from Old English clamm "bond, fetter, grip, grasp," from Proto-Germanic *klam- "to press or squeeze together" (source also of Old 

 alliteration 

 1650s, "repetition of the same sound or letter at the beginning of words in close succession," from Modern Latin alliterationem (nominative alliteratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of alliterare "to begin with the same letter," from Latin ad "to" (see ad-) + littera

 Saturday 

 seventh or last day of the week, Old English sæterdæg, sæternesdæg, literally "day of the planet Saturn," from Sæternes (genitive of Sætern; see Saturn) + Old English dæg (see day). Partial loan-translation of Latin Saturni dies "Saturn's day" (compare Dutch Zaterdag, Old Frisian

 fork 

 Old English forca, force "pitchfork, forked instrument, forked weapon," from a Germanic borrowing (Old Frisian forke, Dutch vork, Old Norse forkr, Danish fork) of Latin furca "two-pronged fork; pitchfork; fork used in cooking," a word of uncertain origin. Old English also had for

 realm 

 c. 1300, reaume, "kingdom, domain under a sovereign, royal jurisdiction," from Old French reaume, later realme, variants (in part by influence of Old French reial "regal," from Latin  regalis) of roiaume "kingdom." This is possibly from a Gallo-Romance *regiminem, "formed as

 Share serene 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/serene Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/serene">Etymology of serene by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of serene. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/serene Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of serene," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/serene. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of serene." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/serene. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of serene." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/serene (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near serene 
 sere 
 Serena 
 serenade 
 serendipitous 
 serendipity 
 serene 
 serenity 
 serf 
 serfdom 
 serge 
 sergeant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix