URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stair
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:17:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stair - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stair - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stair 

 stair (n.) 

 Middle English steir , from Old English stæger "stair, staircase, flight of steps arranged one behind and above the other," from Proto-Germanic *staigri (source also of Middle Dutch stegher , Dutch steiger "a stair, step, quay, pier, scaffold;" German Steig "path," Old English stig "narrow path").

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *steigh- "go, rise, stride, step, walk" (source also of Greek steikhein "to go, march in order," stikhos "row, line, rank, verse;" Sanskrit stighnoti "mounts, rises, steps;" Old Church Slavonic stignati "to overtake," stigna "place;" Lithuanian staiga "suddenly;" Old Irish tiagaim "I walk;" Welsh taith "going, walk, way").

 Originally also a collective plural; stairs developed by late 14c., and stair as "one of a succession of steps leading from one floor to another" is by 1520s. The figurative sense of "step in an ascending or descending scale" is from c. 1200.

 Entries linking to stair 

 acrostic (n.) 

 short poem in which the initial letters of the lines, taken in order, spell a word or phrase, 1580s, from Medieval Latin acrostichis , from Greek akrostikhis , from akros "at the end, outermost" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce") + stikhos "line of verse," literally "row, line" (from PIE root *steigh- "to stride, step, rise;" see stair ). The second element is properly -stich , but it has been assimilated to words in -ic . As an adjective from 1680s.

 backstairs (n.) 

 "stairs at the back of a structure," 1650s, from back (adj.) + stairs (see stair ). Figurative use is attested earlier (1640s).

 cadastral 
 downstairs 
 hemistich 
 staircase 
 stairway 
 stairwell 
 stichic 
 stickler 
 stile 
 stirrup 
 sty 
 tetrastich 
 upstairs 
 See All Related Words (15) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cadastral 

 "pertaining to the valuation of landed property as a basis for taxation," 1850, from French cadastral, from cadastre "register of the survey of lands" (16c.), from Old Italian catastico, from Late Greek katastikhos "register," literally "by the line" (see cata-, stair). Gamillsch

 stichic 

 "made up of lines; pertaining to a verse or line," especially "composed of lines of the same metrical, form," 1844 (stichical is from 1787), from Latinized form of Greek stikhikos "of lines, of verses," from stikhos "row, line, rank, verse," which is related to steikhein "to go, 

 stickler 

 1530s, "moderator, umpire, attendant on or judge of a contest," agent noun from stickle "mediate" (1520s), which is probably a frequentative of Middle English stighten "to arrange, place," from Old English stihtan "to rule, direct, govern, arrange, order," which is cognate with M

 newel 

 mid-14c., nouel, nowel, "pillar from which steps of a winding stair radiate, stone cut to form a step and a section of the...central pillar of a spiral stair," from Old French noel, noiel, novel "knob, newel, kernel, stone" (Modern French noyau)...

 trap 

 snare, trap," from Proto-Germanic *trep- (source also of Middle Dutch trappe "trap, snare"), related to Germanic words for "stair..., step, tread" (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe "step, stair," English tread (v.))....

 degree 

 c. 1200, "a step, a stair," also "a position in a hierarchy," and "a stage of progress, a single movement toward an end,"..."a step (of a stair), pace, degree (of relationship), academic degree; rank, status, position," which is said to be from...

 grade 

 measurement," from French grade "grade, degree" (16c.), from Latin gradus "a step, a pace, gait; a step climbed (on a ladder or stair...

 pest 

 1550s (in imprecations, "a pest upon ____," etc.), "plague, pestilence, epidemic disease," from French peste (1530s), from Latin pestis "deadly contagious disease; a curse, bane," a word of uncertain origin. Meaning "any noxious, destructive, or troublesome person or thing" is at

 step 

 Middle English steppen, from Old English steppan (Anglian), stæppan (West Saxon) "take a step, move the legs and feet as in walking," from West Germanic *stapjanan "tread" (source also of Old Frisian stapa, Middle Dutch, Dutch stappen, Old High German stapfon, German stapfen "ste

 support 

 late 14c., supporten, "to hold up, prop up, bear the weight of;" also "to aid" someone, "speak in support or advocacy of;" also "put up with, bear without opposition, endure without being overcome, tolerate," from Old French suporter "to bear, endure, sustain, support" (14c.) and

 Share stair 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stair Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stair">Etymology of stair by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stair. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stair Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stair," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stair. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stair." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stair. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stair." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stair (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stair 
 stagy 
 staid 
 stain 
 stained 
 stainless 
 stair 
 staircase 
 stairway 
 stairwell 
 stake 
 stake-holder 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix