URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pepper
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:00:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pepper - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pepper - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pepper 

 pepper (n.) 

 "dried berries of the pepper plant," Middle English peper , from Old English pipor , from an early West Germanic borrowing of Latin piper "pepper," from Greek piperi , probably (via Persian) from Middle Indic pippari , from Sanskrit pippali "long pepper." The Latin word is the source of German Pfeffer , Italian pepe , French poivre , Old Church Slavonic pipru , Lithuanian pipiras , Old Irish piobhar , Welsh pybyr , etc.

 Application to fruits of the Capsicum family (unrelated, originally native of tropical America) is from 16c. To have pepper in the nose in Middle English was "to be supercilious or unapproachable."

 pepper (v.) 

 "to sprinkle as with pepper," 1610s, from pepper (n.). Old English had gepipera . Meaning "to pelt with shot, etc.; hit with what pains or annoys" is from 1640s. Related: Peppered ; peppering .
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to pepper 

 hasenpfeffer (n.) 

 1873, from German hasenpfeffer , from Hase "hare" (see hare (n.)) + pfeffer "pepper" (see pepper (n.)).

 paprika (n.) 

 condiment made from types of dried, ground sweet red peppers, 1839, from Hungarian paprika , a diminutive from Serbo-Croatian papar "pepper," from Latin piper or Modern Greek piperi (see pepper (n.)). A condiment made from a New World plant, introduced into Eastern Europe by the Turks; known in Hungary by 1569.

 pep 
 pepper-box 
 pepper-caster 
 peppercorn 
 pepper-mill 
 peppermint 
 pepperoni 
 pepper-pot 
 peppery 
 pimpernel 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pimpernel 

 plant or herb of the primrose family, c. 1400, from Old French pimprenelle, earlier piprenelle (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin pipinella name of a medicinal plant. This is perhaps from *piperinus "pepper-like" (so called because its fruits resemble peppercorns), a derivat

 pelt 

 "to strike repeatedly" (with something), c. 1500, a word of unknown origin; according to one old theory it is perhaps from early 13c. pelten "to strike," a variant of pilten "to thrust, strike," from an unrecorded Old English *pyltan, from Medieval Latin *pultiare, from Latin pul

 pimento 

 , green or red pepper," also pimienta "black pepper," from Late Latin pigmenta, plural of pigmentum "vegetable juice," from...[I]n med.L. spiced drink, hence spice, pepper (generally), Sp. pimiento, Fr. piment are applied to Cayenne or Guinea pepper..., capsicum; in Eng. the name has passed to allspice or Jamaica pepper....The piece of red sweet pepper stuffed in a pitted olive so called from 1918, earlier pimiento (1901), from Spanish....

 enchilada 

 The ingredients which go to make it up are pepper, lye, hominy, pepper, onions chopped fine, pepper, grated cheese, and pepper...

 quern 

 "small mill for grinding" (grain, pepper, mustard, etc.),  Middle English querne, from Old English cweorn "hand-mill...

 costard 

 rib;" see coast (n.)), if the notion is "a large apple with prominent 'ribs,' " i.e. one having a shape more like a green pepper...

 salt 

 Salt-and-pepper (adj.)..."of dark and light color" is by 1915 (pepper-and-salt, 1774, was an old name for a kind of cloth made from dark and light...

 bush 

 "many-stemmed woody plant," from Old English bysc (found in place names), from West Germanic *busk "bush, thicket" (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with Old French (busche "firewood") and Medieval Latin

 spice 

 c. 1200, "vegetable substance aromatic or pungent to the taste added to food or drink to enhance the flavor," also "a spice used as a medication or an alchemical ingredient," from Anglo-French spece, Old French espice (Modern French épice), from Late Latin species (plural) "spice

 worth 

 Old English weorþ "significant, valuable, of value; valued, appreciated, highly thought-of, deserving, meriting; honorable, noble, of high rank; suitable for, proper, fit, capable," from Proto-Germanic *wertha- "toward, opposite," hence "equivalent, worth" (source also of Old Fri

 Share pepper 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pepper Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pepper">Etymology of pepper by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pepper. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pepper Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pepper," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pepper. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pepper." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pepper. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pepper." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pepper (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pepper 
 peony 
 people 
 people-watching 
 Peoria 
 pep 
 pepper 
 pepper-box 
 pepper-caster 
 peppercorn 
 pepperidge 
 pepper-mill 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix