URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/spleen
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Spleen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Spleen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of spleen 

 spleen (n.) 

 c. 1300, splen , "non-glandular organ of the abdomen of a human or animal," also as the seat of melancholy, from Old French esplen , from Latin splen , from Greek spl ē n "the milt, spleen," from PIE *spelghn- "spleen, milt" (source also of Sanskrit plihan- , Avestan sperezan , Armenian p'aicaln , Latin lien , Old Church Slavonic slezena , Czech slezna , Lithuanian blužnis , Old Prussian blusne , Old Irish selg "spleen"). But the exact reconstruction is unclear.

 The organ was regarded in old medicine as the seat of morose feelings and bad temper. Hence figurative sense of "violent ill-temper" (1580s, implied in spleenful ); and thence Chapman's spleenless "mild, gentle; free from anger, ill-humor, malice, or spite" (1610s, in the literal sense from late 14c.), for which compare Greek eusplanchnos "having healthy intestines," also "compassionate."

 A burst of adjectival forms in late 16c.-early 17c. for the figurative meaning yielded spleenative (1592), spleenatic (1621), spleenish (1610s), spleenful (1588), spleeny (1604), and later Keats uses spleenical .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to spleen 

 bowel (n.) 

 c. 1300, usually plural, bowels , "human organs of the abdominal cavity," from late 14c. specifically as "human intestines," from Old French boele "intestines, bowels, innards" (12c., Modern French boyau ), from Medieval Latin botellus "small intestine," originally "sausage," diminutive of botulus "sausage," a word borrowed from Oscan-Umbrian.

 The transferred sense of "the viscera as the seat of emotions" is from late 14c.; especially "inner parts as the seat of pity or kindness," hence "tenderness, compassion." Greek splankhnon (from the same PIE root as spleen ) was a word for the principal internal organs, which also were felt in ancient times to be the seat of various emotions. Greek poets, from Aeschylus down, regarded the bowels as the seat of the more violent passions such as anger and love, but by the Hebrews they were seen as the seat of tender affections, especially kindness, benevolence, and compassion.

 Splankhnon was used in Septuagint to translate a Hebrew word, and thence early Bibles in English rendered it in its literal sense as bowels , which thus acquired in English a secondary meaning of "pity, compassion" (late 14c.). But in later editions the word often was translated as heart . Bowel movement is attested by 1874.

 splenetic (adj.) 

 1540s, "of or pertaining to the spleen," from Late Latin spleneticus , from splen (see spleen ). The meaning "affected with spleen, ill-humored, peevish" is by 1540s.

 Gloomy , Sullen , Sulky , Morose , Splenetic . These words are arranged in the order of their intensity and of their degree of activity toward others. ... The splenetic man is sulky and peevish, with frequent outbursts of irritation venting itself upon persons. or things. [Century Dictionary]

 Related: Splenetical ; splenetically . Alternative splenic  (1610s) is from French splénique (16c.) or Latin splenicus . Splenical (1590s) is marked obsolete in OED. Related: Splenically .

 splenitis 
 vent 
 lieno- 
 splanchno- 
 spleno- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 vent 

 late 14c., "emit from a confined space," probably a shortening of aventer "expose oneself to the air" (c. 1300), from Old French eventer "let out, expose to air," from Vulgar Latin *exventare, from Latin ex "out" + ventus "wind" (from PIE *wē-nt-o‑ "blowing," suffixed (participia

 egg-nog 

 It is, of all physic, the best I have seen  To keep out the cold, and to cut up the spleen — Here madam — miss Cynthia...

 melancholy 

 Old medicine attributed mental depression to unnatural or excess "black bile," a secretion of the spleen and one of the body's...

 hypochondria 

 The sense "morbid melancholy" reflects the ancient belief that the viscera of the hypochondria (liver, gall bladder, spleen...

 humor 

 Blood came from the heart, phlegm from the brain, yellow bile from the liver, and black bile from the spleen....

 line 

 a Middle English merger of Old English line "cable, rope; series, row, row of letters; rule, direction," and Old French ligne "guideline, cord, string; lineage, descent" (12c.), both from Latin linea "linen thread, string, plumb-line," also "a mark, bound, limit, goal; line of de

 short 

 Middle English short, from Old English sceort, scort "of little length; not tall; of brief duration," probably from Proto-Germanic *skurta- (source also of Old Norse skorta "to be short of," skort "shortness;" Old High German scurz "short"), from PIE root *sker- (1) "to cut," on 

 temper 

 late Old English temprian "to moderate, bring to a proper or suitable state, to modify some excessive quality, to restrain within due limits," from Latin temperare "observe proper measure, be moderate, restrain oneself," also transitive, "mix correctly, mix in due proportion; reg

 quick 

 Middle English quik, from Old English cwic "living, alive, animate, characterized by the presence of life" (now archaic), and figuratively, of mental qualities, "rapid, ready," from Proto-Germanic *kwikwaz (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian quik, Old Norse kvikr "living, a

 Share spleen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/spleen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/spleen">Etymology of spleen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of spleen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/spleen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of spleen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spleen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of spleen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spleen. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of spleen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/spleen (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near spleen 
 splash 
 splashy 
 splat 
 splatter 
 splay 
 spleen 
 splendid 
 splendidly 
 splendiferous 
 splendor 
 splendorous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix