URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandalwood
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:53:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sandalwood - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sandalwood - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sandalwood 

 sandalwood (n.) 

 1510s, earlier simply sandell (late 14c.), saundres (early 14c.), "the wood of the heart and roots of certain species of trees native to Asia," from Old French sandale , from Medieval Latin sandalum , from Late Greek santalon , which is ultimately from Sanskrit čandana-m "the sandalwood tree," perhaps literally "wood for burning incense," related to candrah "shining, glowing," and cognate with Latin candere "to shine, glow" (see candle ). In China it was burnt extensively as incense in temples and homes. Sandalwood oil , distilled from the wood of some species, is strongly aromatic and used in perfumes and cosmetics.
 also from 1510s 

 Entries linking to sandalwood 

 candle (n.) 

 "cylindrical body of tallow, wax, etc., formed on a wick and used as a source of artificial light," Old English candel "lamp, lantern, candle," an early ecclesiastical borrowing from Latin candela "a light, torch, candle made of tallow or wax," from candere "to shine" (from PIE root *kand- "to shine").

 The Latin word is also the source of French chandelle , Spanish candela , Irish coinneal , Welsh canwyll , Russian kandilo , Arabic qandil , etc. Candles were unknown in ancient Greece (where oil lamps sufficed), but common from early times among Romans and Etruscans. Candles on birthday cakes seem to have been originally a German custom.

 To hold a candle to originally meant "to help in a subordinate capacity," perhaps from the notion of an assistant or apprentice holding a candle for light while the master works, or from devotional candles borne in Church ceremonies (compare Old English taporberend "acolyte," literally "taper-bearer"). To burn the candle at both ends "consume or waste prodigiously" is recorded from 1730.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic *widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu- "tree, wood" (source als

 maverick 

 1867, "calf or yearling found without an owner's brand," a word from the great cattle ranches of the American West, so called for Samuel A. Maverick (1803-1870), Texas cattle owner who was notoriously negligent in branding his calves. All neat stock found running at large in thi

 style 

 early 14c., stile, "writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative, treatise;" also "characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression," and "way of life, manner, behavior, conduct." This is from Old French stile, estile "style, f

 perpendicular 

 late 15c., perpendiculer, of a line, "lying at right angles to the horizon" (in astronomy, navigation, etc.), from an earlier adverb (late 14c.), "at right angles to the horizon," from Old French perpendiculer, from Late Latin perpendicularis "vertical, as a plumb line," from Lat

 culture 

 mid-15c., "the tilling of land, act of preparing the earth for crops," from Latin cultura "a cultivating, agriculture," figuratively "care, culture, an honoring," from past participle stem of colere "to tend, guard; to till, cultivate" (see colony). Meaning "the cultivation or re

 satyr 

 late 14c., satire, "one of a type of woodland deities part human or animal; demigod or spirit of the air or woods, companion of Bacchus," from Old French satire and directly from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, a word of unknown origin. "The etymology of [satyros] is unknown. 

 Druid 

 "one of the order of priests among the ancient Celts of Gaul, Britain, and Ireland," 1560s, from French druide (16c.), from Latin druis, fem. druias (plural druidae), from Gaulish Druides, from Celtic compound *dru-wid- "strong seer," from Old Celtic *derwos "true" (from PIE root

 virtue 

 c. 1200, vertu, "moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence," from Anglo-French and Old French vertu "force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities" (10c. in Old French), from Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) "moral strength, high character, goodness; 

 blurb 

 used by U.S. scholar Brander Matthews in 1906 in "American Character;" popularized 1907 by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess. Originally mocking excessive praise printed on book jackets, and probably derisively imitative. Gelett Burgess ... then entertained the guests with some

 imperative 

 1520s, in grammar, "expressing command," used of the form of a verb which expresses command, entreaty, advice, or exhortation, from Late Latin imperativus "pertaining to a command," from imperat-, past participle stem of imperare "to command, requisition," from assimilated form o

 Share sandalwood 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandalwood Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandalwood">Etymology of sandalwood by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sandalwood. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandalwood Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sandalwood," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandalwood. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sandalwood." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandalwood. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sandalwood." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandalwood (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sandalwood 
 sanctuary 
 sanctum 
 Sanctus 
 sand 
 sandal 
 sandalwood 
 sandbag 
 sand-bank 
 sandbar 
 sand-blast 
 sandblind 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix