URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummy
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:44:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mummy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mummy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mummy 

 mummy (n.1) 

 late 14c., mummie , "medicinal substance prepared from mummy tissue," from Medieval Latin mumia , which is perhaps from Greek moumia or directly from Arabic mumiyah "embalmed body," from Persian mumiya "asphalt," from mum "wax."

 Mummia , A thing like Pitch, some say it is made of mans-flesh boild in Pitch ; Others, that it is taken out of old Tombes, being a corrupted humour that droppeth from embalmed bodies. [Cockeram, English Dictionarie, 1623] 

 The sense evolution is from the old belief that Egyptian mummies were embalmed with asphalt, which was used medicinally in medieval times. Ancient mummies were harvested for asphalt they were thought to contain, and later merchants mummified executed criminals and other unclaimed bodies to supply the trade. Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi, traveling in Egypt circa A.D. 1300, reported buying three mummified heads filled with asphalt for half a dirham. This medicinal mummia or mummie also was used as a paint pigment into early 20c.

 The sense of "dead human body embalmed and dried after the manner of the ancient Egyptians" is recorded in English from 1610s. Mummy wheat (1842), grown in Egypt and Ethiopia and once thought to be a distinct species, was said to have been cultivated from grains found in mummy-cases.
 also from late 14c. 

 mummy (n.2) 

 1784, a childish alteration of mammy . Alternative form mumsy attested by 1876.
 also from 1784 

 Entries linking to mummy 

 mammy (n.) 

 child's word for "mother," 1520s, diminutive of mam (see mamma ). Meaning "black woman having the care of white children" (who often continued to call her mammy after they were grown) is by 1837, Southern U.S. dialect, a variant of mamma .

 mummification (n.) 

 1793, "process of making into a mummy," from mummy + -fication "a making or causing." Meaning "state or fact of being a mummy" is by 1857.

 mummify (v.) 

 1620s, "embalm and dry (a dead body) as a mummy," from French momifier , from momie "mummy," from Medieval Latin mumia "embalmed body," also a medicinal stuff supposedly prepared from mummy tissue (see mummy (n.1)) + -fier "to make into" (see -fy ).

 The intransitive sense of "shrivel or dry up" is attested by 1864. Cockeram's "English Dictionarie" (1623) has " Mummianiz'd , Turn'd into Mummie." Related: Mummified ; mummifying .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mama 

 1707, spelling variant of mamma. Meaning "sexually attractive woman" is attested by 1925 in African-American vernacular. Mamasan "woman in a position of authority," especially "woman in charge of a geisha-house" is by 1949, with Japanese san, an honorific title. Mama mia! as an e

 mamma 

 "mother," a word used especially by children and infants, 1570s, representing the native form of the reduplication of *ma- that is nearly universal among the Indo-European languages (Greek mamme "mother, grandmother," Latin mamma, Persian mama, Russian and Lithuanian mama "mother

 momma 

 1810, American English variant of mamma (q.v.). Apparently first used in the South and with a racial context. As a biker's girlfriend or female passenger, from 1950s. An old negro woman is called momma, which is a broad pronunciation of mama ; and a girl, missy. I once happened 

 skeleton 

 together," 1570s, from Modern Latin sceleton "bones, bony framework of the body," from Greek skeleton soma "dried-up body, mummy..., skeleton," from neuter of skeletos "dried-up" (also, as a noun, "dried body, mummy"), from skellein "dry up, make dry,...

 anatomy 

 "Dissection" (1540s), "mummy" (1580s), and "skeleton" (1590s) were primary senses of this word in Shakespeare's day; the...

 a.m. 

 also a.m., 1762 in reference to hours, an abbreviation of Latin ante meridiem "before noon" (q.v.). Synonymous with "morning" by 1776. AM as a type of radio wave broadcast, 1921, abbreviation of amplitude modulation (see amplitude). Affixed to a name, an abbreviation of artium ma

 am 

 first-person singular present indicative of be (q.v.); Old English eom "to be, to remain," (Mercian eam, Northumbrian am), from Proto-Germanic *izm(i)-, from PIE *esmi- (source also of Old Norse emi, Gothic im, Hittite esmi, Old Church Slavonic jesmi, Lithuanian esmi), first-pers

 body 

 Middle English bodi, from Old English bodig "trunk of a man or beast; the whole physical structure of a human or animal; material frame, material existence of a human; main or principal part of anything," related to Old High German botah, but otherwise of unknown origin. Not else

 mother 

 "female parent, a woman in relation to her child," Middle English moder, from Old English modor, from Proto-Germanic *mōdēr (source also of Old Saxon modar, Old Frisian moder, Old Norse moðir, Danish moder, Dutch moeder, Old High German muoter, German Mutter), from PIE *mater- "m

 sacrament 

 late Old English, in Christian use, "an outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace," especially "a sacrament of the Church, one of the religious ceremonies enjoined by Christ or the Church," and later specifically "the sacrament of the Eucharist" (c. 1300), from Old F

 Share mummy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummy">Etymology of mummy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mummy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mummy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mummy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummy. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mummy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummy (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mummy 
 mummer 
 Mummerset 
 mummery 
 mummification 
 mummify 
 mummy 
 mumps 
 mun 
 munch 
 Munchausen 
 munchies 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix