URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhubarb
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:52:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rhubarb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rhubarb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rhubarb 

 rhubarb (n.) 

 late 14c., rubarbe , medicinal root-stock of a plant native to China and Tibet, from Old French rubarbe and directly from Medieval Latin reubarbarum , from Greek rha barbaron "foreign rhubarb," from rha "rhubarb," perhaps ultimately from a source akin to Persian rewend "rhubarb" (associated in Greek with Rha , ancient Scythian name of the River Volga) + barbaron , neuter of barbaros "foreign" (see barbarian ).

 It was long imported into Europe by way of Russia and became associated with that land. The European native species was so called by 1640s. The first vowel was altered in Medieval Latin by association with rheum . The restored -h- was occasional from Middle English but not established until late 18c.

 The baseball slang meaning "loud squabble on the field" is from 1938, of unknown origin, said to have been first used by broadcaster Garry Schumacher. Perhaps it is connected with the use of rhubarb as a word repeated by stage actors to give the impression of hubbub or conversation (a stage effect attested from 1934).
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to rhubarb 

 barbarian (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "foreign, of another nation or culture," from Medieval Latin barbarinus (see barbarian (n.)). The meaning "of or pertaining to savages, rude, uncivilized" is from 1590s.

 rosemary (n.) 

 evergreen shrub native to southern Europe and widely cultivated for its fragrance, late 14c., rose-marie , earlier rosmarine (c. 1300), from Latin rosmarinus , literally "dew of the sea" (compare French romarin ), from ros "dew" + marinus "of the sea, maritime," from mare "sea, the sea, seawater" (from PIE root *mori- "body of water").

 Perhaps it was so called because it grew near coasts. The form was altered in English by influence of unrelated rose and Mary .

 Latin ros is from a PIE noun probably from *ers- "to be wet" (source also of Lithuanian rasa , Old Church Slavonic rosa "dew," Sanskrit rasah "sap, juice, fluid, essence," Hittite arszi "flows," and perhaps also Rha , Scythian name of the River Volga (see rhubarb )).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 vegetable 

 early 15c., "capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous;" also "neither animal nor mineral, of the plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant," from Old French vegetable "living, fit to live," and directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis "growing, flourishing," from Late Lati

 rheum 

 late 14c., reume, "watery fluid or humid matter in the eyes, nose, or mouth" (including tears, saliva, mucous discharge from the nostrils), from Old French reume "a head-cold" (13c., Modern French rhume) and directly from Latin rheuma, reuma, from Greek rheuma "discharge from the

 plant 

 Old English plante "young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, a shoot or strip recently sprouted from seed," from Latin planta "sprout, shoot, cutting" (source of Spanish planta, French plante), which is perhaps from an unattested verb *plantare "to drive in with the feet, push in

 real 

 early 14c., "actually existing, having physical existence (not imaginary);" mid-15c., "relating to things" (especially property), from Old French reel "real, actual," from Late Latin realis "actual," in Medieval Latin "belonging to the thing itself," from Latin res "property, goo

 cringe 

 1570s, "to bend or crouch, especially with servility or fear," variant of crenge, crenche "to bend" (c. 1200), from causative of Old English cringan "yield, give way, fall (in battle); become bent," from Proto-Germanic *krank- "bend, curl up" (source also of Old Norse kringr, Dut

 gentleman 

 c. 1200, perhaps mid-12c., "well-born man, man of good family or birth," also extended to Roman patricians and ancient Greek aristocrats, from gentle + man (n.); the compound probably is modeled on Old French gentilhomme (the English gentleman itself was borrowed into French in 1

 quorum 

 early 15c., in law, "the senior justices of the peace," whose presence was necessary to constitute a court, from Latin quorum "of whom," genitive plural (masc. and neuter; fem. quarum) of qui "who" (from PIE root *kwo-, stem of relative and interrogative pronouns). The traditiona

 brood 

 Old English brod "offspring of egg-laying animals, hatchlings, young birds hatched in one nest," from Proto-Germanic *brod (source also of Middle Dutch broet, Old High German bruot, German Brut "brood"), etymologically "that which is hatched by heat," from *bro- "to warm, heat," 

 Logos 

 1580s, "the divine Word, second person of the Christian Trinity," from Greek logos "word, speech, statement, discourse," also "a computation, account," also "reason, judgment, understanding," from PIE *log-o-, suffixed form of root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives

 Share rhubarb 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhubarb Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhubarb">Etymology of rhubarb by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rhubarb. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhubarb Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rhubarb," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhubarb. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rhubarb." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhubarb. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rhubarb." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhubarb (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rhubarb 
 rhomboid 
 rhombus 
 rhonchus 
 Rhone 
 rhotacism 
 rhubarb 
 rhyme 
 rhyme royal 
 rhythm 
 rhythmic 
 ria 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix