URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/censor
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:16:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Censor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Censor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of censor 

 censor (n.) 

 1530s, "Roman magistrate of 5c. B.C.E. who took censuses and oversaw public manners and morals," from French censor and directly from Latin censor , from censere "to appraise, value, judge," from PIE root *kens- "speak solemnly, proclaim" (source also of Sanskrit amsati "recites, praises," asa "song of praise").

 They also had charge of public finances and public works. The transferred sense of "officious judge of morals and conduct" in English is from 1590s. Latin censor had also a transferred sense of "a severe judge; a rigid moralist; a censurer."

 From 1640s as "official empowered to examine books, plays (later films, etc.) to see they are free of anything immoral or heretical." By the early decades of the 19c. the meaning of the English word had concentrated into "state agent charged with suppression of speech or published matter deemed politically subversive." Related: Censorial ; censorian .
 also from 1530s 

 censor (v.) 

 1833, "to act as a censor (of news or public media);" from censor (n.). Related: Censored ; censoring .
 also from 1833 

 Entries linking to censor 

 censorable (adj.) 

 "deserving of or subject to censoring," 1906, from censor (v.) + -able .

 censorious (adj.) 

 "fond of criticizing," 1530s, from Latin censorius "pertaining to a censor," also "rigid, severe," from censor (see censor (n.)). Related: Censoriously ; censoriousness .

 censorship 
 censure 
 census 
 recension 
 uncensored 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 censure 

 late 14c., "judicial sentence," originally ecclesiastical, from Latin censura "judgment, opinion," also "office of a censor," from census, past participle of censere "appraise, estimate, assess" (see censor (n.)). The general sense of "a finding of fault and an expression of cond

 census 

 1610s, in reference to registration and taxation in Roman history, from Latin census "the enrollment of the names and property assessments of all Roman citizens," originally past participle of censere "to assess" (see censor (n.)). The modern use of census as "official enumeratio

 recension 

 1630s, "review, examination, enumeration" (senses now obsolete), from Latin recensionem (nominative recensio) "an enumeration," noun of action from past-participle stem of recensere "to count, enumerate, survey," from re-, here perhaps intensive (see re-) + censere "to tax, rate,

 critic 

 skilled in judging merit in some particular class of things," from French critique (14c.), from Latin criticus "a judge, a censor...

 official 

 early 14c., "minor ecclesiastical court officer" (mid-13c. as a surname), from Old French oficial "law officer; bishop's representative" (12c.) and directly from Late Latin officialis "attendant to a magistrate, public official," noun use of officialis (adj.) "of or belonging to 

 measure 

 early 14c., mesuren, "to exercise moderation;" mid-14c., "to deal out or divide up by measure," also "to ascertain spatial dimensions, quantity, or capacity of by comparison with a standard;" from Old French mesurer "measure; moderate, curb" (12c.), from Late Latin mensurare "to 

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 outlaw 

 Old English utlaga "one put outside the law" (and thereby deprived of its benefits and protections), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse utlagi (n.) "outlaw," from utlagr (adj.) "outlawed, banished," from ut "out" (see out (adv.)) + *lagu, plural of lag "law" (see law). 

 value 

 c. 1300, "price equal to the intrinsic worth of a thing;" late 14c., "degree to which something is useful or estimable," from Old French value "worth, price, moral worth; standing, reputation" (13c.), noun use of fem. past participle of valoir "be worth," from Latin valere "be st

 Share censor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/censor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/censor">Etymology of censor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of censor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/censor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of censor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/censor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of censor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/censor. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of censor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/censor (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near censor 
 cenogamy 
 cenotaph 
 Cenozoic 
 cense 
 censer 
 censor 
 censorable 
 censorious 
 censorship 
 censurable 
 censure 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix