URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fry
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:48:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fry 

 fry (v.) 

 late 13c., "cook (something) in a shallow pan over a fire," from Old French frire "to fry" (13c.), from Latin frigere "to roast or fry," which is reconstructed to be from PIE *bher- "to cook, bake" (source also of Sanskrit bhrjjati "roasts," bharjanah "roasting;" Persian birishtan "to roast;" perhaps also Greek phrygein "to roast, bake").

 The intransitive sense is attested from late 14c. The meaning "execute in the electric chair" is U.S. slang from 1929. Related: Fried ; frying . Frying pan is recorded from mid-14c. ( friing panne ).
 also from late 13c. 

 fry (n.1) 

 early 14c. (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin), "young fish," probably from an Anglo-French noun from Old French frier , froier "to rub, spawn (by rubbing abdomen on sand)," from Vulgar Latin *frictiare . First applied to human offspring c. 1400, in Scottish. Some sources trace this usage, or the whole of the word, to Old Norse frjo , fræ "seed, offspring."
 also from early 14c. 

 fry (n.2) 

 "fried meat," by 1630s, from fry (v.).
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to fry 

 fried (adj.) 

 mid-14c., past-participle adjective from fry (v.). Fried chicken attested by 1832.

 French fries (n.) 

 1903, American English, earlier French fried potatoes (by 1856); see French (adj.) + fry (v.). Literally "potatoes fried in the French style." The name is from the method of making them by immersion in fat, which was then considered a peculiarity of French cooking.

 There are 2 ways of frying known to cooks as (1) wet frying, sometimes called French frying or frying in a kettle of hot fat; and (2) dry frying or cooking in a frying pan. The best results are undoubtedly obtained by the first method, although it is little used in this country. ["The Household Cook Book," Chicago, 1902]

 French frieds (1944) never caught on. Simple short form fries attested by 1973. In the Upper Midwest of the U.S., sometimes called, with greater accuracy, American fries (1950), and briefly during a period of mutual ill feeling, an attempt was made at freedom fries (2003; compare liberty-cabbage for sauerkraut during World War I). Related: French-fry .

 fricassee 
 frit 
 frittata 
 fritter 
 frizz 
 fryer 
 frying-pan 
 pommes frites 
 refry 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fritter 

 "whittle away, waste bit by bit, spend on trifles," 1728, probably from noun fritter "fragment or shred" (though this is recorded later), perhaps an alteration of 16c. fitters "fragments or pieces," which is perhaps ultimately from Old French fraiture "a breaking," from Latin fra

 electrocute 

 "execute by electricity," 1889, American English, from electro- + back half of execute. The method first was used Aug. 6, 1890, in New York state, on William Kemmler, convicted of the murder of his common-law wife. In reference to accidental death by 1909. Electric chair is also 

 child 

 Old English cild "fetus, infant, unborn or newly born person," from Proto-Germanic *kiltham (source also of Gothic kilþei "womb," inkilþo "pregnant;" Danish kuld "children of the same marriage;" Old Swedish kulder "litter;" Old English cildhama "womb," lit. "child-home"); it has 

 friable 

 "Confusion between the common word meaning crumbly & the -able adjective from fry is not likely enough to justify the...

 chow 

 or preserve; mix or medley of any sort," perhaps a reduplication of Chinese cha or tsa "mixed," or Cantonese chaau "to fry...

 empanada 

 America, by 1927, American English, from Spanish empanada, past-participle adjective (fem.) of empanar "to roll in pastry and fry...

 scad 

 the channel along the coast of Glamorganshire; their passage occupied a week, and they were evidently in pursuit of the fry...

 changeling 

 1550s, "one given to change," from change (n.) + diminutive suffix -ling. The meaning "person or thing left in place of one secretly taken" is from 1560s; the specific reference to an infant or young child (usually stupid, strange, or ugly) superstitiously believed to have been l

 frizzle 

 "curl hair," 1560s, of obscure origin. There are words of similar sound and sense in Old English (fris "curly"), Old Frisian (frisle), French (friser "to curl") but their history is tangled; probably connected somehow to frizz (v.). Related: Frizzled; frizzling. As a noun from 16

 rapscallion 

 "A rascally, disorderly, or despicable person" [Century Dictionary], 1690s, alteration of rascallion (1640s), a fanciful elaboration of rascal (q.v.). It had a parallel in now-extinct rampallion (1590s), from Middle English ramp (n.2) "ill-behaved woman." Also compare rascabilian

 Share fry 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fry Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fry">Etymology of fry by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fry. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fry Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fry," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fry. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fry." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fry. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fry." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fry (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fry 
 frumpy 
 frustrate 
 frustrated 
 frustration 
 frustum 
 fry 
 fryer 
 frying-pan 
 fubar 
 fubsy 
 fuchsia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix