URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pneumonia
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:07:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pneumonia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pneumonia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pneumonia 

 pneumonia (n.) 

 "inflammation of the tissues of the lungs" (as distinct from the bronchial tubes or the serous covering of the lungs), c. 1600, from Modern Latin, from Greek pneumonia "inflammation of the lungs," from pneumōn "lung" (see pneumo- ).
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to pneumonia 

 pneumo- 

 before vowels pneum- , word-forming element meaning "lung," from Greek pneumōn "lung," altered (probably by influence of pnein "to breathe") from pleumōn (which was an alternative form in Attic), literally "floater," probably cognate with Latin pulmo "lung(s)," from PIE root *pleu- "to flow." The notion perhaps is from the fact that, when thrown into a pot of water, lungs of a slaughtered animal float, while the heart, liver, etc., do not (compare Middle English lights "the lungs," literally "the light (in weight) organs"). Greek pneumōn also meant "jellyfish, medusa," "perhaps from its rhythmical pulsation, as if breathing" [Thompson].

 *pleu- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to flow."

 It might form all or part of: fletcher ; fledge ; flee ; fleet (adj.) "swift;" fleet (n.) "group of ships under one command;" fleet (v.) "to float, drift; flow, run;" fleeting ; flight (n.1) "act of flying;" flight (n.2) "act of fleeing;" flit ; float ; flood ; flotsam ; flotilla ; flow ; flue ; flugelhorn ; fluster ; flutter ; fly (v.1) "move through the air with wings;" fly (n.) "winged insect;" fowl ; plover ; Pluto ; plutocracy ; pluvial ; pneumo- ; pneumonia ; pneumonic ; pulmonary .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit plavate "navigates, swims;" Greek plynein "to wash," plein "to navigate," ploein "to float, swim," plotos "floating, navigable," pyelos "trough, basin;" Latin plovere "to rain," pluvius "rainy;" Armenian luanam "I wash;" Old English flowan "to flow;" Old Church Slavonic plovo "to flow, navigate;" Lithuanian pilu , pilti "to pour out," plauju , plauti "to swim, rinse."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 score 

 late Old English scoru "twenty," from Old Norse skor "mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock," also, in Icelandic, "twenty," from Proto-Germanic *skur-, from PIE root *sker- (1) "to cut." The notion probably is of counting large numbers (of a passing flock of sheep, etc.) by makin

 theory 

 1590s, "conception, mental scheme," from Late Latin theoria (Jerome), from Greek theōria "contemplation, speculation; a looking at, viewing; a sight, show, spectacle, things looked at," from theōrein "to consider, speculate, look at," from theōros "spectator," from thea "a view" 

 key 

 "instrument for opening locks," Middle English keie, from Old English cæg "metal piece that works a lock, key" literal and figurative ("solution, explanation, one who or that which opens the way or explains"), a word of unknown origin, abnormal evolution, and no sure cognates oth

 equivocal 

 "of doubtful signification, capable of being understood in different senses," c. 1600, with -al (1) + Late Latin aequivocus "of identical sound, of equal voice, of equal significance, ambiguous, of like sound," past participle of aequivocare, from aequus "equal" (see equal (adj.)

 poet 

 "one endowed with the gift and power of imaginative invention and creation, attended by corresponding eloquence of expression, commonly but not necessarily in a metrical form" [Century Dictionary, 1895], early 14c., "a poet, an author of metrical compositions; one skilled in the 

 proportion 

 late 14c., proporcioun, "due relation of one part to another," also "size, extent; comparative relation of one thing to another in size, degree, number, etc.," from Old French proporcion "measure, proportion" (13c.) and directly from Latin proportionem (nominative proportio) "com

 represent 

 late 14c., representen, "show, display, express; bring to mind by description," also "to symbolize, serve as a sign or symbol of (something else, something abstract); serve as the type or embodiment of;" also be a representative of" (the authority of another). This is from Old Fr

 police 

 1530s, "the regulation and control of a community" (similar in sense to policy (n.1)); from Middle French police "organized government, civil administration" (late 15c.), from Latin politia "civil administration," from Greek polis "city" (see polis). Until mid-19c. used in Englan

 staple 

 late 13c., stapel, "bent piece of metal with pointed ends," from Old English stapol, stapel "post, pillar, trunk of a tree, steps to a house," from Proto-Germanic *stapulaz "pillar" (source also of Old Norse stopull "tower," Old Saxon stapal "candle, small tub," Old Frisian stapu

 chagrin 

 1650s, "melancholy," from French chagrin "melancholy, anxiety, vexation" (14c.), from Old North French chagreiner or Angevin dialect chagraigner "sadden," which is of unknown origin, perhaps [Gamillscheg] from Old French graignier "grieve over, be angry," from graigne "sadness, r

 Share pneumonia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pneumonia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pneumonia">Etymology of pneumonia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pneumonia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pneumonia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pneumonia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pneumonia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pneumonia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pneumonia. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pneumonia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pneumonia (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pneumonia 
 pneuma 
 pneumatic 
 pneumatics 
 pneumato- 
 pneumo- 
 pneumonia 
 pneumonic 
 pneumono- 
 pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis 
 pneumothorax 
 pnyx 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix