URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dialysis
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:21:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dialysis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dialysis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dialysis 

 dialysis (n.) 

 1580s, in logic and grammar, in the latter "division of one syllable into two," from Latin, from Greek dialysis "dissolution, separation" (used of the disbanding of troops, a divorce, etc.), from dialyein "dissolve, separate," from dia "apart" + lyein "loosen" (from PIE root *leu- "to loosen, divide, cut apart").

 Chemistry sense of "process by which particles are selectively removed from a liquid by consequence of their differing capacity to pass through a membrane into another liquid" is from 1861; the specific sense in medicine, "process of blood purification by allowing it to pass through a membrane" is by 1914. Related: Dialytic . The verb dialyze was formed from the noun on the model of analyze , etc.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to dialysis 

 *leu- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to loosen, divide, cut apart."

 It might form all or part of: absolute ; absolution ; absolve ; analysis ; analytic ; catalysis ; catalyst ; catalytic ; dialysis ; dissolve ; electrolysis ; electrolyte ; forlorn ; Hippolytus ; hydrolysis ; -less ; loess ; loose ; lorn ; lose ; loss ; Lysander ; lysergic ; lysis ; -lysis ; lyso- ; lysol ; lytic ; -lytic ; palsy ; paralysis ; pyrolusite ; resolute ; resolution ; resolve ; soluble ; solute ; solution ; solve ; solvent .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit lunati "cuts, cuts off," lavitram "sickle;" Greek lyein "to loosen, untie, slacken," lysus "a loosening;" Latin luere "to loose, release, atone for, expiate;" Old Norse lauss "loose, free, unencumbered; vacant; dissolute;" Old English losian "be lost, perish."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 osmosis 

 "the tendency of fluids to pass through porous partitions and mix with each other; the diffusion of fluids through membranes," 1867, Latinized from osmose (1854), a shortened form of endosmose "inward passage of a fluid through a porous septum" (1829), from endo- "inward," which 

 analyze 

 c. 1600, of material things, "to dissect, take to pieces," from French analyser, from the noun analyse "analysis" (see analysis). Of literature, "examine critically to get the essence of," from 1610s; the meaning in chemistry ("resolve a compound into elements") dates from 1660s.

 data 

 1640s, "a fact given or granted," classical plural of datum, from Latin datum "(thing) given," neuter past participle of dare "to give" (from PIE root *do- "to give"). In classical use originally "a fact given as the basis for calculation in mathematical problems." From 1897 as "

 conceive 

 late 13c., conceiven, "take (seed) into the womb, become pregnant," from stem of Old French conceveir (Modern French concevoir), from Latin concipere (past participle conceptus) "to take in and hold; become pregnant" (source also of Spanish concebir, Portuguese concebre, Italian 

 robust 

 1540s, of persons, "having or indicating great strength, muscular, vigorous," from French robuste (14c.) and directly from Latin robustus "strong and hardy," literally "as strong as oak," originally "oaken," from robur, robus "hard timber, strength," also "a special kind of oak,"

 orchid 

 1845, introduced by John Lindley in the third edition of "School Botany," from Modern Latin Orchideæ (Linnaeus), the plant's family name, from Latin orchis, a kind of orchid, from Greek orkhis (genitive orkheos) "orchid," literally "testicle," from PIE *h(o)rghi-, the standard In

 python 

 1580s, name of a fabled serpent, slain by Apollo near Delphi, from Latin Python, from Greek Pythōn "serpent slain by Apollo," probably related to Pythō, the old name of Delphi. Chaucer has it (late 14c.) as Phitoun. This might be related to pythein "to rot," or from PIE *dhubh-(o

 Albuquerque 

 city in New Mexico, founded 1706 and named for Spanish administrator and viceroy of Mexico Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, Duque de Alburquerque (1617-1676); the name subsequently was altered by association with Portuguese hero Alfonso d'Albuquerque (1453-1515), the "Portuguese 

 scissors 

 "pair of shears of medium or small size," late 14c., sisoures, also cisours, sesours, cisurs, etc., from Old French cisoires (plural) "shears," from Vulgar Latin *cisoria (plural) "cutting instrument," from *cisus (in compounds such as Latin excisus, past participle of excidere "

 Kyrie eleison 

 early 13c., a Greek liturgical formula adopted untranslated into the Latin mass, literally "lord have mercy" (Psalms cxxii.3, Matthew xv.22, xvii.15, etc.). From kyrie, vocative of kyrios "lord, master" (see church (n.)) + eleeson, aorist imperative of eleo "I have pity on, show 

 Share dialysis 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dialysis Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dialysis">Etymology of dialysis by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dialysis. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dialysis Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dialysis," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dialysis. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dialysis." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dialysis. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dialysis." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dialysis (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dialysis 
 dialling 
 dialog 
 dialogic 
 dialogue 
 dial-up 
 dialysis 
 diamante 
 diameter 
 diametral 
 diametric 
 diametrically 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix