URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/swallow
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:17:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Swallow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Swallow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of swallow 

 swallow (v.) 

 "ingest through the throat" (transitive), Middle English swolwen , from Old English swelgan "swallow, imbibe, absorb" (class III strong verb; past tense swealg , past participle swolgen ), from Proto-Germanic *swelgan / *swelhan (source also of Old Saxon farswelgan , Old Norse svelgja "to swallow," Middle Dutch swelghen , Dutch zwelgen "to gulp, swallow," Old High German swelahan "to swallow," German schwelgen "to revel"). This is held to be from PIE root *swel- (1) "to eat, drink" (source also of Iranian *khvara- "eating").

 As "drown, engulf" (of the sea, the grave, etc.) by late 12c. The figurative sense of "consume, destroy" is attested from mid-14c. The meaning "accept (belief, opinion, statement) without question, take into the mind readily and credulously" is from 1590s. The intransitive sense "perform the act of swallowing" is from c. 1700. Related: Swallowed ; swallowing .

 swallow (n.1) 

 type of migratory bird, notable for its twittering cry; swift, arcing flight; and pointed wings and forked tail; Middle English swalwe , from Old English swealwe "swallow," from Proto-Germanic *swalwon (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Swedish svala , Danish svale , Middle Dutch zwalewe , Dutch zwaluw , Old High German swalawa , German Schwalbe ), from PIE *swol-wi- (source also of Russian solowej , Slovak slavik , Polish słowik "nightingale").

 The original sense of the word is disputed. The birds are popularly regarded as harbingers of summer. Halliwell, "Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words" (1847) has swallow-day "April 15."

 It is not one swalowe that bryngeth in somer. [Richard Taverner, "Proverbs or Adages by Desiderius Erasmus," 1539] 

 The Latin name was hirundo , hence the genus name. Some sources propose an onomatopoeic origin for this, which de Vaan finds "possible, but the suffix remains unclear;" he suggests as more likely the suggestion that the swallow is named for its forked tail, which could connect hirundo and wand (n.).

 The swallow-hawk (by 1842, also swallow-tailed hawk , 1711) is so called for the shape and the mode of its flight.

 Swallows building nests on or near a house is considered good luck. But swallow-struck was "bewitched or injured by a swallow."

 Among many superstitions connected with swallows are those to the effect that if the bird flies under one's arm the limb is paralyzed, and if under a cow the milk becomes bloody. [Century Dictionary, which compares 
 witch-chick , and 
 shrew-struck ] 

 swallow (n.2) 

 "an act of swallowing," 1822, from swallow (v.). In late Old English and Middle English it meant "gulf, abyss, whirlpool; hole in the earth" into which a stream disappears underground; also, in Middle English, "cavity of the throat, gullet." Compare Old Norse svelgr "whirlpool," literally "devourer, swallower." The meaning "that which is swallowed, as much as one can swallow at once, mouthful" is from 1861.
 also from 1822 

 Entries linking to swallow 

 wand (n.) 

 c. 1200, wonde , "slender stick," from Old Norse vondr "rod, switch" (cognate with Gothic wandus "rod," Middle Swedish vander , Danish vaand ), from Proto-Germanic *wend- "to turn," see wind (v.1)). The notion is of a bending, flexible stick.

 Also compare cognate Old Norse veggr , Old English wag "wall," Old Saxon, Dutch wand , Old High German want , German Wand "wall," originally "wickerwork for making walls," or "wall made of wattle-work." A glimpse of prehistoric building.

 Also from c. 1200 of a rod as a scourge, thus figurative of punishment. By mid-13c. as "scepter," also "rod or staff having some special use or power," in reference to the staff Moses turned into a serpent in the presence of Pharaoh in Exodus ("Moyseses migtful wond").

 In early Middle English figurative of what is pliant or weak, but by c. 1400 the etymological sense of "suppleness" seems to have been largely lost.

 manticore (n.) 

 fabulous monster mentioned by Ctesias with the body of a lion, head of a man, porcupine quills, and tail or sting of a scorpion, c. 1300, from Latin manticora , from Greek mantikhoras , corruption of martikhoras , perhaps from Iranian compound *mar-tiya-khvara "man-eater."

 The first element is represented by Old Persian maritya- "man," from PIE *mar-t-yo- , from *mer- "to die," thus "mortal, human;" from PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm" (also "to die" and forming words referring to death and to beings subject to death). The second element is represented by Old Persian kvar- "to eat," from PIE root *swel- (1) "to eat, drink" (see swallow (v.)).

 swallowtail 
 swill 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sup 

 "eat the evening meal," c. 1300, soupen, from Old French super, soper "dine, sup, dip bread in soup or wine, sop up" (Modern French souper), which probably is from soupe "broth" (see soup (n.)), until recently still the traditional evening meal of French workers. Compare sup (v.2

 drink 

 Old English drincan "to swallow water or other fluid," also "to swallow up, engulf" (class III strong verb; past tense dranc, past participle druncen), from Proto-Germanic *drenkanan (source also of Old Saxon drinkan, Old Frisian drinka, Dutch drinken, Old High German trinkan, Ge

 bury 

 Old English byrgan "to raise a mound, hide, enclose in a grave or tomb, inter," akin to beorgan "to shelter," from Proto-Germanic *burzjan- "protection, shelter" (source also of Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga, Swedish berga, Old High German bergan "protect, shel

 devour 

 "devour, swallow up, engulf," from Latin devorare "swallow down, accept eagerly," from de "down" (see de-) + vorare "to swallow...To "swallow up" figuratively (a book, etc.) from 1580s; to "take in ravenously" with the eyes, 1620s....

 knock 

 To knock back (a drink) "swallow quickly or at a gulp" is from 1931....

 absorb 

 by absorption," early 15c., from Old French absorbir, assorbir (13c., Modern French absorber), from Latin absorbere "to swallow...

 gull 

 it is perhaps from (or influenced by) the bird name (see gull (n.1)); in either case with a sense of "someone who will swallow...

 mouth 

 Old English muþ "oral opening of an animal or human; opening of anything, door, gate," from Proto-Germanic *muntha- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund, German Mund, Gothic munþs "mouth"), 

 enclose 

 enclosen, "to surround (a plot of ground, a town, a building, etc.) with walls, fences, or other barriers," early 14c., from en- (1) + close (v.), and partially from Old French enclos, past participle of enclore "surround; confine; contain." Specific sense of "to fence in waste o

 speak 

 Middle English speken, from Old English specan, variant of sprecan "to utter words articulately without singing, have or use the power of speech; make a speech; hold discourse" with others (class V strong verb; past tense spræc, past participle sprecen), from Proto-Germanic *spre

 Share swallow 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/swallow Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/swallow">Etymology of swallow by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of swallow. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/swallow Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of swallow," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/swallow. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of swallow." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/swallow. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of swallow." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/swallow (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near swallow 
 swaggerer 
 Swahili 
 swain 
 SWAK 
 swale 
 swallow 
 swallowtail 
 swam 
 swami 
 swamp 
 swamper 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix