URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/biscuit
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:53:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Biscuit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Biscuit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of biscuit 

 biscuit (n.) 

 "kind of hard, dry bread baked in thin flat cakes," respelled early 19c. from bisket (16c.), ultimately ( besquite , early 14c.) from Old French bescuit "biscuit" (12c.), altered under influence of cognate Old Italian biscotto , both from Medieval Latin biscoctum , literally "twice-baked," from Latin (panis) bis coctus "(bread) twice-baked;" see bis- + cook (v.). The U.S. sense of "small, round soft bun" is recorded from 1818.
 also from early 19c. 

 Entries linking to biscuit 

 cook (v.) 

 late 14c., in the most basic sense, "to make fit for eating by the action of heat," but especially "to prepare in an appetizing way by various combinations of material and flavoring," from cook (n.).

 Old English had gecocnian , cognate with Old High German cochon , German kochen , all verbs from nouns, but the Middle English word seems to be a fresh formation from the noun in English. The figurative sense of "to manipulate, falsify, alter, doctor" is from 1630s (phrase cook the books is attested by 1954). Related: Cooked , cooking . Phrase what's cooking? "what's up, what's going on" is attested by 1942. To cook with gas "do well, act or think correctly" is 1930s jive talk.

 The expression "NOW YOU'RE COOKING WITH GAS" has bobbed up again — this time as a front page streamer on the Roper Ranger, and as the banner line in the current advertising series of the Nashville (Tenn.) Gas and Heating Company, cleverly tying gas cooking to local food products and restaurants. "Now you're cooking with gas" literally took the gas industry by the ears around December 1939 — Remember? — when it flashed forth in brilliant repartee from the radio programs of the Maxwell Coffee Hour, Jack Benny, Chase and Sanborn, Johnson Wax, Bob Hope and sundry others. [American Gas Association Monthly, vol. xxiii, 1941]

 biscotti (n.) 

 kind of long, crisp cookies containing nuts,1990s, from Italian biscotti , plural of biscotto , from Medieval Latin biscoctum , literally "twice-baked," from Latin (panis) bis coctus "(bread) twice-baked;" see bis- + cook (v.). Compare biscuit .

 bisque 
 Triscuit 
 zwieback 
 bis- 
 *dwo- 
 *pekw- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cookie 

 1730, Scottish, but the sense is "plain bun," and it is debatable whether it is the same word; in the sense of "small, flat, sweet cake" by 1808 (American English); this use is from Dutch koekje "little cake," diminutive of koek "cake," from Middle Dutch koke (see cake (n.)). "Du

 pretzel 

 1836, "small, crisp biscuit in the form of a knot, salted on the outside," from German Prezel, also Brezel, from Middle High...German brezel, prezel, from Old High German brezitella, brecedela, from Medieval Latin *brachitella, presumably a kind of biscuit...

 scouse 

 A dish much eaten at sea, composed of salt beef, biscuit and onions, well peppered, and stewed together....

 firecracker 

 English coinage for what is in England a cracker (n.1), but the longer U.S. word distinguishes it from the word meaning "biscuit...

 bun 

 "small, slightly sweetened roll or biscuit," late 14c., of obscure and much-disputed origin; perhaps [Skeat] from Old French...

 chowder 

 A favorite dish in New England, made of fish, pork, onions, and biscuit stewed together....

 kiss 

 Old English cyssan "to touch with the lips" (in respect, reverence, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *kussjan (source also of Old Saxon kussian, Old Norse kyssa, Old Frisian kessa, Middle Dutch cussen, Dutch, Old High German kussen, German küssen, Norwegian and Danish kysse, Swedish ky

 Oreo 

  type of cookie (made by Nabisco), 1912; the source of the name has been forgotten. As a derogatory word for "black person felt to have a 'white' mentality," 1968, African-American vernacular, from the snack cookies, which consist of dark chocolate wafers and white sugar cre

 cake 

 early 13c., "flat or comparatively thin mass of baked dough," from Old Norse kaka "cake," from West Germanic *kokon- (source also of Middle Dutch koke, Dutch koek "a cake, gingerbread, dumpling," Old High German kuohho, German Kuchen "a cake, a tart"). Not believed to be related 

 brownie 

 1510s, "benevolent goblin supposed to haunt old farmhouses in Scotland," diminutive of brown "a wee brown man" (see brown (adj.)). The brownie was believed to be very useful to the family, particularly if treated well by them, and to the servants, for whom while they slept he wa

 Share biscuit 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/biscuit Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/biscuit">Etymology of biscuit by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of biscuit. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/biscuit Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of biscuit," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/biscuit. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of biscuit." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/biscuit. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of biscuit." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/biscuit (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near biscuit 
 birthright 
 birthstone 
 bis- 
 Biscay 
 biscotti 
 biscuit 
 bisect 
 bisection 
 bisector 
 bisexual 
 bisexuality 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix