URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/period
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:34:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Period - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Period - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of period 

 period (n.) 

 early 15c., periode , "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle of the Greek games," from Greek periodos "cycle, circuit, period of time," literally "a going around," from peri "around" (see peri- ) + hodos "a going, traveling, journey; a way, path, road," a word of uncertain origin (see Exodus ).

 Sense of "repeated cycle of events" led to that of "interval of time." From 1712 as "an indefinite part of any continued state or series of events;" by 1727 as "time in which a circuit or revolution (as of a heavenly body) is made." Sense of "episode of menstruation" is by 1829, probably short for period of menstruation (1808), etc. 

 The meaning "dot marking end of a sentence" is recorded c. 1600, from the earlier sense of "a complete sentence, from one full stop to another," then "a full pause at the end of a sentence" (1580s). The educational sense of "portion of time set apart for a lesson" is from 1876. The sporting sense "division of a game or contest" is attested by 1898. As an adjective from 1905; period piece is attested from 1911.
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to period 

 Exodus 

 late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus , from Greek exodos "a military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death," literally "a going out," from ex "out" (see ex- ) + hodos "a way, path, road; a ride, journey, march," figuratively "way out, means," a word of uncertain origin.

 The book is so called because it tells of the departure of the Israelites from Egypt under the leadership of Moses. General sense (with lower-case -e- ) "departure from a place," especially "the migration of large bodies of people or animals from one country or region to another," is from 1620s.

 Beekes derives the Greek word from PIE *sod- "course" and says it is traditionally connected with Slavic words for "course" (such as Russian xod "course, progress," "which might have been borrowed from Iranian") and adds that it is perhaps also related to Sanskrit a-sad- "to tread on, go on," Avestan apa-had- "to go away; become weak," "but the relation between them is unclear, as is the connection to the PIE root *sed- "sit" (proposed in Watkins, etc.)."

 comma (n.) 

 punctuation mark, 1520s as a Latin word, nativized by 1590s, from Latin comma "short phrase or clause of a sentence or line of poetry," from Greek komma "clause in a sentence," also "stamp, coinage," literally "piece which is cut off," from koptein "to strike, smite, cut off; disable, tire out," which is perhaps from PIE root *kop- "to beat, strike, smite" (see hatchet (n.)), or perhaps Pre-Greek.

 Like colon (n.1) and period it was originally a Greek rhetorical term for a part of a sentence, and like them it has been transferred to the punctuation mark that identifies it. In reading aloud the punctuation mark is used to admit small interruptions in continuity of speech for the sake of clarity, but its purpose is to indicate grammatical structure.

 periodic 
 photoperiodism 
 sentence 
 peri- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 periodic 

 "proceeding in a series of successive revolutions; pertaining to or of the nature of a cycle or period" 1640s, from French périodique (14c.), from Late Latin periodicus "that returns at stated intervals of time," from Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle" (see period). From 1

 flow 

 Old English flowan "to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow" (class VII strong verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flowan "to flow" (source also of Middle Dutch vloyen, Dutch vloeien, vloeijen "to flow," Old Norse floa "to d

 point 

 c. 1200, pointe, "minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc.," a merger of two words, both ultimately from Latin pungere "to prick, pierce," from a nasalized form of PIE root *peuk- "to prick." The Latin neuter past participle punctum was used as a noun, me

 Ordovician 

 in reference to the geological period following the Cambrian and preceding the Silurian, 1879, coined by English geologist...The period was so called because rocks from it first were studied extensively in the region around Bala in North Wales....The geological period at first was considered as either part of the Silurian or the Cambrian, and Lapworth's proposed name...took time to win universal acceptance, not receiving international approval as an official period until 1960....

 Julian 

 Julian period, a period of 7,980 Julian years proposed by Joseph Scaliger in 1582 as a universal standard of comparison in...The first years of these cycles coincided in the year 4713 B.C., from which the period is reckoned....The first year of the Christian era being found by calculation to correspond to the year 4714 of the Julian period, all previous...This period is still used in the computations of chronologists and astronomers. [Century Dictionary, 1899]...

 quarantine 

 1660s, "period a ship suspected of carrying contagious disease is kept in isolation," from Italian quaranta giorni, literally...The extended sense of "any period of forced isolation" is from 1670s....Earlier in English the word meant "period of 40 days in which a widow has the right to remain in her dead husband's house...

 epoch 

 1610s, epocha, "point marking the start of a new period in time" (such as the founding of Rome, the birth of Christ, the...Transferred sense of "a period of time" is 1620s; geological usage (not a precise measurement) is from 1802....

 generation 

 early 14c., "body of individuals born about the same period" (historically 30 years but in other uses as few as 17), on the notion of "descendants at the same stage in the line of descent," from Old French generacion "race, people, species; progeny, offspring; act of procreating"

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 Share period 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/period Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/period">Etymology of period by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of period. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/period Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of period," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/period. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of period." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/period. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of period." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/period (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near period 
 peril 
 perilous 
 perimeter 
 perinatal 
 perineum 
 period 
 periodic 
 periodical 
 periodicity 
 periodontal 
 periodontics 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix