URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tattoo
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:18:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tattoo - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tattoo - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tattoo 

 tattoo (n.1) 

 1680s, "signal calling soldiers or sailors to quarters at night," earlier tap-to (1640s), from Dutch taptoe , from tap "faucet of a cask" (see tap (n.1)) + toe "shut, to" (from Proto-Germanic *to ; see to (prep.)). "So called because police formerly visited taverns in the evening to shut off the taps of casks" [Barnhart].

 In 17c. Dutch the phrase apparently was used with a transferred or figurative sense "say no more." In English, the transferred sense of "drumbeat" is recorded from 1755. Hence, Devil's tattoo "action of idly drumming fingers in irritation or impatience" (1803).
 also from 1680s 

 tattoo (n.2) 

 "pigment design inlaid under the skin," 1769 (noun and verb, both first attested in writing of Capt. Cook), from a Polynesian noun (such as Tahitian and Samoan tatau , Marquesan tatu "puncture, mark made on skin").

 Century Dictionary (1902) describes them as found on sailors and uncivilized people or as a sentence of punishment. Earlier names in English included Jerusalem cross (1690s) in reference to tattoos on the arms of pilgrims to the Holy Land, also Jerusalem letters (1760).
 also from 1769 

 tattoo (v.1) 

 "form permanent marks or designs on the skin with pigment inlaid under it," 1769, tattow , from tattoo (n.2). Related: Tattooed ; tattooing; tattooer . Thackeray has tattooage .
 also from 1769 

 tattoo (v.2) 

 "to beat a drum; beat as a drum," 1784, from tattoo (n.1).
 also from 1784 

 Entries linking to tattoo 

 tap (n.1) 

 [stopper] Middle English tappe "faucet through which liquid can be drawn, hollow or tubular plug for controlling the flow of liquid from a vent or hole," from Old English tæppa , from Proto-Germanic *tappon (source also of Middle Dutch tappe , Dutch tap , Old High German zapfo , German Zapfe ). Boutkan gives it no IE etymology.

 Perhaps originally a tapering cylindrical peg for a cask, then a hollowed one to draw from it; compare the sense evolution of spigot .

 The phrase on tap "ready for use, ready to be drawn and served" is recorded from late 15c. Tap-wrench , used in turning the tool that drives a tap, is attested from 1815.

 to (prep.) 

 Old English to , ta , te , "in the direction of, as far as (a place, state, goal)," opposite of from ; also "for the purpose of, furthermore;" from West Germanic *to (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian to , Dutch toe , Old High German zuo , German zu "to"). Not found in Scandinavian, where the equivalent of till (prep.) is used.

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE pronominal base *do- "to, toward, upward" (source also of Latin donec "as long as," Old Church Slavonic do "as far as, to," Greek suffix -d ē "to, toward," Old Irish do , Lithuanian da- ), from demonstrative *de-. Also see too .

 English to also supplies the place of the dative in other languages. The near-universal use of to as the verbal particle with infinitives ( to sleep, to dream , etc.) arose in Middle English out of the Old English dative use of to and helped shade out the Old English inflectional endings. In this use to is a mere sign, without meaning. Compare similar use of German zu , French à , de .

 As an adverb of motion, direction, etc., "to a place in view, to a thing to be done," in Old English. This use was frequent in Middle English in verbal combinations where it renders Latin ad- , com- , con- , ex- , in- , ob- . As a conjunction, "until, up to the time that," by late Old English.

 The distribution of verbs among at , to , with , of has been idiosyncratic and varied. Before vowels it was sometimes shortened to t' . The phrase what's it to you "how does that concern you?" (1819) is a modern form of an old question:

 Huæd is ðec ðæs? 

 [John xxi:22, in Lindisfarne Gospel, c.950] 

 Used absolutely at the end of a clause. with ellipsis of infinitive (same as the proceeding clause: would do it but don't have time to ), it is attested from 14c.; OED reports it "rare before 19th c.; now a frequent colloquialism."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stigma 

 ," from Latin stigma (plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) "mark of a pointed instrument, puncture, tattoo-mark..., brand," which is related to stizein "to mark, tattoo" (from PIE root *steig- "to stick; pointed" (see stick (v.))....

 paint 

 from peint, past participle of peindre "to paint," from Latin pingere "to paint, represent in a picture, stain; embroider, tattoo...

 stain 

 mid-14c., steinen, "ornament with a design;" late 14c., "damage or blemish the appearance of," also "impart color, dye;" the word is probably a merger of Old Norse steina "to paint, color, stain," and a shortened form of Middle English disteynen "to discolor or stain," from Old F

 saint 

 early 12c. as an adjective, seinte, "holy, divinely inspired, worthy of worship," used before proper names (Sainte Marian Magdalene, etc.), from Old French saint, seinte "holy, pious, devout," from Latin sanctus "holy, consecrated," past participle of sancire "consecrate" (see sa

 satin 

 "smooth, lustrous silken cloth; silk fabric with a very glossy surface and the back less so," mid-14c., from Old French satin (14c.), perhaps from Arabic (atlas) zaytuni, literally "(satin) from Zaitun," name of a place in China, perhaps modern Quanzhou in Fukien province, a majo

 design 

 late 14c., "to make, shape," ultimately from Latin designare "mark out, point out; devise; choose, designate, appoint," from de "out" (see de-) + signare "to mark," from signum "identifying mark, sign" (see sign (n.)). The Italian verb disegnare in 16c. developed the senses "to c

 figure 

 c. 1200, "numeral;" mid-13c., "visible appearance of a person;" late 14c., "visible and tangible form of anything," from Old French figure "shape, body; form of a word; figure of speech; symbol, allegory" (10c), from Latin figura "a shape, form, figure; quality, kind, style; figu

 coordinate 

 1640s, "of the same order, belonging to the same rank or degree," from Medieval Latin coordinatus, past participle of coordinare "to set in order, arrange," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see com-) + ordinatio "arrangement," from ordo "row, rank, series, arrangeme

 decoration 

 early 15c., decoracioun, "the covering of blemishes with cosmetics;" 1580s, "action of adorning with something becoming or ornamental," from Medieval Latin decorationem (nominative decoratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin decorare "to decorate, adorn, embelli

 pattern 

 a Modern English variant of patron, retaining its other old sense of "outline, plan, model, an original proposed for imitation," from Old French patron "patron, protector; model, pattern." The difference in form and sense between English patron and pattern wasn't firm before 1700

 Share tattoo 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tattoo Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tattoo">Etymology of tattoo by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tattoo. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tattoo Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tattoo," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tattoo. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tattoo." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tattoo. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tattoo." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tattoo (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tattoo 
 tattered 
 tattersall 
 tatting 
 tattle 
 tattletale 
 tattoo 
 tatty 
 tau 
 taught 
 taunt 
 taupe 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix