URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sabbath
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:30:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sabbath - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Sabbath - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Sabbath 

 Sabbath (n.) 

 Middle English sabat , from Old English sabat "seventh day of the week in the Jewish calendar; Saturday" as observed by the Jews as a day of rest from secular employment and of religious observance, from Old French sabat and directly from Latin sabbatum , from Greek sabbaton , from Hebrew shabbath , properly "day of rest," from shabath "he rested" (from labor). The spelling with -th is attested from late 14c. but was not widespread until 16c.

 The Babylonians regarded seventh days as unlucky, and avoided certain activities on them; the Jewish observance might have begun as a similar custom. Among European Christians, the time of "Sabbath" shifted from the seventh day to the first (Sunday) via the Christians' celebration of the Lord's resurrection on the first day of the week (a Christian Sabbath ) "though no definite law, either divine or ecclesiastical, directed the change" [Century Dictionary], but elaborate justifications have been made. In English Sabbath as "Sunday" is evident by early 15c. The sense change was completed among the English people generally during the Reformation.

 The original use of the word is preserved in Spanish Sabado , Italian Sabato , and other languages' names for "Saturday." Hungarian szombat , Rumanian simbata , French samedi , German Samstag "Saturday" are from Vulgar Latin * sambatum , from Greek *sambaton , a vulgar nasalized variant of sabbaton . Gothic Sabbato , Sabbatus probably are directly from Greek.

 The meaning "any day (or month or year) in which religious rest is enjoined" is by late 14c.; the word also was used in Medieval Latin of any feast day, the solstice, etc. Sabbath-breaking "act of profaning the Sabbath" is attested from 1650s (to break the Sabbath is from late 14c.), formerly a legal violation in parts of the old U.S., "immoral, disturbing, or unnecessary labors or practices" [Century Dictionary]. Sabbath-school is by 1798.

 Entries linking to Sabbath 

 Sabaoth (n.) 

 "armies, hosts," only in Scripture, "the heavenly hosts," used as part of a title of God ( Lord of Sabaoth ), early 14c., from Late Latin Sabaoth (pl.), from Greek Sabaoth , transliterating Hebrew tzebhaoth "hosts, armies," plural of tzabha "army," from tzaba "he waged war, he served."

 The word was translated in English in the Old Testament by the phrase "Lord of Hosts," but left untranslated in the New Testament (and in the "Te Deum" ) in Lord of Sabaoth . It sometimes is confused with unrelated Sabbath .

 sabbat (n.) 

 "witches' sabbath," a midnight meeting supposed to have been held annually by demons, sorcerers, and witches under the leadership of Satan, to celebrate their orgies, 1650s, a special application of the French form of Sabbath (q.v.).

 Sabbatarian 
 sabbatical 
 Saturday 
 Shabbat 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sabbatical 

 1590s, "recurring in sevens or on every seventh;" 1640s, "of or suitable for the Sabbath," from Latin sabbaticus, from Greek sabbatikos "of the Sabbath," from sabbaton (see Sabbath). By 1836 as "characterized by rest or cessation from labor or tillage." Other adjectives from Sabb

 servile 

 appropriate to a servant or to the class of slaves," originally in reference to work that it is forbidden to do on the Sabbath...independence" is recorded from c. 1600 The earliest sense in English was Church-legal, servile work being forbidden on the Sabbath...

 holiday 

 1500s, earlier haliday (c. 1200), from Old English haligdæg "holy day, consecrated day, religious anniversary; Sabbath,"...

 Adventist 

 divisions of them; the Seventh-Day Adventists (by 1860, see seventh) were so called for their observation of Saturday as the Sabbath...

 accost 

 There is one locality in which vicious women accost persons as they issue from the door of a chapel on the Sabbath....

 seventh 

 Also in reference to Saturday as the sabbath of the Jews, hence Seventh-Day Adventist (by 1860), etc....

 deliver 

 c. 1200, deliveren, "save, rescue, set free, liberate," from Old French delivrer "to set free; remove; save, preserve; hand over (goods)," also used of childbirth, from Late Latin deliberare, from de "away" (see de-) + Latin liberare "to free," from liber "free, unrestricted, uni

 liberty 

 late 14c., "free choice, freedom to do as one chooses," also "freedom from the bondage of sin," from Old French liberte "freedom, liberty, free will" (14c., Modern French liberté), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) "civil or political freedom, condition of a free man; a

 almond 

 kernel of the fruit of the almond tree, c. 1300, from Old French almande, amande, earlier alemondle "almond," from Vulgar Latin *amendla, *amandula, from Latin amygdala (plural), from Greek amygdalos "an almond tree," a word of unknown origin, perhaps from Semitic. Late Old Engli

 project 

 c. 1400, projecte, "a plan, draft, scheme, design," from Medieval Latin proiectum "something thrown forth," noun use of neuter of Latin proiectus, past participle of proicere "stretch out, thrust out, throw forth," from pro- "forward" (see pro-) + combining form of iacere (past p

 Share Sabbath 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sabbath Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sabbath">Etymology of Sabbath by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Sabbath. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sabbath Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Sabbath," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sabbath. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Sabbath." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sabbath. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Sabbath." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sabbath (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Sabbath 
 Sabal 
 Sabaoth 
 sabaton 
 sabbat 
 Sabbatarian 
 Sabbath 
 sabbatical 
 Sabean 
 saber 
 Sabian 
 Sabin 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix