URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/garlic
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:02:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Garlic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Garlic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of garlic 

 garlic (n.) 

 "onion like bulbous plant allied to the leek, known to the ancients and much used in cookery," Middle English garlek , from Old English garlec (West Saxon), garleac (Mercian), "garlic," from gar "spear" (in reference to the clove), see gar , + leac "leek" (see leek ). Garlic-bread is attested by 1947.

 Entries linking to garlic 

 gar (n.) 

 pike-like fish, 1765, American English, shortening of garfish (mid-15c.), from fish (n.) + Middle English gare , gore "a spear," from Old English gar "spear," from Proto-Germanic *gaisa- "spear" (source also of Old Norse geirr "spear; point of an anvil," Old Saxon, Old High German ger , German Ger "spear"), from PIE *ghaiso- "a stick, spear" (see goad (n.)). The fish so called for its long sharp snout. Compare Edgar , garlic .

 leek (n.) 

 pungent bulbous culinary herb of the genus Allium , related to the onion, long the national badge of the Welsh, Old English læc (Mercian), leac (West Saxon) "leek, onion, garlic," from Proto-Germanic *lauka- (source also of Old Norse laukr "leek, garlic," Danish løg , Swedish lök "onion," Old Saxon lok "leek," Middle Dutch looc , Dutch look "leek, garlic," Old High German louh , German Lauch "leek"). No certain cognates outside Germanic; Finnish laukka , Russian luk- , Old Church Slavonic luku are said to be from Germanic. Also the final element in garlic .

 garlicky (adj.) 

 1775, from garlic + -y (2). The -k- perhaps to preserve the hard -c- , but garlick was a former alternative spelling.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ail 

 Middle English eilen, ailen, "trouble, afflict, harm," from Old English eglan "to trouble, plague, afflict," from Proto-Germanic *azljaz (source also of Old English egle "hideous, loathsome, troublesome, painful;" Gothic agls "shameful, disgraceful," agliþa "distress, affliction,

 clove 

 "slice or small bulb forming together a large bulb, as of garlic," Old English clufu "clove (of garlic), bulb, tuber," from...

 onion 

 The sense connection is the unity of the successive layers of an onion, in contrast with garlic or cloves....

 skeptic 

 also sceptic, 1580s, "member of an ancient Greek school that doubted the possibility of real knowledge," from French sceptique and directly from Latin scepticus "the sect of the Skeptics," from Greek skeptikos (plural Skeptikoi "the Skeptics, followers of Pyrrho"), noun use of ad

 hanker 

 c. 1600, "linger in expectation;" 1640s, "have a longing or craving for," of unknown origin. Probably from Flemish hankeren, related to Dutch hunkeren "to hanker, to long for," which is perhaps an intensive or frequentative of Middle Dutch hangen "to hang" (see hang (v.)). If so,

 explicit 

 1610s, "open to the understanding, not obscure or ambiguous," from French explicite, from Latin explicitus "unobstructed," variant past participle of explicare "unfold, unravel, explain," from ex "out" (see ex-) + plicare "to fold" (from PIE root *plek- "to plait"). As a euphemis

 kismet 

 "fate, destiny," 1834, from Turkish qismet, from Arabic qismah, qismat "portion, lot, fate," from root of qasama "he divided." From a nation of enthusiasts and conquerors, the Osmanlis became a nation of sleepers and smokers. They came into Europe with the sword in one hand and 

 disdain 

 mid-14c., desdeinen, "think unworthy or worthless, look upon with contempt," from Old French desdeignier "disdain, scorn, refuse, repudiate" (Modern French dédaigner), from des- "do the opposite of" (see dis-) + deignier "treat as worthy," from Latin dignari "to deem worthy or fi

 Jurassic 

 "of or pertaining to the geological period between the Triassic and the Cretaceous," 1823, from French Jurassique, literally "of the Jura Mountains," between France and Switzerland, whose limestones were laid down during this geological period. The name was chosen by von Humboldt

 jumbo 

 "very large, unusually large for its type," 1882, a reference to Jumbo, name of the London Zoo's huge elephant (acquired from France, said to have been captured as a baby in Abyssinia in 1861), sold February 1882 to U.S. circus showman P.T. Barnum amid great excitement in America

 Share garlic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/garlic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/garlic">Etymology of garlic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of garlic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/garlic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of garlic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/garlic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of garlic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/garlic. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of garlic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/garlic (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near garlic 
 gargle 
 gargoyle 
 Garibaldi 
 garish 
 garland 
 garlic 
 garlicky 
 garment 
 garner 
 garnet 
 garnish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix