URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/straw
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Straw - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Straw - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of straw 

 straw (n.) 

 Middle English strau , from Old English streaw (rare) "dried stems or stalks of certain grains after threshing," apparently literally "that which is scattered or strewn," related to streowian (see strew ), from PIE root *stere- "to spread."

 The notion perhaps is of dried grain stalks strewn on a floor as carpeting or bedding. As a type of what is trifling or unimportant, attested from late 13c. The meaning "hollow tube through which a drink is sucked" is recorded from 1851.

 As an adjective, "made of straw," mid-15c.; hence "false, sham," as in straw bid (by 1889). Straw poll "vote taken without previous notice or at a casual gathering" is from 1932; earlier straw vote (1866).

 Straw hat , one made of woven or plaited straw, is attested mid-15c. ( strawen hattis ).

 To clutch (or grasp or catch ) at straws (1748) is what a drowning man proverbially would do. The last straw (1836 apart from the full phrase) is from the proverbial "it is the last straw that breaks the camel's back" (or, less often, the mare's, the horse's, or the elephant's), an image in use in English by 1755.

 Let it not, however, be inferred that taxation cannot be pushed too far : it is, as the Oriental proverb says, the last straw that overloads the camel ; a small addition, if ill-timed, may overturn the whole. [The Scots Magazine, April 1799]

 To draw straws as a means of deciding something is recorded from 1779 (the custom probably is older). It also meant, in reference to the eyes, "give indications of sleepiness" (1690s). In the straw , of a woman, "giving birth" is from 1660s.

 Germanic cognates include Old Norse stra , Danish straa , Swedish strå , Old Saxon stro , Old Frisian stre , Old Dutch, Old High German stro , Dutch stroo , German Stroh "straw."

 Entries linking to straw 

 strew (v.) 

 Middle English streuen , "scatter about, spread loosely," from Old English strewian , streowian , from Proto-Germanic *strawjanan (source also of Old Frisian strewa , Old Saxon strowian , Old Norse stra , Danish strø , Swedish strö , Middle Dutch strowen , Dutch strooien , Old High German strouwen , German streuen , Gothic straujan "to sprinkle, strew"), from suffixed form of PIE root *stere- "to spread." Related: Strewed ; strewn ; strewing .

 Shakespeare found a noun to go with it in Hamlet's maiden strewments ; strewage was used by 1902 for "scattered things;" the earliest noun was simple strew (1590s) but this is rare.

 jackstraw (n.) 

 1590s, "effigy of a man made of straw," from jack (n.1) + straw (n.); hence "man without substance or means." It also was a name of one of the leaders of the Peasants' Revolt of 1381. As the name of a game played with straw or strips, from 1801. Related: Jackstraws .

 straw man 
 strawberry 
 *stere- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 strawberry 

 Middle English strauberi, used of the plant or its "fruit," from Old English streawberige, streaberie; see straw + berry. There is no corresponding compound in other Germanic languages; the reason for the name is uncertain, but perhaps it is in reference to the tiny chaff-like ex

 shuck 

 "to remove the shucks from," 1819, from or related to shuck (n.). Related: Shucked; shucker; shucking. Many extended U.S. slang senses are from the notion of "stripping" an ear of corn, or from the capers associated with husking frolics; such as "to strip (off) one's clothes" (18

 stalk 

 "stem or main axis of a plant," early 14c., probably a diminutive (with -k suffix) of Middle English stale "one of the uprights of a ladder, handle, stalk," from Old English stalu "wooden part" (of a tool or instrument), from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (source also of Old English st

 fescue 

 1510s, "teacher's pointer," alteration of festu "piece of straw, twig" (late 14c.), from Old French festu "straw; object...of little value" (12c., Modern French fétu), from Vulgar Latin *festucum, from Latin festuca "straw, stalk, rod," probably...In Old French rompre le festu was to symbolically break a straw to signify the breaking of a bond....

 litter 

 on men's shoulders" (early 14c.), from Anglo-French litere "portable bed," Old French litiere "litter, stretcher, bier; straw...The meaning was extended early 15c. to "straw used for bedding" (this sense is early 14c. in Anglo-French) and by late 15c...Litter by 19c. had come to mean both the straw bedding and the animal waste in it after use...."provide with bedding" (late 14c.) and sense extended from the image of strewing straw....

 forage 

 fodder," from Old French forrage "fodder; foraging; pillaging, looting" (12c., Modern French fourrage), from fuerre "hay, straw..., bed of straw; forage, fodder" (Modern French feurre), from Frankish *fodr "food" or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic...

 scarecrow 

 Meaning "figure of straw and old clothes made to resemble a person and set in a grain field or garden" to frighten crows...Shoy-hoy apparently is another old word for a straw-stuffed scarecrow (Cobbett began using it as a political insult in 1819...

 yellow 

 Middle English yelwe, from Old English geolu, geolwe, "yellow," from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish gul "yellow"), from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to sh

 wrest 

 Old English wræstan "to twist, wrench," from Proto-Germanic *wraistjan (source of Old Norse reista "to bend, twist"), from *wreik- "to turn," from PIE root *wer- (2) "to turn, bend." Compare wrist. The meaning "to pull, detach" (something) is recorded from c. 1300. Meaning "to ta

 distribute 

 early 15c., distributen, "to deal out or apportion, bestow in parts or in due proportion," from Latin distributus, past participle of distribuere "to divide, deal out in portions," from dis- "individually" (see dis-) + tribuere "to pay, assign, grant," also "allot among the tribe

 Share straw 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/straw Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/straw">Etymology of straw by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of straw. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/straw Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of straw," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/straw. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of straw." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/straw. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of straw." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/straw (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near straw 
 stratography 
 stratosphere 
 stratovolcano 
 stratum 
 stratus 
 straw 
 straw man 
 strawberry 
 stray 
 streak 
 streaking 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix