URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Austria
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:32:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Austria - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Austria - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Austria 

 Austria 

 central European nation, from Medieval Latin Marchia austriaca "eastern borderland." German Österreich is "eastern kingdom," from Old High German ostar "eastern" (from Proto-Germanic *aust- "east," literally "toward the sunrise," from PIE root *aus- (1) "to shine," especially of the dawn) + reich "kingdom, realm, state" (from Proto-Germanic *rikja "rule," from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight line," thus "to lead, rule"). So called for being on the eastern edge of Charlemagne's empire. Related: Austrian .

 Entries linking to Austria 

 *aus- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine," especially of the dawn. It might form all or part of: austral ; Australia ; Austria ; Austro- ; Aurora ; east ; Easter ; eastern ; eo- ; Ostrogoth .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit usah "dawn;" Greek ēōs "dawn;" Latin Aurora "goddess of dawn," auster "south wind;" Lithuanian aušra "dawn;" Old English east "east."

 *reg- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight line," thus "to lead, rule."

 It might form all or part of: abrogate ; address ; adroit ; Alaric ; alert ; anorectic ; anorexia ; arrogant ; arrogate ; bishopric ; correct ; corvee ; derecho ; derogate ; derogatory ; Dietrich ; direct ; dress ; eldritch ; erect ; ergo ; Eric ; Frederick ; Henry ; incorrigible ; interregnum ; interrogate ; maharajah ; Maratha ; prerogative ; prorogue ; rack (n.1) "frame with bars;" rail (n.1) "horizontal bar passing from one post or support to another;" Raj ; rajah ; rake (n.1) "toothed tool for drawing or scraping things together;" rake (n.2) "debauchee; idle, dissolute person;" rakish ; rank (adj.) "corrupt, loathsome, foul;" real (n.) "small Spanish silver coin;" realm ; reck ; reckless ; reckon ; rectangle ; rectify ; rectilinear ; rectitude ; recto ; recto- ; rector ; rectum ; regal ; regent ; regicide ; regime ; regimen ; regiment ; region ; regular ; regulate ; Regulus ; Reich ; reign ; resurgent ; rex ; rich ; right ; Risorgimento ; rogation ; royal ; rule ; sord ; source ; subrogate ; subrogation ; surge ; surrogate ; viceroy .

 It might also be the source of:

 Sanskrit raj- "a king, a leader," rjyati "he stretches himself," riag "torture" (by racking); Avestan razeyeiti "directs," raštva- "directed, arranged, straight;" Persian rahst "right, correct;" Latin regere "to rule, direct, lead, govern," rex (genitive regis ) "king," rectus "right, correct;" Greek oregein "to reach, extend;" Old Irish ri , Gaelic righ "a king," Gaulish -rix "a king" (in personal names, such as Vircingetorix ), Old Irish rigim "to stretch out;" Gothic reiks "a leader," raihts "straight, right;" Lithuanian raižytis "to stretch oneself;" Old English rice "kingdom," -ric "king," rice "rich, powerful," riht "correct;" Gothic raihts , Old High German recht , Old Swedish reht , Old Norse rettr "correct."

 Austro- 

 combining form meaning "Austrian;" see Austria .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 diet 

 Since c. 1600 used by English and French writers of the legislative assemblies of Germany and Austria....

 kaiser 

 1858 in reference to the emperors of Austria and (after 1870) Germany, from German Kaiser, Bavarian and Austrian spelling...

 Silesia 

 The Silesian Wars were the three waged by Frederick the Great of Prussia against Austria over Silesia between 1740 and 1763...

 zinfandel 

 in 1829, so it is conceivable that the cuttings George Gibbs imported to the USA had never been correctly identified in Austria...

 ducat 

 Over the years it was a unit of currency of varying value in Holland, Russia, Austria, Sweden, Venice, etc....

 quark 

 Quark "curds, rubbish" has been proposed as the ultimate inspiration [Barnhart; Gell-Mann's parents were immigrants from Austria-Hungary...

 west 

 West used in geopolitical sense from World War I (Britain, France, Italy, as opposed to Germany and Austria-Hungary); as...

 slap 

 late 15c., slappen, "strike or smack with the open hand," from slap (n.). By 1836 as "to put into place." As an adverb, 1670s, "suddenly;" 1829, "directly." Related: Slapped; slapping....mid-15c., "a smart blow," especially with the open hand or something flat, probably of imitat

 Europe 

 from Latin Europa "Europe," from Greek Europe, which is of uncertain origin; as a geographic name first recorded in the Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier): "Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring per

 Reich 

 German, "kingdom, realm, state," from Old High German rihhi "realm," from Proto-Germanic *rikja "rule" (source also of Old Norse riki, Danish rige, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch rike, Dutch rijk, Old English rice, Gothic reiki), from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with 

 Share Austria 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Austria Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Austria">Etymology of Austria by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Austria. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Austria Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Austria," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Austria. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Austria." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Austria. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Austria." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Austria (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Austria 
 Australasia 
 Australia 
 Australian 
 Australioid 
 Australopithecus 
 Austria 
 Austro- 
 autarchy 
 autarky 
 auteur 
 authentic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix