URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/obelisk
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:02:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Obelisk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Obelisk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of obelisk 

 obelisk (n.) 

 "tapering rectangular stone column with a pyramidal apex," 1560s, from French obélisque (16c.) and directly from Latin obeliscus "obelisk, small spit," from Greek obeliskos "small spit, obelisk, leg of a compass," diminutive of obelos "a spit, pointed pillar, needle, broach; obelisk; bar of metal used as a coin or weight," a word of uncertain origin; according to Beekes, "clearly Pre-Greek." In printing, "a sign resembling a small dagger" (1580s). In dictionaries it is used to mark obsolete words. Greek obelos also was "a mark used in writing; horizontal line used as a diacritic." Related: Obeliscal; obeliskine .
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to obelisk 

 obol (n.) 

 ancient Greek small coin and weight, 1660s, from Latin obolus , from Greek obolos , the name of a coin (sixth part of a drachme); identical to obelos "a spit, needle, broach; bar of metal used as a coin or weight" (see obelisk ). So called from the original shape. Middle English had obolus as the name of a small measure of weight, also ob "halfpenny," from Latin ob. , abbreviation of obolus .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dagger 

 "edged or pointed weapon for thrusting, shorter than a sword," late 14c. (mid-14c. in Anglo-Latin), apparently related to Old French dague "dagger," from Old Provençal or Italian daga, which are of uncertain origin; perhaps from Celtic, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *daca "Dacian kni

 pyramid 

 in Latin form piramis, late 14c., or nativized in Middle English as piram), from French pyramide (Old French piramide "obelisk...

 rock 

 substance; large rocky formation, rocky height or outcrop, crag," from Old English rocc (as in stanrocc "stone rock or obelisk...

 pillar 

 c. 1200, piler, "a column or columnar mass, narrow in proportion to height, either weight-bearing or free-standing," from Old French piler "pillar, column, pier" (12c., Modern French pilier) and directly from Medieval Latin pilare, from Latin pila "pillar, stone barrier," a word 

 ragged 

 of clothing or garments, "rough, shaggy," c. 1300 (late 12c. in surnames), past-participle adjective as though from a verb form of rag (n.1). Compare Latin pannosus "ragged, wrinkly," from pannus "piece of cloth." But ragged might reflect a broader, older meaning of the noun rag 

 column 

 mid-15c., "a pillar, long, cylindrical architectural support," also "vertical division of a page," from Old French colombe (12c., Modern French colonne "column, pillar"), from Latin columna "pillar," collateral form of columen "top, summit," from PIE root *kel- (2) "to be promine

 character 

 mid-14c., carecter, "symbol marked or branded on the body;" mid-15c., "symbol or drawing used in sorcery;" late 15c., "alphabetic letter, graphic symbol standing for a sound or syllable;" from Old French caratere "feature, character" (13c., Modern French caractère), from Latin ch

 ignominious 

 early 15c., from Latin ignominiosus "disgraceful, shameful," from ignominia "disgrace, infamy, loss of a (good) name," from assimilated form of in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + nomen (genitive nominis) "name" (from PIE root *no-men- "name"). The Latin spelling perhaps influ

 iris 

 late 14c. as the name of a flowering plant (Iris germanica); early 15c. in reference to the eye membrane, from Latin iris (plural irides) "iris of the eye; iris plant; rainbow," from Greek iris (genitive iridos) "a rainbow;" also "iris plant" and "iris of the eye," a word of unce

 kudos 

 "fame, renown, glory," 1799, probably originally in university slang, from Greek kydos "glory, fame," especially in battle, "a poetical word, found chiefly in the Iliad and Odyssey" [Century Dictionary], literally "that which is heard of," perhaps from PIE root *keu- "to see, obs

 Share obelisk 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/obelisk Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/obelisk">Etymology of obelisk by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of obelisk. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/obelisk Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of obelisk," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/obelisk. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of obelisk." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/obelisk. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of obelisk." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/obelisk (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near obelisk 
 obeah 
 obedience 
 obedient 
 obediently 
 obeisance 
 obelisk 
 Oberon 
 obese 
 obesity 
 obey 
 obfuscate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix