URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/crane
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:58:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Crane - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Crane - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of crane 

 crane (n.) 

 large grallatorial bird with very long legs, beak, and neck, Old English cran , common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon krano , Old High German krano , German Kranich , and, with unexplained change of consonant, Old Norse trani , Danish trane ), from PIE *gere-no- , suffixed form of root *gere- (2) "to cry hoarsely," also the name of the crane (cognates: Greek geranos , Latin grus , Welsh garan , Lithuanian garnys "heron, stork"). Thus the name is perhaps an echo of its cry in ancient ears.

 Misapplied to herons and storks. The gray European crane was "formerly abundant in marshy places in Great Britain, and prized as food" [OED], but was extinct there through much of 20c.

 Use for "machine with a long arm for moving weights" is attested from late 13c. (a sense also in equivalent words in German, French, and Greek). The constellation was one of the 11 added to Ptolemy's list in the 1610s by Flemish cartographer Petrus Plancius after Europeans began to explore the Southern Hemisphere.

 crane (v.) 

 1799, of the neck, "to stretch or be stretched out," from crane (n.). As "to stretch or bend the neck," 1849. Earliest sense (1560s) is "to hoist with a crane." Related: Craned ; craning .
 also from 1799 

 Entries linking to crane 

 cranberry (n.) 

 name of the fruit of several species of a swamp-growing shrub, 1640s, apparently an American English adaptation of Low German kraanbere , from kraan "crane" (see crane (n.)) + Middle Low German bere "berry" (see berry ). The reason for the name is not known; perhaps they were so called from fancied resemblance between the plants' stamens and the beaks of cranes.

 Upon the Rocks and in the Moss, grew a Shrub whose fruit was very sweet, full of red juice like Currans, perhaps 'tis the same with the New England Cranberry, or Bear-Berry, (call'd so from the Bears devouring it very greedily;) with which we make Tarts. ["An Account of Several Late Voyages & Discoveries," London, 1694]

 German and Dutch settlers in the New World apparently recognized the similarity between the European berries ( Vaccinium oxycoccos ) and the larger North American variety ( V. macrocarpum ) and transferred the name. In England, they were marshwort or fenberries , but according to OED the North American berries, and the name, were imported by 1680s and the name was applied to the native species in 18c. The native Algonquian name for the plant is represented by West Abenaki popokwa .

 crantara (n.) 

 "The fiery cross which in old times formed the rallying symbol in the Highlands of Scotland in any sudden emergency," Gaelic cranntara, cranntaraidh , also (by influence of crois "cross") croistara, croistaraidh , literally "the beam or cross of reproach," from crann "a beam, a shaft" (see crane (n.)) + tair "reproach, disgrace." "[S]o called because neglect of the symbol implied infamy" [Century Dictionary].

 geranium 
 grackle 
 pedigree 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pedigree 

 early 15c., pedigrue, "genealogical table or chart," from Anglo-French pe de gru, a variant of Old French pied de gru "foot of a crane," from Latin pedem accusative of pes "foot" (from PIE root *ped- "foot") + gruem (nominative grus) "crane," cognate with Greek geranos, Old Engli

 derrick 

 "It is similar to the crane, but differs from it in having the boom, which corresponds to the jib of the crane, pivoted at...

 widgeon 

 perhaps from a northern variant of French vigeon, which some trace to Latin vipionem (nominative vipio), "a kind of small crane...

 cliff-hanger 

 heroine "hanging over a cliff from a fraying rope through which the villain was sawing with a dull knife, to be saved by Crane...

 whoop 

 Whooping cough (1739) is now the prevalent spelling of hooping cough; whooping crane is recorded from 1791....

 guy 

 "small rope, chain, wire," 1620s, nautical; earlier "leader" (mid-14c.), from Old French guie "a guide," also "a crane, derrick...

 vise 

 early 14c., "a winch, crane," from Anglo-French vice, Old French vis, viz "screw," from Latin vītis "vine, tendril of a vine...

 stretch 

 Middle English strecchen, from Old English streccan (transitive and intransitive) "draw out to full length, spread out, prostrate (oneself);" also "to reach or extend in space" (past tense strehte, past participle streht). This is from Proto-Germanic *strakjanan (source also of D

 extend 

 early 14c., "to value, assess," from Anglo-French estendre (late 13c.), Old French estendre "stretch out, extend, increase," transitive and intransitive (Modern French étendre), from Latin extendere "stretch out, spread out; increase, enlarge, prolong, continue," from ex "out" (s

 nacre 

 1590s, "type of shellfish that yields mother-of-pearl," from French nacre (Old French nacaire, 14c.), from Italian naccaro (now nacchera), possibly from Arabic naqur "hunting horn" (from nakara "to hollow out"), in reference to the shape of the mollusk shell. Meaning "mother-of-p

 Share crane 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/crane Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/crane">Etymology of crane by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of crane. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/crane Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of crane," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crane. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of crane." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crane. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of crane." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/crane (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near crane 
 cram 
 cramp 
 crampon 
 crampy 
 cranberry 
 crane 
 cranial 
 cranio- 
 craniography 
 craniometry 
 craniotomy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix