URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pony
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pony 

 pony (n.) 

 1650s, powny , "a very small horse" (less than 13 hands in height), from Scottish, apparently from obsolete French poulenet "little foal" (mid-15c.), diminutive of Old French poulain "foal," from Late Latin pullanus "young of an animal," from Latin pullus "young of a horse, fowl, etc." (from PIE root *pau- (1) "few, little") [Skeat's suggestion, still accepted]. Compare, from the same source, foal , filly , Sanskrit potah "a young animal," Greek pōlos "foal," secondarily also of other young animals; Latin pullus "young animal," Lithuanian putytis "young animal, young bird."

 A small horse, especially one of a small breed, as opposed to a colt or filly , words which indicate merely young horses. German, sensibly, indicates this animal by attaching a diminutive suffix to its word for "horse," which might yield Modern English *horslet . Modern French poney is a 19c. borrowing from English.

 The Shetland breed of ponies are stoutly built, active and hardy, with very full mane and tail, and of gentle, docile disposition. In western parts of the United States all the small hardy horses (mustangs or broncos) used by the Indians are called 
 ponies . [Century Dictionary, 1897] 

 Meaning "crib of a text as a cheating aid," especially a translation of a Greek or Latin author used unfairly in the preparation of lessons (1827) and "small liquor glass" (1849) both are from notion of "smallness" (the former also "something one rides," a translation being something that enables a student to "get along fast").

 As the name of a popular dance, it dates from 1963. The U.S. Pony Express began 1860 (and operated about 18 months before being superseded by the transcontinental telegraph). The figurative one-trick pony is 1897, American English, in reference to circus acts.
 also from 1650s 

 pony (v.) 

 1824, in pony up "to pay," of uncertain origin; similar uses of pony or poney in the sense "money" date to late 18c. OED says from pony (n.), but not exactly how. "Dictionary of American Slang" says it is from slang use of Latin legem pone (q.v.) to mean "money" (first recorded 16c.), because this was the title of the Psalm for March 25, a Quarter Day and the first payday of the year. Latin pone is the imperative of Latin ponere "to put, place" (see position ). Related: Ponied ; ponying .
 also from 1824 

 Entries linking to pony 

 colt (n.) 

 Old English colt "a young horse," also "young ass," in Biblical translations also used for "young camel," perhaps from Proto-Germanic *kultaz (source also of Swedish dialectal kult "young boar, piglet; boy," Danish kuld "offspring, brood") and akin to child . Commonly and distinctively applied to the male, the young female being a filly . Applied to young or inexperienced persons from early 13c.

 COLT'S TOOTH An old fellow who marries, or keeps a young girl, is ſaid to have a colt's tooth in his head. ["Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue," 1796] 

 The image is in Chaucer. Colts shed their first set of teeth beginning at about three years.

 filly (n.) 

 c. 1400, filli , fyly , "a young mare, female colt or foal," possibly from Old Norse fylja , fem. of foli "foal," from Proto-Germanic *fuljo , from PIE *pulo- "young of an animal," suffixed form of root *pau- (1) "few, little." Slang sense of "lively young girl" is from 1610s.

 foal 
 legem pone 
 position 
 coach 
 ponytail 
 pullet 
 *pau- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 position 

 late 14c., posicioun, as a term in logic and philosophy, "statement of belief, the laying down of a proposition or thesis," from Old French posicion "position, supposition" (Modern French position) and directly from Latin positionem (nominative positio) "act or fact of placing, s

 coach 

 1550s, "large kind of four-wheeled, covered carriage," from French coche (16c.), from German kotsche, from Hungarian kocsi (szekér) "(carriage) of Kocs," village where it was first made. In Hungary, the thing and the name for it date from 15c., and forms are found since 16c. in m

 pullet 

 late 14c., polet, "young fowl" (late 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French pullet, Old French poulette, poilette, diminutive of poule, poille "hen," from Vulgar Latin *pulla, fem. of Latin pullus "young animal," especially "young fowl" (source also of Spanish pollo "chicken," Ita

 one-horse 

 It was what is generally denominated a "one horse town," and I would think a pretty small pony at that....

 translation 

 mid-14c., "removal of a saint's body or relics to a new place," also "rendering of a text from one language to another," from Old French translacion "translation" of text, also of the bones of a saint, etc. (12c.) or directly from Latin translationem (nominative translatio) "a ca

 version 

 1580s, "a translation, that which is rendered from another language," from French version, from Medieval Latin versionem (nominative versio) "a turning, a translation," from past-participle stem of Latin vertere "to turn, turn back, be turned; convert, transform, translate; be ch

 mustang 

 "small, half-wild horse of the American prairie and pampas," 1808, from Mexican Spanish mestengo "animal that strays" (16c.), from Spanish mestengo "wild, stray, ownerless," literally "belonging to the mesta," an association of cattle ranchers who divided stray or unclaimed anima

 tort 

 mid-13c., "injury, wrong," from Old French tort "wrong, injustice, crime" (11c.), from Medieval Latin tortum "injustice," noun use of neuter of tortus "wrung, twisted," past participle of Latin torquere "turn, turn awry, twist, wring, distort" (from PIE root *terkw- "to twist"). 

 trot 

 "a gait faster than a walk and slower than a run," c. 1300, originally of horses, from Old French trot "a trot, trotting" (12c.), from troter "to trot, to go," from Frankish *trotton, from Proto-Germanic *trott- (source also of Old High German trotton "to tread"), derivative of *

 glass 

 Old English glæs "glass; a glass vessel," from Proto-Germanic *glasam "glass" (source also of Old Saxon glas, Middle Dutch and Dutch glas, German Glas, Old Norse gler "glass, looking glass," Danish glar), from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives denoting bright color

 Share pony 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pony Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pony">Etymology of pony by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pony. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pony Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pony," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pony. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pony." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pony. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pony." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pony (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pony 
 pontifical 
 pontificate 
 pontification 
 pontoon 
 Pontus 
 pony 
 ponytail 
 Ponzi scheme 
 poo 
 pooch 
 poodle 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix