URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fellow
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:48:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fellow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fellow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fellow 

 fellow (n.) 

 "companion, comrade," c. 1200, from Old English feolaga "partner, one who shares with another," from Old Norse felagi , from fe "money" (see fee ) + lag , from Proto-Germanic *lagam , from PIE root *legh- "to lie down, lay." The etymological sense of fellow seems to be "one who puts down money with another in a joint venture."

 Meaning "one of the same kind" is from early 13c.; that of "one of a pair" is from c. 1300. Used familiarly since mid-15c. for "any man, male person," but not etymologically masculine (it is used of women, for example, in Judges xi.37 in the King James version: "And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows").

 Its use can be contemptuous or dignified in English and American English, and at different times in its history, depending on who used it to whom, it has carried a tinge of condescension or insult.

 University senses (mid-15c., corresponding to Latin socius ) evolved from notion of "one of the corporation who constitute a college" and who are paid from its revenues. Fellow well-met "boon companion" is from 1580s, hence hail-fellow-well-met as a figurative phrase for "on intimate terms."

 In compounds, with a sense of "co-, joint-," from 16c., and by 19c. also denoting "association with another." Hence fellow-traveler , 1610s in a literal sense but in 20c. with a specific extended sense of "one who sympathizes with the Communist movement but is not a party member" (1936, translating Russian poputchik ).

 Fellow-countrymen formerly was one of the phrases the British held up to mock the Americans for their ignorance, as it is redundant to say both, until they discovered it dates from the 1580s and was used by Byron and others.
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to fellow 

 fee (n.) 

 Middle English, representing the merger or mutual influence of two words, one from Old English, one from an Old French form of the same Germanic word, and both ultimately from a PIE root meaning "cattle."

 The Old English word is feoh "livestock, cattle; movable property; possessions in livestock, goods, or money; riches, treasure, wealth; money as a medium of exchange or payment," from Proto-Germanic *fehu (source also of Old Saxon fehu , Old High German fihu , German Vieh "cattle," Gothic faihu "money, fortune"). This is from PIE *peku- "cattle" (source also of Sanskrit pasu , Lithuanian pekus "cattle;" Latin pecu "cattle," pecunia "money, property").

 The other word is Anglo-French fee , from Old French fieu , a variant of fief "possession, holding, domain; feudal duties, payment" (see fief ), which apparently is a Germanic compound in which the first element is cognate with Old English feoh .

 Via Anglo-French come the legal senses "estate in land or tenements held on condition of feudal homage; land, property, possession" (c. 1300). Hence fee-simple (late 14c.) "absolute ownership," as opposed to fee-tail (early 15c.) "entailed ownership," inheritance limited to some particular class of heirs (second element from Old French taillir "to cut, to limit").

 The feudal sense was extended from landholdings to inheritable offices of service to a feudal lord (late 14c.; in Anglo-French late 13c.), for example forester of fe "a forester by heritable right." As these often were offices of profit, the word came to be used for "remuneration for service in office" (late 14c.), hence, "payment for (any kind of) work or services" (late 14c.). From late 14c. as "a sum paid for a privilege" (originally admission to a guild); early 15c. as "money payment or charge exacted for a licence, etc."

 bedfellow (n.) 

 "close friend, roommate, one who shares a bed with another," mid-15c., from bed (n.) + fellow (n.). Also (late 15c) "concubine." Earlier in the "close companion" sense was bed-fere (early 14c.). Old English had simply bedda . Bedsister "husband's concubine" is recorded in Middle English (c. 1300).

 fella 
 fellow-feeling 
 fellowship 
 playfellow 
 willow 
 yokefellow 
 *legh- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fellowship 

 c. 1200, feolahschipe "companionship," from fellow + -ship. The sense of "a body of companions" is from late 13c. The meaning "spirit of comradeship, friendliness" is from late 14c. As a state of privilege in English colleges, from 1530s. In Middle English it was at times a euphe

 willow 

 Old English welig "willow," from Proto-Germanic *wel- (source also of Old Saxon wilgia, Middle Dutch wilghe, Dutch wilg), probably from PIE root *wel- (3) "to turn, revolve," with derivatives referring to curved, enclosing objects. The change in form to -ow (14c.) paralleled that

 beau 

 "attendant suitor of a lady," 1720, from French beau "the beautiful," noun use of an adjective, from Old French bel "beautiful, handsome, fair, genuine, real" (11c.), from Latin bellus "handsome, fine, pretty, agreeable" (see belle). The meaning "man who attends excessively to dr

 cull 

 1690s, earlier cully (1660s) "a dupe, a sap-head," "a verdant fellow who is easily deceived, tricked, or imposed on" [Century...Perhaps a shortening of cullion "base fellow," originally "testicle" (from French couillon, from Old French coillon "testicle...; worthless fellow, dolt," from Latin coleus, literally "strainer bag;" see cojones)....sometimes in the form cully, however some authorities assert cully was the canting term for "dupe" and cull was generic "man, fellow...

 sympathy 

 French sympathie (16c.) and directly from Late Latin sympathia "community of feeling, sympathy," from Greek sympatheia "fellow-feeling..., community of feeling," from sympathes "having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings," from assimilated form of syn...Meaning "conformity of feelings" is from 1590s; sense of "fellow feeling, compassion" is first attested c. 1600....

 Joe 

 Meaning "generic fellow, man" is from 1846....invented names meaning "typical male example of," for example Joe college "typical college man" (1932); Joe Blow "average fellow...

 slouch 

 1510s, "lazy man; ungainly fellow," a variant of slouk (1560s), which is of obscure origin, but probably ultimately from...a Scandinavian source (perhaps Old Norse slokr "lazy fellow"), and related to slack (adj.) on the notion of "sagging, drooping...

 lover 

 "one who is enamored, person in love," early 13c., agent noun from love (v.). Old English had lufend for male lovers, lufestre for women. Meaning "one who has a predilection for" (a thing, concept, pursuit, etc.) is mid-14c. As a form of address to a lover, from 1911. Related: Lo

 dude 

 1883, "fastidious man," New York City slang of unknown origin; recent research suggests it is a shortening of Yankee Doodle, based on the song's notion of "foppish, over-fastidious male" (compare macaroni). The vogue word of 1883, originally used in reference to the devotees of t

 pair 

 mid-13c., paire, "a set of two, two of a kind coupled in use," from Old French paire "pair, couple," and directly from Medieval Latin paria "equals," neuter plural of Latin par (genitive paris) "a pair, counterpart, equal," noun use of par (adj.) "equal, equal-sized, well-matched

 Share fellow 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fellow Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fellow">Etymology of fellow by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fellow. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fellow Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fellow," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fellow. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fellow." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fellow. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fellow." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fellow (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fellow 
 fellate 
 fellatio 
 fellation 
 feller 
 felloe 
 fellow 
 fellow-feeling 
 fellowship 
 felo-de-se 
 felon 
 felonious 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix