URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gibraltar
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gibraltar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Gibraltar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Gibraltar 

 Gibraltar 

 1590s, ancient Calpe , captured 710 C.E. by Saracen leader Tariq, renamed Jebel el Tarik "the Mountain of Tarik," hence the English name. A British possession since 1704. Figurative of impregnability by 1856. Formerly also the name of a kind of rock-candy (1831).
 also from 1590s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 prudential 

 Prudential, the U.S. insurance company, dates to the 1870s; its logo featuring the Rock of Gibraltar dates from c. 1900 and...

 ape 

 The only native apes in Europe are the Barbary apes of Gibraltar, intelligent and docile, and these were the showman's apes...

 pillar 

 The Pillars of Hercules are the two hills on opposite sides of the Straits of Gibraltar, Abyla in Africa and Calpe in Europe...

 Europe 

 from Latin Europa "Europe," from Greek Europe, which is of uncertain origin; as a geographic name first recorded in the Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier): "Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring per

 evil 

 Old English yfel (Kentish evel) "bad, vicious, ill, wicked," from Proto-Germanic *ubilaz (source also of Old Saxon ubil, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch evel, Dutch euvel, Old High German ubil, German übel, Gothic ubils), from PIE *upelo-, from root *wap- "bad, evil" (source also of

 cousin 

 early 13c., "a collateral blood relative more remote than a brother or sister" (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French cosin "nephew; kinsman; cousin" (12c., Modern French cousin), from Latin consobrinus "cousin," originally "mother's sister's son," from assimilated form of com 

 perspicacious 

 "sharp-sighted," also "of acute mental discernment," 1630s, formed as an adjective to perspicacity, from Latin perspicax "sharp-sighted, having the power of seeing through; acute," from perspicere "look through, look closely at," from per "through" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forwa

 John Doe 

 fictitious plaintiff in a legal action, attested from 1768 (in Blackstone). The fictitious defendant was Richard Roe. If female, Jane Doe, Jane Roe. Replaced earlier John-a-nokes (1530s) or Jack Nokes, who usually was paired with John-a-stiles or Tom Stiles. Also used of plaintif

 worry wart 

 1930, from newspaper comic "Out Our Way" by U.S. cartoonist J.R. Williams (1888-1957), in which Worry Wart is attested by 1929. Worry Wart was a generic nickname or insult for any character who caused others to worry, which is the inverse of the current colloquial meaning. For ex

 protagonist 

 1670s, "principal character in a story, drama, etc.," from Greek prōtagōnistēs "actor who plays the chief or first part," from prōtos "first" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, first, chief") + agōnistēs "actor, competitor," from agōn "contest" (from PIE root

 Share Gibraltar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gibraltar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gibraltar">Etymology of Gibraltar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Gibraltar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gibraltar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Gibraltar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gibraltar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Gibraltar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gibraltar. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Gibraltar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gibraltar (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Gibraltar 
 gibbon 
 gibbous 
 gibe 
 giblet 
 giblets 
 Gibraltar 
 Gibson girl 
 giclee 
 giddily 
 giddiness 
 giddy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix