URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/norm
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:28:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Norm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Norm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of norm 

 norm (n.) 

 "a standard, pattern, or model," 1821 (Coleridge), from French norme , from Latin norma "carpenter's square, rule, pattern," a word of unknown origin. Klein suggests a borrowing (via Etruscan) of Greek gnōmōn "carpenter's square." The Latin form of the word, norma , was used in English in the sense of "carpenter's square" from 1670s, also as the name of a small, faint southern constellation introduced 18c. by La Caille.
 also from 1821 

 Entries linking to norm 

 abnormal (adj.) 

 "not conformed or conforming to rule, deviating from a type or standard, contrary to system or law, irregular, unnatural," 1835, a refashioning of anormal (q.v.) under influence of Latin abnormalis "deviating from a fixed rule, irregular," from ab "off, away from" (see ab- ) + norma "rule" (see norm ).

 The older form was from French anormal (13c.), from Medieval Latin anormalus , an altered (by association with norma ) borrowing of Greek anomalos "uneven, irregular," from an- "not" (see an- (1)) + homalos "even," from homos "same" (from PIE root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with"). Compare anomaly . "Few words show such a series of pseudo-etymological perversions" [Weekley]. Another adjective was abnormous (1742) "irregular, misshapen," from Latin abnormis . Related: Abnormally .

 enormous (adj.) 

 1530s, "abnormal" (usually in a bad sense), from Latin enormis "out of rule, irregular, shapeless; extraordinary, very large," from assimilated form of ex "out of" (see ex- ) + norma "rule, norm" (see norm ), with English -ous substituted for Latin -is . Meaning "extraordinary in size" is attested from 1540s; original sense of "outrageous" is more clearly preserved in enormity . Earlier was enormyous (mid-15c.) "exceedingly great, monstrous." Related: Enormously ; enormousness .

 Norma 
 normal 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 normal 

 c. 1500, "typical, common;" 1640s, in geometry, "standing at a right angle, perpendicular," from Late Latin normalis "in conformity with rule, normal," in classical Latin "made according to a carpenter's square," from norma "rule, pattern," literally "carpenter's square," a word 

 average 

 late 15c., "any small charge over freight cost, payable by owners of goods to the master of a ship for his care of the goods," also "financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit," from French avarie "damage to ship," and Italian avaria. A word from 12c. Mediterranea

 state 

 "physical condition as regards form or structure," "particular condition or phase," and "condition with reference to a norm...

 standard 

 mid-12c., "distinctive flag or other conspicuous object displayed from a position in battle to serve as a rallying point for a military force," from shortened form of Old French estandart "military standard, banner" (Anglo-French estandard) and in part from Medieval Latin standar

 name 

 "word by which a person or thing is denoted," Old English nama, noma "name, reputation," from Proto-Germanic *naman- (source also of Old Saxon namo, Old Frisian nama, Old High German namo, German Name, Middle Dutch name, Dutch naam, Old Norse nafn, Gothic namo "name"), from PIE r

 mane 

 "growth of long hair on the back of the neck and shoulders," characteristic of the horse, lion, and some other animals, Old English manu "mane of a horse," from Proto-Germanic *mano (source also of Old Norse mön, Old Frisian mana, Middle Dutch mane, Dutch manen, Old High German m

 amen 

 Old English, from Late Latin amen, from Ecclesiastical Greek amen, from Hebrew amen "truth," used adverbially as an expression of agreement (as in Deuteronomy xxvii.26, I Kings i.36), from Semitic root a-m-n "to be trustworthy, confirm, support." Compare similar use of Modern Eng

 mean 

 "intend, have in mind;" Middle English mēnen, from Old English mænan "intend (to do something), plan; indicate (a certain object) or convey (a certain sense) when using a word," from Proto-West Germanic *menjojanan (source also of Old Frisian mena "to signify," Old Saxon menian "

 dome 

 "a round, vaulted roof, a hemispherical covering of a building," 1650s, from French dome "a town-house; a dome, a cupola" (16c.), from Provençal doma, from Greek dōma "a house, housetop" (especially in reference to a style of roof from the east), related to domos "house," from PI

 mode 

 "manner;" late 14c., "melodies, strains of music" (a sense now obsolete; see musical senses below), from Old French mode and directly from Latin modus "measure, extent, quantity; proper measure, rhythm, song; a way, manner, fashion, style" (in Late Latin also "mood" in grammar an

 Share norm 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/norm Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/norm">Etymology of norm by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of norm. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/norm Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of norm," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/norm. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of norm." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/norm. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of norm." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/norm (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near norm 
 nor 
 Nora 
 Nordic 
 norepinephrine 
 Norfolk 
 norm 
 Norma 
 normal 
 normalcy 
 normality 
 normalization 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix