URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harry
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:21:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Harry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Harry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of harry 

 harry (v.) 

 Old English hergian "make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder," the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (source also of Old Frisian urheria "lay waste, ravage, plunder," Old Norse herja "to make a raid, to plunder," Old Saxon and Old High German herion , German verheeren "to destroy, lay waste, devastate"). This is literally "to overrun with an army," from Proto-Germanic *harjan "an armed force" (source also of Old English here , Old Norse herr "crowd, great number; army, troop," Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri , Dutch heir , Old High German har , German Heer , Gothic harjis "a host, army").

 The Germanic words come from PIE root *korio- "war" also "war-band, host, army" (source also of Lithuanian karas "war, quarrel," karias "host, army;" Old Church Slavonic kara "strife;" Middle Irish cuire "troop;" Old Persian kara "host, people, army;" Greek koiranos "ruler, leader, commander"). Weakened sense of "worry, goad, harass" is from c. 1400. Related: Harried ; harrying .

 Harry 

 masc. proper name, a familiar form of Henry . Weekley takes the overwhelming number of Harris and Harrison surnames as evidence that "Harry," not "Henry," was the Middle English pronunciation of Henry . Compare Harriet , English equivalent of French Henriette , fem. diminutive of Henri .

 Entries linking to harry 

 Harriet 

 fem. proper name, fem. of Harry .

 We think that gentlemen lose a particle of their respect for young ladies who allow their names to be abbreviated into such cognomens as Kate, Madge, Bess, Nell, &c. Surely it is more lady-like to be called Catharine, Margaret, Eliza, or Ellen. We have heard the beautiful name Virginia degraded into Jinny; and Harriet called Hatty, or even Hadge. [Eliza Leslie, "Miss Leslie's Behaviour Book," Philadelphia, 1839]

 Nautical slang Harriet Lane "preserved meat" (1896) is the name of the victim of a notorious murder in which it was alleged the killer chopped up her body.

 Henry 

 masc. proper name, from French Henri , from Late Latin Henricus , from German Heinrich , from Old High German Heimerich , literally "the ruler of the house," from heim "home" (see home (n.)) + rihhi "ruler" (from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight line," thus "to lead, rule"). One of the most popular Norman names after the Conquest. Related: Henrician .

 army 
 harangue 
 harbor 
 hare 
 harness 
 Harold 
 harrier 
 Harris 
 harrow 
 herald 
 Herbert 
 Herefordshire 
 heriot 
 Herman 
 host 
 hurry 
 Lothario 
 Oliver 
 See All Related Words (21) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 army 

 late 14c., armee, "armed expedition," from Old French armée "armed troop, armed expedition" (14c.), from Medieval Latin armata "armed force," from Latin armata, fem. of armatus "armed, equipped, in arms," as a noun, "armed men, soldiers," past participle of armare "to arm," liter

 harangue 

 "a public address; a formal, vehement, or passionate address;" also "any formal or pompous speech; a declamation; a tirade," mid-15c., arang, Scottish (in English from c. 1600), from French harangue "a public address" (14c.), from Old Italian aringo "public square, platform; pulp

 harbor 

 "lodging for ships; sheltered recess in a coastline," early 12c., a specialized sense of Middle English herberwe "temporary dwelling place, quarters, lodgings; an inn; the camp of an army in the field," probably from Old English here-beorg (West Saxon), *here-berg (Anglian) "lodg

 shamus 

 "police officer, detective," 1920, apparently first in "The Shamus," a detective story published that year by Harry J....

 every 

 Slang phrase every Tom, Dick, and Harry "every man, everyone" dates from at least 1723, from the common English given names...when) all Mankind were upon a Level, and that there was no ſuch Thing as Government in the World; and that Tom, Dick, and Harry...

 host 

 It replaced Old English here (see harry (v.)), and in turn has been largely superseded by army....

 veep 

 Barkley (1877-1956), Harry Truman's vice president....

 gravel 

 "stone in small, irregular fragments," early 13c., from Old French gravele "sand, gravel; sea-shore; sandy bed of a river," diminutive of grave "sand, seashore" (Modern French grève), possibly from Celtic *graw- (compare Welsh gro "coarse gravel," Breton grouan, Cornish grow "gra

 nettle 

 "herbaceous plant of the genus Urtica, armed with stinging hairs" (also used of other plants of the genus and of nettle-like plants, generally with a qualifying word), Middle English netle, from Old English netele, from Proto-Germanic *natilon (source also of Old Saxon netila, Mi

 rile 

 "excite, disturb, vex, annoy," 1825, American English spelling alteration to reflect a dialectal pronunciation of roil (q.v.) in a figurative sense. Compare heist from hoist and in the same era spile for spoil (v.). Bartlett writes that in both England and America roil "is now co

 Share harry 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/harry Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/harry">Etymology of harry by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of harry. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/harry Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of harry," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harry. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of harry." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harry. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of harry." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/harry (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near harry 
 Harriet 
 Harris 
 harrow 
 harrowing 
 harrumph 
 harry 
 harsh 
 harshly 
 harshness 
 hart 
 hartebeest 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix