URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/communism
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:00:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Communism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Communism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of communism 

 communism (n.) 

 1843, "social system based on collective ownership," from French communisme (c. 1840), from commun (Old French comun "common, general, free, open, public;" see common (adj.)) + -isme (see -ism ).

 Originally a theory of society. As the name of a political or economic theory which rests upon the abolition of the right of private property, especially the means of production and distribution, and seeks the overthrow of capitalism by revolutions, it is attested from 1850, a translation of German Kommunismus (itself from French), in Marx and Engels' "Manifesto of the Communist Party." Compare communist . 

 By 1919 and through mid-20c. it was a general a term of abuse for revolutionaries, implying anti-social criminality without regard to political theory.

 Each [i.e. 
 socialism, communism, anarchism ] stands for a state of things, or a striving after it, that differs much from that which we know; & for many of us, especially those who are comfortably at home in the world as it is, they have consequently come to be the positive, comparative, & superlative, distinguished not in kind but in degree only, of the terms of abuse applicable to those who would disturb our peace. [Fowler]
 also from 1843 

 Entries linking to communism 

 common (adj.) 

 c. 1300, "belonging to all, owned or used jointly, general, of a public nature or character," from Old French comun "common, general, free, open, public" (9c., Modern French commun ), from Latin communis "in common, public, shared by all or many; general, not specific; familiar, not pretentious." This is from a reconstructed PIE compound *ko-moin-i- "held in common," compound adjective formed from *ko- "together" + *moi-n- , suffixed form of root *mei- (1) "to change, go, move," hence literally "shared by all."

 The second element of the compound also is the source of Latin munia "duties, public duties, functions," those related to munia "office." Perhaps reinforced in Old French by the Germanic form of PIE *ko-moin-i- (compare German gemein , Old English gemne "common, public, general, universal;" see mean (adj.)), which came to French via Frankish.

 Used disparagingly of women and criminals since c. 1300. Meaning "pertaining equally to or proceeding equally from two or more" is from c. 1400. Meaning "usual, not exceptional, of frequent occurrence" is from late 14c. Sense of "not distinguished, belonging to the general mass" is from c. 1400; of things, "ordinary, not excellent," late 14c.

 Common pleas is 13c., from Anglo-French communs plets , hearing civil actions by one subject against another as opposed to pleas of the crown. Common prayer is that done in public in unity with other worshipers; contrasted with private prayer. Common stock is attested from 1888. Common speech (late 14c.) is the vernacular, as opposed to Latin. Common good (late 14c.) translates Latin bonum publicum "the common weal." The college common room (1660s) is one to which all members have common access. 

 communist 

 1841, as both a noun and adjective, from French communiste , from commun (Old French comun "common, general, free, open, public;" see common (adj.)) + -iste (see -ist ). First attested in writing by John Goodwin Barmby (1820-1881), British Owenite and utopian socialist who founded the London Communist Propaganda Society in 1841. Main modern sense, "an opponent of capitalism or supporter of revolutionary leftism," emerged after publication of Communist Manifesto ( "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei" ) in 1848.

 All communists without exception propose that the people as a whole, or some particular division of the people, as a village or commune, should own all the means of production--land, houses, factories, railroads, canals, etc.; that production should be carried on in common; and that officers, selected in one way or another, should distribute among the inhabitants the fruits of their labor. [Richard T. Ely, "French and German Socialism in Modern Times," New York, 1883] 

  Shortened form Commie is attested from 1939. Century Dictionary (1900) recognizes the noun alone; as an adjective it has only communistic (1850) "relating to communists or communism." 

 -ism 
 *mei- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 reactionary 

 tending toward reversing existing tendencies," opposed to revolutionary and used opprobriously in reference to opponents of communism...

 witch hunt 

 The extended sense is attested from 1919, American English, later re-popularized in reaction to Cold War anti-Communism....

 consumerism 

 alternative to capitalism to describe the Western consumer-driven economic system as a contrast to state-centered Soviet communism...

 individualism 

 As the name of a social philosophy favoring non-interference of government in lives of individuals (opposed to communism...

 May Day 

 May Day's association with communism (and socialism and anarchism) dates to 1890....

 hammer 

 Hammer and sickle as an emblem of Soviet communism attested from 1921, symbolizing industrial and agricultural labor....

 ideology 

 1907, earliest in socialist and communist writing, with reference to class; from 1918 it came to be used of socialism and communism...

 socialism 

 in reference to theories or systems that substitute cooperative action and community possession of means of production in place of competition based on individual effort, 1837, from French socialisme (1832) or formed in English (based on socialist) from social (adj.) + -ism. Perh

 holiday 

 1500s, earlier haliday (c. 1200), from Old English haligdæg "holy day, consecrated day, religious anniversary; Sabbath," from halig "holy" (see holy) + dæg "day" (see day); in 14c. meaning both "religious festival" and "day of exemption from labor and recreation," but pronunciati

 worry wart 

 1930, from newspaper comic "Out Our Way" by U.S. cartoonist J.R. Williams (1888-1957), in which Worry Wart is attested by 1929. Worry Wart was a generic nickname or insult for any character who caused others to worry, which is the inverse of the current colloquial meaning. For ex

 Share communism 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/communism Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/communism">Etymology of communism by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of communism. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/communism Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of communism," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/communism. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of communism." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/communism. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of communism." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/communism (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near communism 
 communication 
 communicative 
 communicator 
 communion 
 communique 
 communism 
 communist 
 communitarian 
 community 
 commutation 
 commutative 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix