URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/aubergine
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Aubergine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Aubergine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of aubergine 

 aubergine (n.) 

 "fruit of the eggplant" ( Solanum esculentum ), 1775, from French aubergine , from Catalan alberginera (showing typical change of al- to au- in French), from Arabic al-badinjan "the eggplant" (source also of Spanish alberengena , 15c.), from Persian badin-gan , from Sanskrit vatigagama . The plant, native to Southeast Asia, was unknown to the ancients and introduced to the Mediterranean by the Arabs. As the name of a color like that of the eggplant fruit, it is attested from 1895.
 also from 1775 

 Entries linking to aubergine 

 eggplant (n.) 

 also egg-plant , plant cultivated for its large oblong or ovate fruit, which is highly esteemed as a vegetable, 1763, from egg (n.) + plant (n.). Originally of the white variety. Compare aubergine .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 bush 

 "many-stemmed woody plant," from Old English bysc (found in place names), from West Germanic *busk "bush, thicket" (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with Old French (busche "firewood") and Medieval Latin

 garden 

 late 13c. (late 12c. in surnames), from Old North French gardin "(kitchen) garden; orchard; palace grounds" (Old French jardin, 13c., Modern French jardin), from Vulgar Latin *hortus gardinus "enclosed garden," via Frankish *gardo or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germani

 egg 

 "the body formed in the females of all animals (with the exception of a few of the lowest type) in which by impregnation the development of the fetus takes place," mid-14c., egge, mostly in northern England dialect, from Old Norse egg, from Proto-Germanic *ajja(m) (source also of

 apple 

 Old English æppel "apple; any kind of fruit; fruit in general," from Proto-Germanic *ap(a)laz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch appel, Old Norse eple, Old High German apful, German Apfel), from PIE *ab(e)l- "apple" (source also of Gaulish avallo "fruit;" Old Irish ubu

 costume 

 1715, "style of dress," but also more broadly "custom or usage with respect to place and time, as represented in art or literature; distinctive action, appearance, arms, furniture, etc.," from French costume (17c.), from Italian costume "fashion, habit," from Latin consuetudinem 

 romance 

 c. 1300, romaunce, "a story, written or recited, in verse, telling of the adventures of a knight, hero, etc.," often one designed principally for entertainment, from Old French romanz "verse narrative" (Modern French roman), also "the vulgar language." It was originally an adverb

 Jehovah 

 1530, Tyndale's transliteration of Hebrew Tetragrammaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai "my lord" (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation the lord would have been inc

 salvation 

 c. 1200, savacioun, saluatiun, sauvacioun, etc., originally in the Christian sense, "the saving of the soul, deliverance from the power of sin and admission to eternal bliss," from Old French salvaciun and directly from Late Latin salvationem (nominative salvatio, a Church Latin 

 Share aubergine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/aubergine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/aubergine">Etymology of aubergine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of aubergine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/aubergine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of aubergine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aubergine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of aubergine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aubergine. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of aubergine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/aubergine (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near aubergine 
 au pair 
 au revoir 
 aubade 
 aubaine 
 auberge 
 aubergine 
 Aubrey 
 auburn 
 auction 
 auctioneer 
 audacious 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix