URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lamb
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:33:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lamb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lamb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lamb 

 lamb (n.) 

 "young animal of the sheep kind," Middle English lomb , from Old English lamb , lomb , Northumbrian lemb , from Proto-Germanic *lambaz (source also of Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Gothic lamb , Middle Dutch, Dutch lam , Middle High German lamp , German Lamm "lamb"). Common to the Germanic languages but with no certain cognates beyond them.

 The -b probably has been silent since 13c. The Old English form was sometimes lombor , plural lambru .

 As a symbol of Christ (Lamb of God), typified by the paschal lamb, it is attested from late Old English. Also applied from late Old English to persons gentle or innocent as a lamb (especially young Church members); from mid-15c. it was applied to persons easy to cheat (compare figurative use of fleece (v.)), especially an inexperienced speculator deceived into making bad investments.

 Lamb also sometimes was used ironically for cruel or rough characters (such as Kirke's Lambs in Monmouth's rebellion, 1684-86, "an ironical allusion to the device of the Paschal Lamb on their flag" [OED]); Farmer and Henley ("Slang and Its Analogues") say "specifically applied to Nottingham roughs, and hence to bludgeon men at elections." Compare lambaste .

 Diminutive form lambie is attested from 1718. Lamb's-wool , also lambs-wool , "the wool of lambs" used commercially, hence delicate wool generally (used in hosiery, etc.) is from mid-14c. as a noun ( lambwoll ), by 1804 as an adjective.

 lamb (v.) 

 "to bring forth young," as a sheep, 1610s, from lamb (n.). Related: Lambed ; lambing .

 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to lamb 

 fleece (v.) 

 1530s in the literal sense of "to strip (a sheep) of fleece," from fleece (n.). From 1570s in the figurative meaning "to cheat, swindle, strip of money." Related: Fleeced ; fleecer ; fleecing .

 lambaste (v.) 

 1630s, apparently from baste "to thrash;" see baste (v.3). The first element is the obscure verb lam "to beat, to lame" or the related Elizabethan noun lam "a heavy blow" (implied by 1540s in puns on lambskin ). To lambaste was, "In sailors' use, to beat with a rope's end" [Century Dictionary].

 Compare earlier lamback "to beat, thrash" (1580s, used in old plays). A dictionary from c. 1600 defines Latin defustare as "to lamme or bumbast with strokes." Related: Lambasted ; lambasting .

 lambkin 
 lamblike 
 lambskin 
 lammergeier 
 tomb 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dear 

 Old English deore (Anglian diore, West Saxon dyre), "precious, valuable; costly, expensive; glorious, noble; loved, beloved, regarded with affection" from Proto-Germanic *deurja- (source also of Old Saxon diuri "precious, dear, expensive," Old Norse dyrr, Old Frisian diore "expen

 Agnus Dei 

 Late Latin, literally "lamb of God."...Latin agnus "lamb" is from PIE *agwh-no- "lamb" (see yean). For deus "god," see Zeus....The phrase is used from 1620s in reference to an image of a lamb as emblematic of Christ; usually it is pictured with a nimbus...

 shadowland 

 also shadow-land, 1821 (Lamb), "abode of ghosts and spirits," from shadow (n.) + land (n.)....[Charles Lamb, "Witches and other Night-fears"]...

 ossifrage 

 By this name Pliny meant "the Lammergeier" (that name is from German and means literally "lamb-vulture"), a very large Old...

 Mary 

 The nursery rhyme "Mary had a Little Lamb" was written early 1830 by Sarah Josepha Hale of Boston and published September...

 pure 

 complete, absolute; bare, mere," also "sexually pure, virgin, chaste" (late 12c. as a surname, and Old English had purlamb "lamb...

 Cheshire 

 [Charles Lamb, letter to Thomas Manning, Feb. 26, 1808]...

 get 

 c. 1200, from Old Norse geta (past tense gatum, past participle getenn) "to obtain, reach; to be able to; to beget; to learn; to be pleased with," a word of very broad meaning, often used almost as an auxilliary verb, also frequently in phrases (such as geta rett "to guess right"

 dare 

 Middle English durren, daren, from first and third person singular of Old English durran "be bold enough, have courage" (to do something), also transitive "to venture, presume," from Proto-Germanic *ders- (source also of Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan

 read 

 Middle English reden, ireden, "to counsel, advise," also "to read," from Old English rædan, gerædan (West Saxon), redan, geredan (Anglian) "to advise, counsel, persuade; discuss, deliberate; rule, guide; arrange, equip; forebode; to read (observe and apprehend the meaning of some

 Share lamb 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lamb Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lamb">Etymology of lamb by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lamb. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lamb Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lamb," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lamb. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lamb." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lamb. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lamb." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lamb (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lamb 
 lallygag 
 lam 
 lama 
 Lamarckian 
 Lamaze 
 lamb 
 lambada 
 lambaste 
 lambda 
 lambdacism 
 lambdoid 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix