URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stable
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stable - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stable - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stable 

 stable (n.) 

 early 13c., "building or enclosure with stalls where horses or cows are kept, building for domestic animals," from Old French stable , estable "a stable, stall" (Modern French étable ), also applied to cowsheds and pigsties, and directly from Latin stabulum "a stall, fold, aviary, beehive, lowly cottage, brothel, etc.," etymologically "a standing place" (from PIE *ste-dhlo- , suffixed form of root *sta- "to stand, make or be firm").

 The meaning "collection of horses belonging to a particular (racing) stable" is attested from 1570s; the transferred sense of "group of fighters under same management" is from 1897; that of "group of prostitutes working for the same employer" is by 1937.

 For what the grete Stiede 

 Is stole, thanne he taketh hiede, 

 And makth the stable dore fast. 

 [John Gower, 
 "Confessio Amantis," 1390] 
 also from early 13c. 

 stable (adj.) 

 mid-12c., "trustworthy, reliable;" mid-13c., "constant, steadfast; virtuous;" from Old French stable , estable "constant, steadfast, unchanging," from Latin stabilis "firm, steadfast, stable, fixed," figuratively "durable, unwavering," etymologically "able to stand" (from PIE *stedhli- , suffixed form of root *sta- "to stand, make or be firm").

 It is attested from c. 1300 as "firm, fixed, permanent in its place; well-founded, lasting upon its foundations, secure" (of governments, etc.). The physical sense of "secure against falling" is recorded from late 14c., as is the meaning "of even temperament." Of nuclear isotopes, from 1904. Related: Stably .
 also from mid-12c. 

 stable (v.) 

 "put (a horse) in a stable," early 14c., stablen , from stable (n.) or from Old French establer, establir (see establish ). Stabler "one who provides food and accommodation for horses" is attested by late 12c. as a surname. A different Middle English stablen meant "put in a certain place or position; institute, enact, establish," from Old French establir and directly from Latin stabilire . Related: Stabled ; stabling .
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to stable 

 establish (v.) 

 late 14c., from Old French establiss- , present participle stem of establir "cause to stand still, establish, stipulate, set up, erect, build" (12c., Modern French établir ), from Latin stabilire "make stable," from stabilis "stable" (see stable (adj.)). For the unetymological e- , see e- . Related: Established ; establishing . An established church or religion is one sanctioned by the state.

 constable (n.) 

 c. 1200, "chief household officer;" c. 1300, "justice of the peace," from Old French conestable (12c., Modern French connétable ), "steward, governor," principal officer of the Frankish king's household, from Medieval Latin conestabulus , from Late Latin comes stabuli , literally "count of the stable" (established by Theodosian Code, c. 438 C.E.), hence, "chief groom."

 For first element, see count (n.1). Second element is from Latin stabulum "stable, standing place" (see stable (n.)). Probably the whole is a loan-translation of a Germanic word. Compare marshal (n.).

 Meaning "an officer chosen to serve minor legal process" is from c. 1600, transferred to "police officer" by 1836. French reborrowed constable 19c. as "English police."

 instability 
 instable 
 stability 
 stable-boy 
 unstable 
 *sta- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stability 

 mid-14c., stabilite, of persons or character, "firmness of resolve, mental equilibrium, steadfastness," from Old French stablete, establete "firmness, solidity, stability; durability, constancy" (Modern French stabilité), from Latin stabilitatem (nominative stabilitas) "a standin

 static 

 1630s, "pertaining to the science of weight and its mechanical effects," from Modern Latin statica, from Greek statikos "causing to stand, skilled in weighing," statos, verbal stem of histanai "to make to stand, set; to place in the balance, weigh" (from PIE root *sta- "to stand,

 stabilize 

 also stabilise, 1861, "render stable, give stability to," originally of ships; probably a back-formation from stability,...Earlier verbs in the same sense were stabilitate "make stable; establish" (1640s) and simple stable (v.)..."make steady or firm, make stable" (c. 1300), from Old French establir....Century Dictionary marks stabilify "render stable, fixed, or firm" (1871) as "rare."...

 stall 

 [place in a stable for animals] Middle English stalle, from Old English steall "standing place, any fixed place or position..., state; place where cattle are kept, stable; fishing ground," from Proto-Germanic *stalli- (source also of Old Norse stallr..."pedestal for idols, altar; crib, manger," Old Frisian stal, Old High German stall "stand, place, stable, stall," German...Stall "stable," Stelle "place")....

 stallion 

 estalon "stallion, uncastrated male horse" (Modern French étalon), from Frankish *stal, cognate with Old High German stal "stable...The notion is probably of a horse kept in a stable to service mares, rather than for work or war....

 infirm 

 (figuratively "superstitious, pusillanimous, inconstant"), from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + firmus "strong; stable...

 equerry 

 equirrie, from esquiry "stables" (1550s), from French escuerie (Modern French écurie), perhaps from Medieval Latin scuria "stable...

 shelter 

 1580s, "structure affording protection," also figurative; 1590s, "state of being sheltered;" a word of disputed origin, possibly an alteration of Middle English sheltroun, sheltron, sheldtrume "roof or wall formed by locked shields," also "group of soldiers in tight battle format

 horse 

 "solidungulate perissodactyl mammal of the family Equidæ and genus Equus" [Century Dictionary], Old English hors "horse," from Proto-Germanic *harss- (source also of Old Norse hross, Old Frisian, Old Saxon hors, Middle Dutch ors, Dutch ros, Old High German hros, German Roß "horse

 barn 

 "covered building for the storage of farm produce," Middle English bern, bærn, from Old English bereærn "barn," literally "barley house," from bere "barley" (see barley) + aern "house; place for storing," metathesized from *rann, *rasn (source also of Old Norse rann "large house,

 Share stable 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stable Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stable">Etymology of stable by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stable. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stable Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stable," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stable. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stable." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stable. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stable." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stable (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stable 
 Stabat Mater 
 stability 
 stabilization 
 stabilize 
 stabilizer 
 stable 
 stable-boy 
 stablish 
 staccato 
 stack 
 stacked 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix