URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/natron
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:34:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Natron - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Natron - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of natron 

 natron (n.) 

 "native carbonate of sodium," 1680s, from French natron (1660s), which is said to be directly from Arabic natrun , itself from Greek nitron , itself possibly of Eastern origin (see nitre ). Medieval Latin and Paracelsus (16c.) had a form anatron , from Arabic with the article assimilated ( an-natron ). It is the source of the chemical symbol Na for sodium and the word-forming element natro- , used in the names of minerals to indicate the presence of sodium.
 also from 1680s 

 Entries linking to natron 

 nitre (n.) 

 c. 1400, "native sodium carbonate" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French nitre (13c.), from Latin nitrum , from Greek nitron , which is possibly of Eastern origin (compare Hebrew nether "carbonate of soda;" Egyptian ntr ). Originally a word for native soda, but also associated since the Middle Ages with saltpeter (potassium nitrate) for obscure reasons; this became the predominant sense by late 16c.

 sodium (n.) 

 metallic alkaline element, 1807, coined by English chemist Humphry Davy from soda + -ium . So called because the element was isolated from caustic soda (sodium hydroxide). The chemical symbol Na is from natrium , the name for the element that had been proposed by Berzelius and coined from natron , a name of a type of soda.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cameo 

 early 15c., kaadmaheu, camew, chamehieux and many other spellings (from early 13c. in Anglo-Latin), "engraving in relief upon a precious stone with two layers of colors" (such as onyx, agate, or shell) and done so as to utilize the effect of the colors, from Old French camaieu an

 ABBA 

 Swedish pop music group formed 1972, the name dates from 1973 and is an acronym from the first names of the four band members: Anni-Frid Lyngstad, Björn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson, Agnetha Fältskog....Biblical title of honor, literally "father," used as an invocation of God, from L

 tablet 

 c. 1300, "small, portable slab of durable material, often covered in wax in which writing was incised; flat surface for an inscription" (originally especially the two Mosaic tables of stone), from Old French tablete "small table, merchant's display counter" (13c., Modern French t

 Egypt 

 Old English Egipte "the Egyptians," from French Egypte, from Greek Aigyptos "the river Nile, Egypt," from Amarna Hikuptah, corresponding to Egyptian Ha(t)-ka-ptah "temple of the soul of Ptah," the creative god associated with Memphis, the ancient city of Egypt. Strictly one of th

 boggle 

 1590s, "to start with fright (as a startled horse does), shy, take alarm," from Middle English bugge "specter" (among other things, supposed to scare horses at night); see bug (n.); also compare bogey (n.1), boggart. The meaning " hesitate, stop as if afraid to proceed in fear of

 hunky-dory 

 1866, American English (popularized c. 1870 by a Christy Minstrel song), perhaps an elaboration of hunkey "all right, satisfactory" (1861), from hunk "in a safe position" (1847) New York City slang used in street games, from Dutch honk "post, station, home," in children's play, "

 brand 

 Old English brand, brond "fire, flame, destruction by fire; firebrand, piece of burning wood, torch," and (poetic) "sword," from Proto-Germanic *brandaz "a burning" (source also of Old Norse brandr, Old High German brant, Old Frisian brond "firebrand; blade of a sword," German br

 hocus-pocus 

 magical formula used in conjuring, 1630s, earlier Hocas Pocas, common name of a magician or juggler (1620s); a sham-Latin invocation used by jugglers, perhaps based on a perversion of the sacramental blessing from the Mass, Hoc est corpus meum "This is my body." The first to make

 soldier 

 c. 1300, souder, soudiour, "fighting man, one engaged ion military service," from Old French soudier, soldier and Anglo-French variants, "one who serves in the army for pay," from Medieval Latin soldarius "a soldier" (source also of Spanish soldado, Italian soldato), literally "o

 octopus 

 1758, genus name of a type of eight-armed cephalopod mollusks, from Latinized form of Greek oktōpous, literally "eight-foot," from oktō "eight" (see eight) + pous "foot," from PIE root *ped- "foot." The more usual Greek word seems to have been polypous (also pōlyps), from polys "

 Share natron 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/natron Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/natron">Etymology of natron by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of natron. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/natron Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of natron," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/natron. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of natron." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/natron. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of natron." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/natron (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near natron 
 nativeness 
 nativism 
 nativity 
 nativize 
 NATO 
 natron 
 natter 
 natterjack 
 natty 
 natural 
 natural-born 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix