URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/deca-
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:54:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Deca- - Etymology & Meaning of the Suffix

Deca- - Etymology & Meaning of the Suffix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of deca- 

 deca- 

 before a vowel, dec- , word-forming element meaning "ten," from Latinized combining form of Greek deka "ten" (from PIE root *dekm- "ten"). In the metric system, "multiplied by ten;" while deci- means "divided by ten."

 Entries linking to deca- 

 decahedron (n.) 

 in geometry, "a solid having ten faces," 1828, from deca- "ten" + -hedron , from Greek hedra "seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid," from PIE root *sed- (1) "to sit." Related: Decahedral .

 Decalogue (n.) 

 "Ten Commandments," late 14c., from Latin decalogus , from Greek dekalogos , from the phrase hoi deka logoi used to translate "Ten Commandments" in Septuagint. See deca- + Logos .

 *dekm- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "ten."

 It might form all or part of: cent ; centenarian ; centenary ; centi- ; centime ; centurion ; century ; centennial ; cinquecento ; dean ; deca- ; decade ; decagon ; Decalogue ; Decameron ; decapod ; decathlon ; December ; decennial ; deci- ; decile ; decimal ; decimate ; decimation ; decuple ; decussate ; denarius ; denier (n.) "French coin;" dicker ; dime ; dinar ; doyen ; dozen ; duodecimal ; duodecimo ; eighteen ; fifteen ; fourteen ; hecatomb ; hendeca- ; hundred ; icosahedron ; nineteen ; nonagenarian ; octogenarian ; Pentecost ; percent ; quattrocento ; Septuagint ; sexagenarian ; seventeen ; sixteen ; ten ; tenth ; thirteen ; thousand ; tithe ; -ty (1).

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dasa , Avestan dasa , Armenian tasn , Greek deka , Latin decem (source of Spanish diez , French dix ), Old Church Slavonic deseti , Lithuanian dešimt , Old Irish deich , Breton dek , Welsh deg , Albanian djetu , Old English ten , Old High German zehan , Gothic taihun "ten."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hazard 

 c. 1300, name of a game at dice, from Old French hasard, hasart "game of chance played with dice," also "a throw of six in dice" (12c.), of uncertain origin. Possibly from Spanish azar "an unfortunate card or throw at dice," which is said to be from Arabic az-zahr (for al-zahr) "

 inspire 

 mid-14c., enspiren, "to fill (the mind, heart, etc., with grace, etc.);" also "to prompt or induce (someone to do something)," from Old French enspirer (13c.), from Latin inspirare "blow into, breathe upon," figuratively "inspire, excite, inflame," from in- "in" (from PIE root *e

 Amazon 

 late 14c., "one of a race of female warriors in Scythia," via Old French (13c.) or Latin, from Greek Amazon (mostly in plural Amazones), probably from an unknown non-Indo-European word, or possibly from an Iranian compound *ha-maz-an- "(one) fighting together" [Watkins]. But in f

 stop 

 Middle English stoppen, "obstruct (a passage) with a physical barrier; close up by filling, stuffing, or plugging," from Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian "to stop up, stifle"), a general West Germanic word, cognate with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low Germ

 loyalty 

 c. 1400, from Old French loialte, leaute "loyalty, fidelity; legitimacy; honesty; good quality" (Modern French loyauté), from loial (see loyal). The Medieval Latin word was legalitas. The earlier Middle English form was leaute (mid-13c.), from the older French form. Loyalty oath 

 slander 

 late 13c., sclaundre, "state of impaired reputation; disgrace or dishonor;" c. 1300, "a false tale or report spread maliciously; the fabrication and dissemination of false tales to discredit someone," from Anglo-French esclaundre, Old French esclandre "scandalous statement," alte

 restaurant 

 "an eating-house, establishment where meals may be bought and eaten," 1821, from French restaurant "a restaurant," originally "food that restores," noun use of present participle of restaurer "to restore or refresh," from Old French restorer (see restore). In 1765 a man by the n

 compassion 

 "feeling of sorrow or deep tenderness for one who is suffering or experiencing misfortune," mid-14c., compassioun, literally "a suffering with another," from Old French compassion "sympathy, pity" (12c.), from Late Latin compassionem (nominative compassio) "sympathy," noun of sta

 honor 

 c. 1200, onur, "glory, renown, fame earned," from Anglo-French honour, Old French onor, honor "honor, dignity, distinction, position; victory, triumph" (Modern French honneur), from Latin honorem (nominative honos, the form used by Cicero, but later honor) "honor, dignity, office

 fascinate 

 1590s, "bewitch, enchant," from French fasciner (14c.), from Latin fascinatus, past participle of fascinare "bewitch, enchant, fascinate," from fascinus "a charm, enchantment, spell, witchcraft," which is of uncertain origin. Earliest used of witches and of serpents, who were sai

 Share deca- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/deca- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/deca-">Etymology of deca- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of deca-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/deca- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of deca-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/deca-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of deca-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/deca-. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of deca-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/deca- (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near deca- 
 debug 
 debunk 
 debut 
 debutant 
 debutante 
 deca- 
 decade 
 decadence 
 decadent 
 decaffeinate 
 decagon 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix