URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/colon
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Colon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Colon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of colon 

 colon (n.1) 

 "punctuation mark consisting of two dots, one above the other, used to mark grammatical discontinuity less than that indicated by a period," 1540s, from Latin colon "part of a verse or poem," from Greek kōlon "part of a verse," literally "limb, member" (especially the leg, but also of a tree limb), also, figuratively, "a clause of a sentence," a word of uncertain etymology.

 The meaning evolved in modern languages from "independent clause" to the punctuation mark that sets it off. In ancient grammar a colon was one of the larger divisions of a sentence.
 also from 1540s 

 colon (n.2) 

 "large intestine," late 14c., from Latin colon , Latinized form of Greek kolon (with a short initial -o- ) "large intestine," which is of unknown origin.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to colon 

 colectomy (n.) 

 "surgical excision of part of the colon," 1882, from combining form of colon (n.2) + -ectomy "a cutting, surgical removal."

 colic (n.) 

 "disease characterized by severe spasmodic abdominal pain," early 15c., from Late Latin colicus "pertaining to colic," from Greek kolikos , belonging to the kolon "lower intestine" (see colon (n.2)). The word was used in English late 14c. as an adjective, "affecting the colon." Related: Colicky (1742).

 colitis 
 colonic 
 colonoscopy 
 colorectal 
 colostomy 
 comma 
 decolonization 
 E. coli 
 semicolon 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 comma 

 punctuation mark, 1520s as a Latin word, nativized by 1590s, from Latin comma "short phrase or clause of a sentence or line of poetry," from Greek komma "clause in a sentence," also ""stamp, coinage," literally "piece which is cut off," from koptein "to strike, smite, cut off; di

 decolonization 

 1853 in a political sense, "remove (a place) from colonial status," American English, from de- + colonization. Earlier as a medical term (from colon (n.2)). The great occupation of the nations of western Europe, from the beginning of the fifteenth century to near the close of th

 semicolon 

 also semi-colon, point used in punctuation, consisting of a dot above a comma, to mark a sentence somewhat more independent than that marked by a comma, 1640s, a hybrid coined from Latin-derived semi- + Greek-based colon (n.1). The mark itself was (and is) in Greek the point of i

 caecum 

 in human anatomy, "the pouch at the beginning of the colon," 1721, from Latin intestinum caecum "blind gut," from neuter...

 punctuation 

 1530s, "pointing of the psalms" (for the purpose of singing them), from Medieval Latin punctuationem (nominative punctuatio) "a marking with points in writing," noun of action from past-participle stem of punctuare "to mark with points or dots," from Latin punctus, past participl

 Panama 

 Central American nation; the name is used of a political jurisdiction by 1530s in Spanish, probably from an unknown Guarani word, traditionally said to mean "place of many fish." Originally the name of the settlement founded 1519 (destroyed 1671 but subsequently rebuilt). Related

 school 

 [place of instruction] Middle English scole, from Old English scol, "institution for instruction," from Latin schola "meeting place for teachers and students, place of instruction;" also "learned conversation, debate; lecture; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect," als

 aubergine 

 "fruit of the eggplant" (Solanum esculentum), 1775, from French aubergine, from Catalan alberginera (showing typical change of al- to au- in French), from Arabic al-badinjan "the eggplant" (source also of Spanish alberengena, 15c.), from Persian badin-gan, from Sanskrit vatigagam

 sonnet 

 1557 (in the title of Surrey's poems), from French sonnet (1540s) or directly from Italian sonetto, literally "little song," from Old Provençal sonet "song," diminutive of son "song, sound," from Latin sonus "sound" (from PIE root *swen- "to sound"). Originally in English and int

 mortgage 

 late 14c., morgage, "a conveyance of property on condition as security for a loan or agreement," from Old French morgage (13c.), mort gaige, literally "dead pledge" (replaced in modern French by hypothèque), from mort "dead" (see mortal (adj.)) + gage "pledge" (see wage (n.)). So

 Share colon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/colon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/colon">Etymology of colon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of colon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/colon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of colon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/colon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of colon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/colon. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of colon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/colon (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near colon 
 collusion 
 collusive 
 collywobbles 
 cologne 
 Colombia 
 colon 
 colonel 
 colonial 
 colonialism 
 colonialist 
 colonialization 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix