URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/caviar
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T13:55:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caviar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Caviar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of caviar 

 caviar (n.) 

 also caviare , "roe of certain large fish, salted and served as food," 1550s, from French caviar (16c.), from Italian caviaro (modern caviale ) or Turkish khaviar , from Persian khaviyar , from khaya "egg," from Middle Persian khayak "egg," from Old Iranian *qvyaka- , diminutive of *avya- (from PIE *ōwyo‑, *ōyyo‑ "egg," which is perhaps a derivative of the root *awi- "bird"). The second element is Persian dar "bearing." The Russian name is ikra .
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to caviar 

 *awi- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "bird." It also might be the source of *woyo, *oyyo , Proto-Indo-European words for "egg."

 It might form all or part of: auspex ; auspices ; auspicious ; avian ; aviary ; aviation ; aviator ; avicide ; aviculture ; aviform ; caviar ; cockney ; egg (n.); ocarina ; oo- ; oocyte ; oolite ; oology ; osprey ; ostrich ; oval ; ovary ; ovate (adj.); oviform ; oviparous ; ovoviviparous ; ovoid ; ovulate ; ovulation ; ovule ; ovum .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit vih , Avestan vish , Latin avis "bird;" Greek aietos "eagle;" Old Church Slavonic aja , Russian jajco , Breton ui , Welsh wy , Greek ōon , Latin ovum , Old Norse egg , Old High German ei , Gothic ada all meaning "egg."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ore 

 "a metalliferous mineral or rock," especially one worth mining, 12c., a merger of Old English ora "ore, unworked metal" (related to eorþe "earth;" see earth (n.); and cognate with Low German ur "iron-containing ore," Dutch oer, Old Norse aurr "gravel"); and Old English ar "brass,

 roe 

 "mass of fish eggs," mid-15c., roughe, probably from an unrecorded Old English *hrogn, from Proto-Germanic *khrugnaz (source also of Old Norse hrogn, Danish rogn, Swedish rom, Flemish rog, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch roge, Old High German rogo, German Rogen "roe"), from PI

 belong 

 mid-14c., "to go along with, properly relate to," from be- intensive prefix, + longen "to go," from Old English langian "pertain to, to go along with," which is of uncertain origin but perhaps related to the root of long (adj.). The senses of "be the property of" and "be a member

 praise 

 c. 1300, preisen, "to express admiration of, commend, adulate, flatter" (someone or something), from Old French preisier, variant of prisier "to praise, value," from Late Latin preciare, earlier pretiare "to price, value, prize," from Latin pretium "reward, prize, value, worth," 

 Sabbath 

 Middle English sabat, from Old English sabat "seventh day of the week in the Jewish calendar; Saturday" as observed by the Jews as a day of rest from secular employment and of religious observance, from Old French sabat and directly from Latin sabbatum, from Greek sabbaton, from 

 confess 

 late 14c., transitive and intransitive, "make avowal or admission of" (a fault, crime, sin, debt, etc.), from Old French confesser (transitive and intransitive), from Vulgar Latin *confessare, a frequentative form from Latin confess-, past participle stem of confiteri "to acknowl

 plagiarism 

 "the purloining or wrongful appropriation of another's ideas, writing, artistic designs, etc., and giving these forth as one's own" [Century Dictionary], 1620s, from -ism + plagiary (n.) "plagiarist, literary thief" (c. 1600), from Latin plagiarius "kidnapper, seducer, plunderer,

 trivia 

 "trivialities, bits of information of little consequence," by 1932, from the title of a popular book by U.S.-born British aphorist Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946) first published in 1902 but popularized in 1918 (with "More Trivia" following in 1921 and a collected edition includ

 irony 

 "figure of speech in which the intended meaning is the opposite of the literal meaning" (usually covert sarcasm under a serious or friendly pretense), c. 1500, from Latin ironia, from Greek eironeia "dissimulation, assumed ignorance," from eiron "dissembler," perhaps related to e

 stress 

 c. 1300, stresse, "hardship, adversity; constraining or compelling force or pressure, coercion;" the original senses are mostly archaic or obsolete. The word is in part a shortening of distress (n.) and in part from Old French estrece "narrowness, oppression," from Vulgar Latin *

 Share caviar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/caviar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/caviar">Etymology of caviar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of caviar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/caviar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of caviar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caviar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of caviar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caviar. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of caviar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/caviar (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near caviar 
 cave-dweller 
 caveman 
 cavendish 
 cavern 
 cavernous 
 caviar 
 cavil 
 cavitate 
 cavitation 
 cavity 
 cavort 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix