URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Indonesia
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Indonesia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Indonesia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Indonesia 

 Indonesia 

 "the East Indies," 1850, from Indo- "India" + Greek nēsos "island" (see Chersonese ) + -ia . Formerly called Indian Archipelago or East Indies Islands (see Indies ). Related: Indonesian "of or from the East Indies" (1850).
 also from 1850 

 Entries linking to Indonesia 

 Chersonese 

 peninsula south of Thrace, from Greek khersonesos "peninsula," etymologically "island connected to the mainland," from khersos "dry land, mainland" + nēsos "island," also "(flooded) land near a river, alluvial land," which is of uncertain origin; traditionally from PIE root sna- "to swim," but this is now generally rejected. "As words for 'island' differ from language to language, [ nēsos ] is probably an Aegean loan (note that Lat. insula is also of unclear origin)" [Beekes]. Compare isle .

 Greek khersos is perhaps from PIE root  *ghers-  "to bristle" (see horror (n.)) if the Greek word first referred to "arid, stubbly land, and only later to land in opposition to water" [Beekes].

 Indies 

 "India and adjacent regions and islands," 1550s, plural of Indie , Indy , from Middle English Ynde (early 13c.), the usual word in Middle English for "India," from the Old French form of Latin India (see India ). Commonly applied to Asia and the East generally; later in a time of geographical confusion, it was applied to the Caribbean basin, which was distinguished from Asia proper by being called the West Indies .

 -ia 
 Indo- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 benzoin 

 balsamic resin obtained from a tree (Styrax benzoin) of Indonesia, 1560s (earlier as bengewine, 1550s), from French benjoin...

 domino 

 President Eisenhower, on August 4, 1953, explained that if Indonesia fell, "the peninsula, the last little bit of land hanging...falls inevitably from the toppling of the first, the loss of Indochina would lead to the loss of Burma, of Thailand, and Indonesia...

 durian 

 globular fruit of a tree of Indonesia, 1580s, from Malay (Austronesian) durian, from duri "thorn, prickle."...

 Hezbollah 

 In Modjokuto (like Masjumi itself, Hizbullah was Indonesia-wide but, also like Masjumi, it had little effective central organization...

 bail 

 "bond money, security given to obtain the release of a prisoner," late 15c., a sense that apparently developed from that of "temporary release (of an arrested person) from jail" (into the custody of another, who gives security for future appearance at trial), which is recorded fr

 cope 

 late 14c., coupen, "to quarrel;" c. 1400, "come to blows, deliver blows, engage in combat," from Old French couper, earlier colper "hit, punch," from colp "a blow" (see coup). The meaning evolved by 18c. into "handle (successfully), deal with," perhaps influenced by now-obsolete 

 case 

 early 13c., "what befalls one; state of affairs," from Old French cas "an event, happening, situation, quarrel, trial," from Latin casus "a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap," literally "a falling," from cas-, past-participle stem of cadere "to fall, sink, settle do

 identity 

 c. 1600, "sameness, oneness, state of being the same," from French identité (14c.), from Medieval Latin identitatem (nominative identitas) "sameness," ultimately from Latin idem (neuter) "the same" (see idem). [For discussion of Latin formation, see entry in OED.] Earlier form of

 sinister 

 early 15c., sinistre, "prompted by malice or ill-will; false, dishonest, intending to mislead," with suggestion, report, etc., from Old French senestre, sinistre "contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left" (14c.), from Latin sinister "left, on the left side" (opposite of dexter),

 plagiarism 

 "the purloining or wrongful appropriation of another's ideas, writing, artistic designs, etc., and giving these forth as one's own" [Century Dictionary], 1620s, from -ism + plagiary (n.) "plagiarist, literary thief" (c. 1600), from Latin plagiarius "kidnapper, seducer, plunderer,

 Share Indonesia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Indonesia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Indonesia">Etymology of Indonesia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Indonesia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Indonesia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Indonesia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Indonesia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Indonesia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Indonesia. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Indonesia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Indonesia (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Indonesia 
 Indo-Germanic 
 Indo-Iranian 
 indolence 
 indolent 
 indomitable 
 Indonesia 
 indoor 
 Indo-Pacific 
 indorse 
 indorsement 
 Indra 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix