URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/anxious
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T20:07:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Anxious - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Anxious - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of anxious 

 anxious (adj.) 

 1620s, "greatly troubled by uncertainties," from Latin anxius "solicitous, uneasy, troubled in mind" (also "causing anxiety, troublesome"), from angere , anguere "to choke, squeeze," figuratively "to torment, cause distress" (from PIE root *angh- "tight, painfully constricted, painful").

 The same image is in Serbo-Croatian tjeskoba "anxiety," literally "tightness, narrowness." The meaning "earnestly desirous" (as in anxious to please ) is from 1742. Related: Anxiously ; anxiousness .
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to anxious 

 anxiety (n.) 

 1520s, "apprehension caused by danger, misfortune, or error, uneasiness of mind respecting some uncertainty, a restless dread of some evil," from Latin anxietatem (nominative anxietas ) "anguish, anxiety, solicitude," noun of quality from anxius "uneasy, troubled in mind" (see anxious ).

 It was sometimes considered a pathological condition (1660s); modern psychiatric use dates to 1904. Age of Anxiety is from Auden's poem (1947). For "anxiety, distress," Old English had angsumnes , Middle English anxumnesse .

 overanxious (adj.) 

 also over-anxious , "anxious to excess, unduly anxious," 1713, from over- + anxious . Related: Overanxiously ; overanxiousness .

 *angh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "tight, painfully constricted, painful."

 It might form all or part of: agnail ; anger ; angina ; angry ; angst ; anguish ; anxious ; hangnail ; quinsy .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit amhu- "narrow," amhah "anguish;" Armenian anjuk "narrow;" Lithuanian ankštas "narrow;" Greek ankhein "to squeeze," ankhone "a strangling;" Latin angere "to throttle, torment;" Old Irish cum-ang "straitness, want;" Old English enge "narrow, painful," Old Norse angra "to grieve, vex, distress," Gothic aggwus "narrow."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nervous 

 late 14c., "containing nerves; affecting the sinews" (the latter sense now obsolete); from Latin nervosus "sinewy, vigorous," from nervus "sinew, nerve" (see nerve (n.)). The meaning "of or belonging to the nerves" in the modern anatomical sense is from 1660s. From 1630s it was u

 queasy 

 mid-15c., kyse, coysy, of food, "unsettling to the stomach, apt to cause nausea;" by 1540s of persons or the stomach, "affected with nausea, inclined to vomit;" a word of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse kveisa "a boil" (Middle English Comp

 religiosity 

 religiositas "religiousness," from religiosus "pious, devout, reverencing or fearing the gods," also "religiously careful, anxious...

 vigilante 

 American English, from Spanish vigilante, literally "watchman," from Latin vigilantem (nominative vigilans) "watchful, anxious...

 care 

 Old English carian, cearian "be anxious or solicitous; grieve; feel concern or interest," from Proto-Germanic *karo- "lament...Old Saxon karon "to lament, to care, to sorrow, complain," Old High German charon "complain, lament," Gothic karon "be anxious...

 careful 

 Old English cearful "mournful, sad," also "full of care or woe; anxious; full of concern" (for someone or something), thus...

 busy 

 Old English bisig "careful, anxious," later "continually employed or occupied, in constant or energetic action" cognate with...

 dingy 

 1736, in Kentish dialect, "dirty, foul," a word of uncertain origin, but perhaps related to dung. Meaning "soiled, tarnished, having a dull, brownish color" (from grime or weathering) is by 1751; hence "shabby, shady, drab" (by 1855). The noun dinge "dinginess" (1816) is a back-f

 please 

 c. 1300, plesen, "to please or satisfy (a deity), propitiate, appease," from Old French plaisir "to please, give pleasure to, satisfy" (11c., Modern French plaire, the form of which is perhaps due to analogy of faire), from Latin placere "to be acceptable, be liked, be approved,"

 fanny 

 "buttocks," 1920, American English, from earlier British meaning "vulva" (1879), perhaps from the name of John Cleland's heroine in the scandalous novel "Fanny Hill or Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure" (1748). The fem. proper name is a diminutive of Frances. The genital sense is st

 Share anxious 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/anxious Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/anxious">Etymology of anxious by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of anxious. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/anxious Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of anxious," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anxious. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of anxious." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anxious. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of anxious." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/anxious (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near anxious 
 Anubis 
 anuria 
 anus 
 anvil 
 anxiety 
 anxious 
 any 
 anybody 
 anyhow 
 anymore 
 anyone 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix