URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dew
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:08:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dew - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dew - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dew 

 dew (n.) 

 "water vapor deposited from the atmosphere by condensation, especially during the night," Middle English deaw, deu , from Old English deaw , from Proto-Germanic *dawwaz (source also of Old Saxon dau , Old Frisian daw , Middle Dutch dau , Old High German tau , German Tau , Old Norse dögg "dew"), perhaps from PIE root *dheu- "to flow" (source also of Sanskrit dhavate "flows, runs").

 Used figuratively of something refreshing (late Old English), or suggestive of morning and youthful freshness (1530s). As a verb, "to wet with or as with dew," Old English deawian .

 The formation of dew is explained by the loss of heat by bodies on the earth's surface through radiation at night, by which means they and the air immediately about them are cooled below the dew-point ....Dew is thus deposited chiefly on bodies which are good radiators and poor conductors of heat, like grass; hence also it appears chiefly on calm and clear nights--that is, when the conditions are most favorable for radiation. It never appears on nights both cloudy and windy. In winter dew becomes hoar frost. [Century Dictionary]

 Entries linking to dew 

 dag (n.) 

 several words, probably unrelated, including: 1. "pendant point of cloth on a garment," late 14c., of uncertain origin; 2. "thin rain, drizzle, wet fog," Scottish, late 17c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse dögg , plural daggir "dew," from Proto-Germanic *daowo- (source of Old English deaw ; see dew ); 3. "kind of heavy pistol," 1560s, of uncertain origin; 4. "clot of dirty wool about the rear end of a sheep," 1731; 5. "tough but amusing person," Australian and New Zealand slang, 1916.

 dewberry (n.) 

 popular name of a woodland bramble or its fruit, which is black with a bluish dewy bloom, 1570s, from dew + berry . a name variously applied in England and North America.

 dewdrop 
 dewfall 
 dewpoint 
 dewy 
 honeydew 
 mildew 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mildew 

 "minute parasitic fungus that appears on plants or decaying organic matter," mid-14c., a transferred sense of a word that meant originally "nectar, honeydew" (the sugar-rich sticky stuff secreted by aphids feeding on plant sap); this is from mid-13c. as mildeu, from Old English m

 rosemary 

 widely cultivated for its fragrance, late 14c., rose-marie, earlier rosmarine (c. 1300), from Latin rosmarinus, literally "dew...of the sea" (compare French romarin), from ros "dew" + marinus "of the sea, maritime," from mare "sea, the sea, seawater...Latin ros is from a PIE noun probably from *ers- "to be wet" (source also of Lithuanian rasa, Old Church Slavonic rosa "dew...

 drizzle 

 Perhaps it is an alteration of drysning "a falling of dew" (c. 1400), from Old English -drysnian, which is related to dreosan...

 micturition 

 As during the final 20 minutes of a 4-hour film after drinking a 32-ounce Mountain Dew from the snack bar and the movie ends...

 frost 

 A black frost (late 14c.) is one which kills plants (turns them black) but is not accompanied by visible frozen dew....

 dreary 

 blood-stained," from dreor "gore, blood," from (ge)dreosan (past participle droren) "fall, decline, fail," used of rain, snow, dew...

 precipitation 

 The meteorological sense of "rain, snow, dew, frost, hail, etc.; moisture from the atmosphere deposited on the earth's surface...

 mess 

 c. 1300, "a supply or provision of food for one meal," from Old French mes "portion of food, course at dinner," from Late Latin missus "course at dinner," literally "a placing, a putting (on a table, etc.)," from past participle of mittere "to put, place," in classical Latin "to 

 calendar 

 c. 1200, calender, "the year as divided systematically into days and months;" mid-14c. as "table showing divisions of the year;" from Old French calendier "list, register," from Latin calendarium "account book," from calendae/kalendae "the calends" the first day of the Roman mont

 empathy 

 1908, modeled on German Einfühlung (from ein "in" + Fühlung "feeling"), which was coined 1858 by German philosopher Rudolf Lotze (1817-1881) as a translation of Greek empatheia "passion, state of emotion," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + pathos "feeling" (from PI

 Share dew 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dew Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dew">Etymology of dew by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dew. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dew Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dew," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dew. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dew." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dew. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dew." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dew (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dew 
 devotee 
 devotion 
 devotional 
 devour 
 devout 
 dew 
 dew claw 
 dewberry 
 dewdrop 
 Dewey Decimal system 
 dewfall 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix