URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/curtain
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:11:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Curtain - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Curtain - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of curtain 

 curtain (n.) 

 c. 1300, curtine , "hanging screen of textile fabric used to close an opening or shut out light, enclose a bed, or decorate an altar," from Old French cortine "curtain, tapestry, drape, blanket," from Late Latin cortina "curtain," but in classical Latin "round vessel, cauldron," from Latin cortem (older cohortem ) "enclosure, courtyard" (see cohort ).

 The meaning shift apparently begins with cortina being used as a loan-translation of Greek aulaia ("curtain") in the Vulgate (to render Hebrew yeriah in Exodus xxvi:1, etc.). The Greek word was connected to aule "court," perhaps because the "door" that led out to the courtyard of a Greek house was a hung cloth.

 Figuratively from early 15c. as "something that conceals or screens." From 1590s as "large sheet used to conceal the stage in a theater." Many of the figurative senses are from stage plays: Behind the curtain "concealed" is from 1670s; curtains "the end" is by 1912. The theatrical curtain call "appearance of individual performers on stage at the end of a performance to be recognized by the audience" is from 1884. To draw the curtain is from c. 1500 in opposite senses: "to conceal," and "to reveal." Curtain-rod is from c. 1500. An Old English word for "curtain" was fleonet "fly-net."
 also from c. 1300 

 curtain (v.) 

 c. 1300, "to enclose with or as if with a curtain," from Old French cortiner , from cortine (see curtain (n.)). Related: Curtained .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to curtain 

 cohort (n.) 

 early 15c., "company of soldiers, band of warriors," from French cohorte (14c.) and directly from Latin cohortem (nominative cohors ) "enclosure," with meaning extended to "infantry company" in the Roman army through the notion of "enclosed group, retinue;" from assimilated form of com "with" (see co- ) + a root akin to hortus "garden," from PIE *ghr-ti- , from PIE root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose."

 Sense of "accomplice" is first recorded 1952, American English, from meaning "group united in common cause" (1719). In demographics, "group of persons having a common statistical characteristic" (originally being born in the same year), 1944.

 iron curtain (n.) 

 1794, the name of a fire-protection device to be used in theaters, a literal iron curtain; see iron (n.) + curtain (n.).

 The new and exquisitely beautiful theatre of Drury-lane has the peculiar contrivance of an 
 iron-curtain to secure the audience from all danger, in case of fire on the stage. Miss Farren, in the occasional epilogue, delivered on opening this new theatre, pleasantly informs the spectators that, should flames burst out in the part appropriated to the representation, they may comfort themselves with thinking that nothing can be burnt but the scenery and the actors. [The Monthly Review, June 1794]

 From 1819 in the figurative sense "impenetrable barrier." In reference to the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe, famously coined by Winston Churchill March 5, 1946, in speech at Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri, but it had been used earlier in this context (for example by U.S. bureaucrat Allen W. Dulles at a meeting of the Council on Foreign Relations, Dec. 3, 1945). The phrase had been used in the sense of "barrier at the edge of the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union" from 1920. During World War II, Goebbels used it in German ( ein eiserner Vorhang ) in the same sense. But its popular use in the U.S. dates from Churchill's speech.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 drape 

 c. 1400, drapen, "to ornament with cloth hangings;" mid-15c., "to weave into cloth," from Old French draper "to weave, make cloth" (13c., in Modern French "to cover with mourning-cloth, dress, drape"), from drap "cloth, piece of cloth, sheet, bandage," from Late Latin drapus, whi

 mantle 

 Old English mentel "a loose, sleeveless garment worn as an outer covering, falling in straight lines from the shoulders," from Latin mantellum "cloak" (source of Italian mantello, Old High German mantal, German Mantel, Old Norse mötull), perhaps from a Celtic source, or, if the L

 pall 

 Middle English pal, from Old English pæll "rich cloth or cloak, purple robe, altar cloth," from Latin pallium "cloak, coverlet, covering," in Tertullian, the garment worn by Christians instead of the Roman toga; related to pallo "robe, cloak," palla "long upper garment of Roman w

 proscenium 

 Modern sense of "space between the curtain and the orchestra" (often including the curtain and its framework) is attested...

 portiere 

 curtain hung at the doorway or entrance to a room," 1843, from French portière, which is formed in French from porte "door...A curtain hung at a doorway, or entrance to a room, either with the door or to replace it, to intercept the view or currents...

 canopy 

 "suspended covering serving as protection or shelter," late 14c., canope, from Old French conope "bed-curtain" (Modern French...canapé), from Medieval Latin canopeum, a dissimilatiion of Latin conopeum "mosquito curtain,"from Greek kōnōpeion "Egyptian...

 hijab 

 by some Muslim women, by 1906 in this sense in bilingual dictionaries; in classical Arabic it meant "partition, screen, curtain...

 render 

 late 14c., rendren, rendre, "repeat, say again, recite; translate," from Old French rendre "give back, present, yield" (10c.) and Medieval Latin rendere, from Vulgar Latin *rendere, a variant of Latin reddere "give back, return, restore," from red- "back" (see re-) + combining fo

 prod 

 1530s, "to poke with a stick," of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart, Century Dictionary] a variant of brod, from Middle English brodden "to goad," from Old Norse broddr "shaft, spike" (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED]. Compare dialectal prog "pointed instrument for poking

 drop 

 Middle English drope, from Old English dropa "a small, spherical mass of liquid," from Proto-Germanic *drupon (source also of Old Saxon dropo, Old Norse dropi, Dutch drop, Old High German tropfo, German Tropfen (n.)); see drop (v.). Sense of "minute quantity of anything, least po

 Share curtain 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/curtain Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/curtain">Etymology of curtain by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of curtain. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/curtain Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of curtain," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/curtain. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of curtain." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/curtain. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of curtain." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/curtain (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near curtain 
 cursor 
 cursorial 
 cursory 
 curt 
 curtail 
 curtain 
 curtal 
 curtilage 
 curtsey 
 curtsy 
 curvaceous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix