URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cushy
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:16:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cushy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cushy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cushy 

 cushy (adj.) 

 "easy," 1915, Anglo-Indian slang, from Hindi khush "pleasant, healthy, happy" + -y (2). Wright's "English Dialect Dictionary" (1898) has cush "a soft, useless person," identified as Scottish and Northumberland and explained as "A common term of reproach, used of one who allows others to beat him, either in self-defence or at work," hence cushie "soft, flabby." 
 also from 1915 

 Entries linking to cushy 

 -y (2) 

 very common adjective suffix, "full of, covered with, or characterized by" the thing expressed by the noun, Middle English -i , from Old English -ig , from Proto-Germanic *-iga- , from PIE -(i)ko- , adjectival suffix, cognate with elements in Greek -ikos , Latin -icus (see -ic ). Germanic cognates include Dutch, Danish, German -ig , Gothic -egs .

 It was used from 13c. with verbs ( drowsy , clingy ), and by 15c. with other adjectives ( crispy ). Chiefly with monosyllables; with more than two the effect tends to become comedic.

 *

 Variant forms in -y for short, common adjectives ( vasty , hugy ) helped poets after the loss of grammatically empty but metrically useful -e in late Middle English. Verse-writers adapted to -y forms, often artfully, as in Sackville's "The wide waste places, and the hugy plain" ( and the huge plain would have been a metrical balk).

 After Coleridge's criticism of it as archaic artifice, poets gave up stilly (Moore probably was last to make it work, with "Oft in the Stilly Night"), paly (which Keats and Coleridge himself had used) and the rest.

 Jespersen ("Modern English Grammar," 1954) also lists bleaky (Dryden), bluey , greeny , and other color words, lanky , plumpy , stouty , and the slang rummy . Vasty survives, he writes, only in imitation of Shakespeare; cooly and moisty (Chaucer, hence Spenser) he regards as fully obsolete. But in a few cases he notes ( haughty , dusky ) they seem to have supplanted shorter forms.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 soft 

 Old English softe, earlier sefte, "gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed; luxurious," from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz "level, even, smooth, gentle, soft" (source also of Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and 

 shark 

 "large, voracious fish," by 1560s, perhaps mid-15c., if an isolated instance in a diary quoted in Middle English Compendium is the same word, of uncertain origin. The meaning "dishonest person who preys on others," though attested from 1599 (sharker "artful swindler" in this sens

 banter 

 "attack with good-humored jokes and jests," 1670s, origin uncertain; said by Swift to be a word from London street slang. Related: Bantered; bantering. The noun, "good-humored ridicule," is from 1680s. The third refinement observable in the letter I send you, consists in the cho

 sarcasm 

 1570s, sarcasmus, "a biting taunt or gibe, a satirical remark or expression," from Late Latin sarcasmus, from late Greek sarkasmos "a sneer, jest, taunt, mockery," from sarkazein "to speak bitterly, sneer," literally "to strip off the flesh" (like dogs), from sarx (genitive sarko

 ground 

 Old English grund "bottom; foundation; surface of the earth," also "abyss, Hell," and "bottom of the sea" (a sense preserved in run aground), from Proto-Germanic *grundu-, which seems to have meant "deep place" (source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish grund, Dutch 

 brain 

 "soft, grayish mass filling the cranial cavity of a vertebrate," in the broadest sense, "organ of consciousness and the mind," Old English brægen "brain," from Proto-Germanic *bragnan (source also of Middle Low German bregen, Old Frisian and Dutch brein), a word of uncertain orig

 boggle 

 1590s, "to start with fright (as a startled horse does), shy, take alarm," from Middle English bugge "specter" (among other things, supposed to scare horses at night); see bug (n.); also compare bogey (n.1), boggart. The meaning " hesitate, stop as if afraid to proceed in fear of

 godspeed 

 also God speed, by late 14c., "(I wish that) God (may) grant you success," from God + speed (v.) in its old sense of "prosper, grow rich, succeed." Specifically as a salutation by mid-15c. Also in Middle English as an adverb, "quickly, speedily" (early 14c.); the then-identically

 groom 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), grome "male child, boy;" c. 1300, "a youth, young man," also "male servant, attendant, minor officer in a royal or noble household ranking higher than a page; a knight's squire." A word of unknown origin with no certain cognates in other Germanic 

 afflict 

 late 14c., "to cast down" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare "to damage, harass, torment," frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) "to dash down, overthrow," from ad "to" (see ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) "to strike.

 Share cushy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cushy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cushy">Etymology of cushy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cushy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cushy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cushy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cushy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cushy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cushy. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cushy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cushy (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cushy 
 curve 
 curvilinear 
 curvity 
 curvy 
 cushion 
 cushy 
 cusp 
 cuspid 
 cuspidor 
 cuss 
 custard 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix