URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/serum
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Serum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Serum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of serum 

 serum (n.) 

 1670s, "watery animal fluid," especially the clear pale-yellow liquid which separates in coagulation of blood in wounds, etc., from Latin serum "watery fluid, whey." This is held to be from PIE *sero- "flowing, liquid," from verbal root *ser- "to run, flow" (source also of Greek oros "whey, watery parts of curdled milk;" Sanskrit sarah "flowing, liquid," sarit "brook, river"). The word was applied by 1893 to blood serum used in medical treatments.
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to serum 

 Saar 

 river in western Germany, perhaps ultimately from PIE verbal stem *ser- "to run, flow" (see serum ). Related: Saarland , Saarlander .

 samsara (n.) 

 "endless cycle of death and rebirth, transmigration of souls," 1886, from Sanskrit samsara "a wandering through," from sam- , prefix denoting completeness (from PIE root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with"), + sr- "to run, glide" (from PIE verbal stem *ser- "to flow;" see serum ).

 serology 
 serotonin 
 serous 
 strudel 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 edema 

 also oedema, "excessive accumulation of serum in tissue spaces or a body cavity," c. 1400, idema, "a swelling filled with...

 soiree 

 "late, at a late hour," from serum "late hour," neuter of serus "late," from PIE *se-ro-, suffixed form of root *se- (2)...

 humor 

 mid-14c., "fluid or juice of an animal or plant," from Old North French humour "liquid, dampness; (medical) humor" (Old French humor, umor; Modern French humeur), from Latin umor "body fluid" (also humor, by false association with humus "earth"); related to umere "be wet, moist,"

 blood 

 Old English blod "blood, fluid which circulates in the arteries and veins," from Proto-Germanic *blodam "blood" (source also of Old Frisian blod, Old Saxon blôd, Old Norse bloð, Middle Dutch bloet, Dutch bloed, Old High German bluot, German Blut, Gothic bloþ), according to some s

 skill 

 early 12c., "knowledge, divine wisdom;" late 12c., "power of discernment, sound judgment; that which is reasonable," senses all now obsolete, from Old Norse skil "distinction, ability to make out, discernment, adjustment," which is related to skilja (v.) "to separate; discern, un

 shall 

 Old English sceal, Northumbrian scule "I owe/he owes, will have to, ought to, must" (infinitive sculan, past tense sceolde), from *skulanan, a common Germanic preterite-present verb (along with can, may, will), from Proto-Germanic *skul- (source also of Old Saxon sculan, Old Fris

 folk 

 Old English folc "common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army," from Proto-Germanic *fulka- (source also of Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk, Old High German folc, German Volk "people"). Perhaps originally "host of warri

 utopia 

 1551, from Modern Latin Utopia, literally "nowhere," coined by Thomas More (and used as title of his book, 1516, about an imaginary island enjoying the utmost perfection in legal, social, and political systems), from Greek ou "not" + topos "place" (see topos). The current (since 

 diet 

 c. 1200, "regular food," from Old French diete (13c.) "diet, pittance, fare," from Medieval Latin dieta "parliamentary assembly," also "a day's work; daily food allowance, food," from Latin diaeta "prescribed way of life," from Greek diaita, originally "way of life, regimen, dwel

 nostalgia 

 1726, "morbid longing to return to one's home or native country, severe homesickness considered as a disease," Modern Latin, coined 1688 in a dissertation on the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German heimweh "homesickness"

 Share serum 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/serum Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/serum">Etymology of serum by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of serum. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/serum Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of serum," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/serum. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of serum." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/serum. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of serum." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/serum (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near serum 
 serpentine 
 serrate 
 serrated 
 serration 
 serried 
 serum 
 serval 
 servant 
 serve 
 served 
 server 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix