URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tongue
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:17:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tongue - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tongue - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tongue 

 tongue (n.) 

 "lingual apparatus and principal organ of taste," Old English tunge "tongue, organ of speech; speech, faculty or mode of speech, a people's language," from Proto-Germanic *tungō (source also of Old Saxon and Old Norse tunga , Old Frisian tunge , Middle Dutch tonghe , Dutch tong , Old High German zunga , German Zunge , Gothic tuggo ), from PIE root *dnghu- "tongue."

 By normal evolution in Modern English it would be *tung . For substitution of -o- for -u- , see come . The spelling of the ending of the word apparently is a 14c. attempt to indicate proper pronunciation of the -g- , but the result is "neither etymological nor phonetic, and is only in a very small degree historical" [OED, 1989].

 As "beef's tongue served as food," early 15c. Also extended to any object or process resembling a tongue, as "long, narrow spit of land into the sea: (1560s, for these senses see tongs , tang ).

 In the "knowledge of a foreign language" sense in the Pentecostal miracle, from 1520s. In 16c.-16c. in the classical revival the Tongues (or the Three Tongues ) were Hebrew, Greek, Latin.

 Tongue-work meant "philological research and labor" (1590s) before it meant "debate, discussion" (1660s). To hold (one's) tongue "refrain from speaking" was in Old English; bite (one's) tongue "refrain from speaking" is by 1590s. Tonguepad "A great talker" [Johnson] is slang attested from 1700.

 Bewar of tungis double and deceyuable, 

 Which with ther venym infect ech companye, 

 Ther poynaunt poisoun is so penetrable. 

 [John Lydgate, Fall of Princes (c. 1439)] 

 tongue (v.) 

 "to touch with the tongue, lick," 1680s, from tongue (n.). In reference to playing on musical instruments, by 1936. Related: Tongued ; tonguing .

 Earlier it meant "drive out by order or reproach" (late 14c., tungen ); in 19c. slang to tongue-bang was to "scold heartily," hence tongue-banger "scold." To tongue it (1620s) was 17c. colloquial for "talk volubly."

 Lowell in 19c. has tonguey (adj.) "talkative," which was anticipated by Wycliffe's 14c. tongi (adj.) "talkative, loquacious," translating Latin linguosus .
 also from 1680s 

 Entries linking to tongue 

 come (v.) 

 elementary intransitive verb of motion, Old English cuman "to move with the purpose of reaching, or so as to reach, some point; to arrive by movement or progression;" also "move into view, appear, become perceptible; come to oneself, recover; arrive; assemble" (class IV strong verb; past tense cuom , com , past participle cumen ), from Proto-Germanic *kwem- (source also of Old Saxon cuman , Old Frisian kuma , Middle Dutch comen , Dutch komen , Old High German queman , German kommen , Old Norse koma , Gothic qiman ), from PIE root *gwa- "to go, come."

 The substitution of Middle English -o- for Old English -u- was a scribal habit before minims to avoid misreading the letters in the old style handwriting, which jammed them together (see U ). Modern past tense form came is Middle English, probably from Old Norse kvam , replacing Old English cuom .

 Meaning "to happen, occur" is from early 12c. ( come to pass "happen, occur" is from 1520s). As an invitation to action, c. 1300; as a call or appeal to a person (often in expanded forms: "come, come," "come, now"), mid-14c. Come again? as an off-hand way of asking "what did you say?" is attested by 1884. For sexual senses, see cum .

 Remarkably productive with prepositions (NTC's "Dictionary of Phrasal Verbs" lists 198 combinations); consider the varied senses in come to "regain consciousness," come over "possess" (as an emotion), come at "attack," come on (interj.) "be serious," and come off "occur, have some level of success" (1864). Among other common expressions are:

 To come down with "become ill with" (a disease), 1895; come in , of a radio operator, "begin speaking," 1958; come on "advance in growth or development," c. 1600; come out , of a young woman, "make a formal entry into society," 1782;  come round "return to a normal state or better condition," 1841; come through "act as desired or expected," 1914; come up "arise as a subject of attention," 1844; come up with "produce, present," 1934.

 To have it coming "deserve what one suffers" is from 1904. To come right down to it "get to fundamental facts" is from 1875.

 tang (n.) 

 mid-14c., tang , tonge , "serpent's tongue" (thought to be a stinging organ), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tangi "spit of land; pointed end by which a blade is driven into a handle; sting of a scorpion or bee; fang of a serpent; prong-like tongue of a demon; pungency of flavor," which is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *tang- , from PIE *denk- "to bite" (see tongs ).

 It was used later in English as in Old Norse of other long, projecting parts, such as "portion of a metal blade that extends into the handle" of a sword, knife, chisel, etc. (1680s). Influenced in some senses by tongue (n.). The meaning "sting of an insect or reptile" lingered in provincial English.

 The figurative sense of "a sharp taste, pungency of flavor" is recorded by mid-15c. (for sense evolution, compare piquant , pungent , sharp (adj.), acrid , etc.; there are similar evolutions in the Dutch and German cognates); that of "suggestion, trace" is from 1590s. The fish (1734) are so called for their spines.

 As a verb, Middle English tangen , "to bite" (of a serpent); "to pierce" (of an arrow), c. 1400, from the noun.

 tongs 
 lingual 
 ox-tongue 
 tongued 
 tongue-lash 
 tongueless 
 tongue-tied 
 tongue-twister 
 U 
 *dnghu- 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tang 

 mid-14c., tang, tonge, "serpent's tongue" (thought to be a stinging organ), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tangi "spit of land; pointed end by which a blade is driven into a handle," from Proto-Germanic *tang-, from PIE *denk- "to bite" (see tongs). Later of other l

 knife 

 "hand-held cutting instrument consisting of a short blade and handle," late Old English cnif, probably from Old Norse knifr "knife, dirk," from Proto-Germanic *knibaz (source also of Middle Low German knif, Middle Dutch cnijf, German kneif), a word of uncertain origin. To further

 clapper 

 late 13c., "something which strikes with a loud, sharp noise," agent noun from clap (v.). Meaning "tongue of a bell" is from late 14c. Old English had clipur. Meaning "hinged board snapped in front of a camera at the start of filming to synchronize picture and sound" is from 1940

 linguist 

 1580s, "a master of languages;" also "one who uses his tongue freely," a hybrid from Latin lingua "language, tongue" (from...PIE root *dnghu- "tongue") + -ist....

 loll 

 Specifically of the tongue from 1610s. Also in extended form lollop (1745). Related: Lolled; lolling....Lollpoop "A lazy, idle drone" ("Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue") is from 1660s....

 lollipop 

 "to dangle" (the tongue) + pop "a strike, slap." Or the first element may be northern dialectal lolly "the tongue."...

 dental 

 In grammar, "formed or pronounced at or near the front upper teeth, with the tip or front of the tongue," 1590s....As a noun, "sound formed by placing the end of the tongue against or near the upper teeth," 1794....

 Caucasian 

 1807, of or pertaining to the Caucasus Mountains (q.v.), with -ian. Applied to the "white" race 1795 (in Latin) by German anthropologist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1840), who in his pioneering treatise on anthropology distinguished mankind into five races: Mongolian, Ethio

 play 

 Middle English pleien, from Old English plegan, plegian "move lightly and quickly, occupy or busy oneself, amuse oneself; engage in active exercise; frolic; engage in children's play; make sport of, mock; perform music." It is from Proto-West Germanic *plegōjanan "occupy oneself 

 bell 

 "hollow metallic instrument which rings when struck," Old English belle, which has cognates in Middle Dutch belle, Middle Low German belle but is not found elsewhere in Germanic (except as a borrowing); perhaps from an imitative PIE root *bhel- "to sound, roar" (compare Old Engli

 Share tongue 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tongue Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tongue">Etymology of tongue by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tongue. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tongue Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tongue," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tongue. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tongue." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tongue. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tongue." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tongue (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tongue 
 toned 
 toner 
 Tong 
 Tonga 
 tongs 
 tongue 
 tongued 
 tongue-in-cheek 
 tongue-lash 
 tongueless 
 tongue-tied 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix