URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sweep
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sweep - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sweep - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sweep 

 sweep (v.) 

 early 14c., swepen , "make clean by sweeping with a broom;" mid-14c., "perform the act of sweeping," replacing earlier swope , and perhaps originally the past tense form of it. Middle English swope "sweep" is from Old English swapan "to sweep" (transitive and intransitive), for which see swoop (v.). Or perhaps sweep is from a Scandinavian source cognate to this or an unrecorded Old English *swipian . Related: Swept ; sweeping . Swope also was used as a dialectal past tense of sweep .

 It is attested from late 14c. as "hasten, rush, move or pass along swiftly and strongly" (intransitive); from c. 1400 in the transitive sense of "drive quickly, impel, move or carry forward by force." It is attested from late 14c. also as "collect (debris, etc.) by sweeping;" mid-15c. as "clear (something) away, remove by or as if by a sweeping blow." By 1630s as "draw or drag something over" (a lake, a minefield, etc.).

 By 1892 as "achieve widespread popularity" (as in sweeping the nation ). The meaning "win all the events" is by 1960, American English (compare sweepstakes ). The sense of "pass the eye systematically over (a surface) in search of something" is from 1727. To sweep (one) off (one's) feet "affect with infatuation" is from 1913.
 also from early 14c. 

 sweep (n.) 

 mid-13c., swope , "a whip, scourge," from the verb (see sweep (v.)) or its Old Norse cognate, or from Old English sweopu . The form replacement with -ee- follows the verb.

 The meaning "act or action of sweeping" is from 1550s. It is attested from 1670s as "range or extent of a continued or non-rectilinear motion."

 The meaning "rapid survey or inspection by moving the direction of vision" is by 1784. In reference to military (later police) actions that comprehensively move across a wide area, from 1837.

 The sense of "a winning of all the tricks in a card game" is from 1814 (see sweepstakes ); it was extended in this sense to other sports and contests by 1960. As a shortened form of chimney-sweeper , it is attested by 1796.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to sweep 

 sweepstakes (n.) 

 1773, "prize won in a winner-takes-all race or contest," from Middle English swepe stake , in the phrase make sweep stake "sweep the board, win all the stakes in a game" (late 15c.), from swepen "to sweep" (see sweep (v.)) + stake (n.2).

 The notion is of the winner taking all the stakes, rather than the stakes being dividing among the top finishers. The meaning "any race or gambling for stakes contributed" is by 1862. Also compare Middle English wipe the stake in the same sense.

 swoop (v.) 

 1560s, "move or walk in a stately manner," apparently from a dialectal survival of Old English swapan "to sweep, brandish, dash," from Proto-Germanic *swaip- , which is perhaps from a PIE root *swei- "to bend, turn" (but see swing (v.)).

 The meaning "pounce upon with a sweeping movement," in reference to a bird of prey, is by 1630s, from swoop (n.). The spelling with -oo- may have been influenced by Scottish and northern England dialectal soop "to sweep," from Old Norse sopa "to sweep." Related: Swooped ; swooping .

 chimney-sweep 
 mine-sweeper 
 sweeper 
 swept 
 swipe 
 upsweep 
 windswept 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 swipe 

 1807, "heavy blow, driving stroke made with the arms in full swing," colloquial, perhaps (OED, 2nd ed. print, 1989) a dialectal variant of sweep (n.), or in part from obsolete swip, swaip "a stroke, blow" (Old English swapan), related to Old English swipu "a stick, whip; chastise

 embroil 

 c. 1600, "throw into disorder," from French embrouillier "entangle, confuse, embroil" (cognate of Italian imbrogliare), from assimilated form of en- "in" (see en- (1)) + brouiller "confuse," from Old French brooillier "to mix, mingle," figuratively "to have sexual intercourse" (1

 tangle 

 mid-14c., tanglen, "encumber, enmesh, knit together confusedly," a shortening of entangle in some cases, in others probably a nasalized variant of tagilen "to involve in a difficult situation, entangle," from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Swedish taggla "to disorder," 

 raffle 

 Swedish rafs "rubbish," Old High German raspon "to scrape together, snatch up in haste," German raffen "to snatch away, sweep...The notion would be "to sweep up (the stakes), to snatch (the winnings)."...

 ravenous 

 French ravinos, ravinous, of people, "rapacious, violent," of water, "swift-flowing," from raviner "to seize, pillage; to sweep...

 brush 

 broisse, broce "a brush" (13c., Modern French brosse), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *bruscia "a bunch of new shoots" (used to sweep...

 roundhouse 

 In pugilism, in reference to a blow delivered with a wide sweep of the arm (by 1920); in baseball of a sidearm pitch (by...

 swan 

 large, web-footed swimming bird, stately and graceful in the water, noted for its long neck and white down; Old English swan "swan," from Proto-Germanic *swanaz "singer" (source also of Old Saxon swan, Old Norse svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, 

 motion 

 late 14c., mocioun, "process of moving; change of place, continuous variation of position;" also "suggestion, proposal or proposition formally made," from Old French mocion "movement, motion; change, alteration" (13c., Modern French motion) and directly from Latin motionem (nomin

 drag 

 late 14c., draggen, "to draw a grapnel along the bottom of a river, lake, etc., in search of something;" late 15c., "to draw away by force, pull haul," from Old Norse draga, or a dialectal variant of Old English dragan "to draw," both from Proto-Germanic *draganan "to draw, pull,

 Share sweep 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sweep Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sweep">Etymology of sweep by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sweep. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sweep Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sweep," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sweep. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sweep." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sweep. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sweep." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sweep (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sweep 
 sweaty 
 Swede 
 Sweden 
 Swedenborgian 
 Swedish 
 sweep 
 sweeper 
 sweepstakes 
 sweer 
 sweet 
 Sweet Adeline 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix