URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:12:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dragon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dragon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dragon 

 dragon (n.) 

 mid-13c., dragoun , a fabulous animal common to the conceptions of many races and peoples, from Old French dragon and directly from Latin draconem (nominative draco ) "huge serpent, dragon," from Greek drakon (genitive drakontos ) "serpent, giant seafish," apparently from drak- , strong aorist stem of derkesthai "to see clearly," from PIE *derk- "to see" (source also of Sanskrit darsata- "visible;" Old Irish adcondarc "I have seen;" Gothic gatarhjan "characterize;" Old English torht , Old High German zoraht "light, clear;" Albanian dritë "light").

 Perhaps the literal sense is "the one with the (deadly) glance, the one with (paralyzing) sight." The young are dragonets (c. 1300). Fem. form dragoness is attested from 1630s. Obsolete drake (n.2) "dragon" is an older borrowing of the same word, and a later form in another sense is dragoon . Used in the Bible generally for creatures of great size and fierceness, it translates Hebrew tannin "a great sea-monster," also tan , a desert mammal now believed to be the jackal.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to dragon 

 dragoon (n.) 

 1620s, "cavalry soldier carrying firearms," and thus capable of service either on horseback or on foot, from French dragon, probably so called for the guns they carried, from dragon "carbine, musket," because the guns "breathed fire" like dragons (see dragon ). Also see -oon . For the sense evolution, compare musket .

 drake (n.2) 

 "dragon," c. 1200, from Old English draca "dragon, sea monster, huge serpent," from Proto-Germanic *drako (source also of Middle Dutch and Old Frisian drake , Dutch draak , Old High German trahho , German drache ), an early borrowing from Latin draco (see dragon ).

 Draco 
 draconian 
 Dracula 
 dragonfly 
 pendragon 
 rankle 
 snapdragon 
 tarragon 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 draconian 

 1759, "of or pertaining to Draco," the ancient Greek statesman; 1777, in reference to laws, "rigorous, extremely severe or harsh" (earlier Draconic, which is implied from 1640s). Draco is the Latinized form of Greek Drakon, name of the archon of Athens who laid down a code of law

 rankle 

 c. 1300, ranclen, of a sore, wound, etc., "to fester," from Old French rancler, earlier raoncler, draoncler "to suppurate, run," from draoncle "abscess, festering sore," from Medieval Latin dracunculus, literally "little dragon," diminutive of Latin draco "serpent, dragon" (see d

 tarragon 

 Artemisia Dracunculus, Eastern European composite plant of the wormwood genus, native to Russia and temperate Asia, 1530s, from Medieval Latin tragonia, from Byzantine Greek tarchon, from Arabic tarkhon, which is said to be (OED, 1989) from a non-Arabic source, perhaps Greek drak

 mummer 

 George and the Dragon, with sundry whimsical adjuncts" [Century Dictionary]....

 damsel 

 Damsel-fly for "dragon-fly" is by 1815, from a sense in French demoiselle....

 mosquito 

 Mosquito-hawk as a name for a kind of dragon-fly which preys on mosquitoes is from 1737....

 shard 

 Also used, by Gower (late 14c.), as "scale of a dragon." French écharde "prickle, splinter" is a Germanic loan-word....

 tartar 

 "bitartrate of potash, sediment of potassium tartarate" (a deposit left during fermentation), late 14c., from Old French tartre and directly from Medieval Latin tartarum, from late Greek tartaron "tartar encrusting the sides of wine casks," a word perhaps of Semitic origin, but i

 flying 

 early 15c., replacing forms from Old English fleogende "flying, winged;" present-participle adjective from fly (v.1). The meaning "attached so as to have freedom of movement" (1670s) is the source of the nautical use (flying jib, etc.). Meaning "designed for rapid movement" (espe

 Share dragon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragon">Etymology of dragon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dragon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dragon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dragon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragon. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dragon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragon (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dragon 
 drafty 
 drag 
 draggle 
 dragnet 
 dragoman 
 dragon 
 dragonfly 
 dragoon 
 dragster 
 drain 
 drainage 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix