URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/England
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T20:08:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: England - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

England - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of England 

 England (n.) 

 Old English Engla land , literally "the land of the Angles" (see English (n.1)), used alongside Angelcynn "the English race," which, with other forms, shows Anglo-Saxon persistence in thinking in terms of tribes rather than place. By late Old English times both words had come to be used with a clear sense of place, not people; a Dane, Canute, is first to call himself "King of England." By the 14c. the name was being used in reference to the entire island of Great Britain and to the land of the Celtic Britons before the Anglo-Saxon conquest. The loss of one of the duplicate syllables is a case of haplology.

 Entries linking to England 

 English (n.1) 

 "the people of England; the speech of England," noun use of Old English adjective Englisc (contrasted to Denisc , Frencisce , etc.), "of or pertaining to the Angles," from Engle (plural) "the Angles," the name of one of the Germanic groups that overran the island 5c., supposedly so-called because Angul , the land they inhabited on the Jutland coast, was shaped like a fish hook (see angle (n.)). The use of the word in Middle English was reinforced by Anglo-French Engleis . Cognates: Dutch Engelsch , German Englisch , Danish Engelsk , French Anglais (Old French Engelsche ), Spanish Inglés , Italian Inglese .

 Technically "of the Angles," but Englisc also was used from earliest times without distinction for all the Germanic invaders — Angles, Saxon, Jutes (Bede's gens Anglorum ) — and applied to their group of related languages by Alfred the Great. "The name English for the language is thus older than the name England for the country" [OED]. After 1066, it specifically meant the native population of England (as distinguished from Normans and French occupiers), a distinction which lasted about a generation. But as late as Robert of Gloucester's "Chronicle" (c. 1300) it still could retain a sense of "Anglian" and be distinguished from "Saxon" ("Þe englisse in þe norþ half, þe saxons bi souþe").

 ... when Scots & others are likely to be within earshot, 
 Britain & 
 British should be inserted as tokens, but no more, of what is really meant [Fowler] 

 In pronunciation, "En-" has become "In-," perhaps through the frequency of -ing- words and the relative rarity of -e- before -ng- in the modern language. A form Inglis is attested from 14c. and persisted in Scotland and northern England, and Ingland and Yngelond were used for "England" in Middle English, but the older spelling has stood fast. Meaning "English language or literature as a subject at school" is from 1889.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ninepence 

 No coin of this value was ever issued in England, but the silver shilling issued by Queen Elizabeth for Ireland in 1561 were...current in England for nine pence, and in New England it was the name of a Spanish silver coin worth about 9 pence of New...England currency....

 league 

 itinerary unit in medieval England, distance of about three statute miles, late 14c., ultimately from Late Latin leuga (source...A vague measure (perhaps originally an hour's hike), in England it was a conventional, not a legal measure, and in English...

 Stafford 

 city in England, mid-11c., Stæfford, literally "ford by a landing-place," from Old English stæð "river bank, shore" + ford...The city was noted in medieval England as a source of blue cloth, hence the 15c. phrase clothe in Stafford blue "beat (someone...

 Plymouth 

 city in Devon, England, named for its location at the mouth of the Plym River; the river is in turn named for Plympton, literally...The town in Massachusetts, U.S., was named 1620 by immigrants on the "Mayflower," which had sailed from Plymouth, England...

 Portland 

 The city in Maine, U.S.A., took its name in 1786 for the place in England....by its inventor, English mason Joseph Aspdin, from resemblance of the color to the popular building stone of Portland, England...

 strafe 

 colloquial or humorous use, from German strafen "to punish" (from Proto-Germanic *stræf-) as used in the slogan Gott strafe England..."May God punish England," current in Germany c. 1914-16 at the start of World War I....

 Elizabethan 

 "belonging to the period of Queen Elizabeth I" (1558-1603) of England, 1807 (Elizabethean); Coleridge (1817) has Elizabethian...James Granger, "A Biographical History of England," 1769]...

 bath 

 Old English bæð "an immersing of the body in water, mud, etc.," also "a quantity of water, etc., for bathing," from Proto-Germanic *badan (source also of Old Frisian beth, Old Saxon bath, Old Norse bað, Middle Dutch bat, German Bad), from PIE root *bhē- "to warm" + *-thuz, German

 hull 

 "seed covering," Middle English hol, hole, from Old English hulu "husk, pod," from Proto-Germanic *hulu- "to cover" (source also of Old High German hulla, hulsa; German Hülle, Hülse, Dutch huls), from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover, conceal, save." Figurative use by 1831...."body o

 Europe 

 from Latin Europa "Europe," from Greek Europe, which is of uncertain origin; as a geographic name first recorded in the Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier): "Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring per

 Share England 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/England Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/England">Etymology of England by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of England. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/England Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of England," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/England. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of England." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/England. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of England." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/England (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near England 
 engender 
 engine 
 engineer 
 engineering 
 engird 
 England 
 English 
 Englishman 
 engorge 
 engorgement 
 engraft 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix