URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/grape
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:54:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Grape - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Grape - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of grape 

 grape (n.) 

 mid-13c., "a grape, a berry of the vine," also collective singular, from Old French grape "bunch of grapes, grape" (12c.), probably a back-formation from graper "steal; grasp; catch with a hook; pick (grapes)," from a Frankish or other Germanic word, from Proto-Germanic *krappon "hook," from a group of Germanic words meaning "bent, crooked, hooked" (cognates: Middle Dutch crappe , Old High German krapfo "hook;" also see cramp (n.2)). The original notion thus perhaps was "vine hook for grape-picking." The vine is not native to England. The word replaced Old English winberige "wine berry." Spanish grapa , Italian grappa also are from Germanic.

 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to grape 

 cramp (n.2) 

 early 15c., "metal bar bent at both ends," from Middle Dutch crampe or Middle Low German krampe , from Proto-Germanic * kramp-. It is thus the same word as cramp (n.1). Metaphoric sense of "something that confines or hinders" is attested by 1719.

 grapefruit (n.) 

 1814, from grape + fruit . Said to have been so called for its taste, or perhaps because it grows in clusters. Perhaps a marketing name; it was known by various names ( pomelo , shaddock ) before the current one emerged. The fruit itself was known since 1693 (in Hans Sloane's catalogue of Jamaican plants); presumably it originated in Jamaica from chance hybrids between other cultivated citrus. An ornamental plant chiefly at first, not much eaten until late 19c.

 grapeshot 
 grapevine 
 grapnel 
 grappa 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 grapeshot 

 also grape-shot, 1747, from grape + shot (n.). So called for its appearance. Originally simply grape (1680s), a collective singular. The whiff of grapeshot was popularized in English from 1837, from Carlyle's history of the French Revolution (in which book it was a chapter title)

 grapevine 

 also grape-vine, 1736, from grape + vine. Meaning "a rumor; a secret or unconventional method of spreading information" (1863) is from the use of grapevine telegraph as "secret source of information and rumor" in the American Civil War; in reference to Southerners under northern 

 Shiraz 

 As the name for a red wine made from a type of grape grown in the Rhône valley of France, it is recorded from 1908, from...French syrah, the name apparently being altered in English on the mistaken notion that the grape was brought to Europe from...The Iranian place name is said to be from Elamite sher "good" + raz "grape."...

 raisin 

 "dried sweet grape," c. 1300, from Anglo-French raycin (late 13c.), Old French raisin "grape; raisin," from Vulgar Latin...racemo), probably a loan-word from the same ancient lost Mediterranean language that gave Greek rhax (genitive rhagos) "grape...

 zinfandel 

 1896, "red or white dry California wine," origin uncertain; used earlier as the name of the grape from which it was made...Some wine experts suggest a corruption of the Austrian grape name Zierfandler, though these grapes are not related to those...

 dregs 

 ), from Old Norse dregg "sediment," from Proto-Germanic *drag- (source also of Old High German trestir, German Trester "grape-skins...

 climber 

 distinguished as stem-climbers, which like the hop, wind upward around an upright support, and as tendril-climbers, which, like the grape-vine...

 wine 

 Old English win "wine," from Proto-Germanic *winam (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German win, Old Norse vin, Dutch wijn, German Wein), an early borrowing from Latin vinum "wine," from PIE *uoin-a-, related to words for "wine" in other southern European languages

 host 

 "person who receives guests," especially for pay, late 13c., from Old French oste, hoste "guest, host, hostess, landlord" (12c., Modern French hôte), from Latin hospitem (nominative hospes) "guest, stranger, sojourner, visitor (hence also 'foreigner')," also "host; one bound by t

 pellet 

 mid-14c., pelot, "any little ball," as of a medicine or food, but especially a little metallic ball used as a missile, from Old French pelote "small ball" (11c.) and directly from Medieval Latin pelotis, from Vulgar Latin *pilotta, diminutive of Latin pila "ball, playing ball, th

 Share grape 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/grape Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/grape">Etymology of grape by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of grape. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/grape Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of grape," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/grape. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of grape." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/grape. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of grape." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/grape (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near grape 
 granulate 
 granulation 
 granule 
 granuloma 
 granulose 
 grape 
 grapefruit 
 grapeshot 
 grapevine 
 -graph 
 graph 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix