URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/philosophy
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:17:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Philosophy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Philosophy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of philosophy 

 philosophy (n.) 

 c. 1300, philosophie , "knowledge, learning, scholarship, scholarly works, body of knowledge," from Old French filosofie "philosophy, knowledge" (12c., Modern French philosophie ) and directly from Latin philosophia, from Greek philosophia "love of knowledge, pursuit of wisdom; systematic investigation," from philo- "loving" (see philo- ) + sophia "knowledge, wisdom," from sophis "wise, learned;" a word of unknown origin [Beekes]. With many spelling variants in Middle English ( filozofie, phelosophie , etc.).

 From mid-14c. as "the discipline of dealing in rational speculation or contemplation;" from late 14c. as "natural science," also "alchemy, occult knowledge;" in the Middle Ages the word was understood to embrace all speculative sciences. The meaning "system a person forms for conduct of life" is attested from 1771. The modern sense of "the body of highest truth, the science of the most fundamental matters" is from 1794.

 Nec quicquam aliud est philosophia, si interpretari velis, praeter studium sapientiae; sapientia autem est rerum divinarum et humanarum causarumque quibus eae res continentur scientia. [Cicero, 
 "De Officiis" ]

 In 1744 he made an unsuccessful attempt to obtain a professorship at Edinburgh; having failed in this, he became first a tutor to a lunatic and then secretary to a general. Fortified by these credentials, he ventured again into philosophy. [Bertrand Russell, writing of Hume, in "A History of Western Philosophy," 1945]

 [Philosophical problems] are, of course, not empirical problems; but they are solved through an insight into the workings of our language, and that in such a way that these workings are recognized — 
 despite an urge to misunderstand them. The problems are solved, not through the contribution of new knowledge, rather through the arrangement of things long familiar. Philosophy is a struggle against the bewitchment (
 Verhexung ) of our understanding by the resources of our language. [Ludwig Wittgenstein, "Philosophical Investigations," 1953]

 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to philosophy 

 philosophaster (n.) 

 "pretender to philosophical knowledge," 1610s, from philosophy + -aster .

 philosophic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to philosophy," mid-15c., philosophik , from Old French filosofique (Modern French philosophique ) and directly from Late Latin philosophicus , from Greek philosophikos , from philosophia "philosophy" (see philosophy ).

 philosophical 
 philosophist 
 philosophize 
 philo- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 doctrine 

 late 14c., "the body of principles, dogmas, etc., in a religion or field of knowledge," from Old French doctrine (12c.) "teaching, doctrine" and directly from Latin doctrina "a teaching, body of teachings, learning," from doctor "teacher" (see doctor (n.)) + -ina, fem. of -inus, 

 mathematics 

 Originally one of three branches of Aristotelian theoretical science, along with first philosophy (or metaphysics) and physics...(or natural philosophy)....[Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy"]...

 nous 

 ," 1706, from Greek nous, Attic form of noos "mind, intelligence, perception, intellect," which was taken in English in philosophy...translation is "mind," but this does not have the correct connotations, particularly when the word is used in a religious philosophy...[Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy"]...

 Confucius 

 His ethico-political philosophy is based on proper observance of the relationships of human life (parent/child, husband/wife...The term Confucianism (1836) sometimes is extended to ancient Chinese speculative philosophy generally....

 Averroes 

 His followers were particularly noted for their separation of philosophy from religion....Averroes is more important in Christian than in Mohammedan philosophy....[Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy"]...

 realism 

 "the doctrine of a realist," in any sense of that word, 1794, originally in philosophy, from real (adj.) + -ism; after French...Opposed to idealism in philosophy, art, etc. The sense of "tendency to see things as they are" is by 1817....

 physiology 

 1560s, "study and description of natural objects, natural philosophy" (a sense now obsolete), from French physiologie (16c...The two words [ physics/physiology] had once the same wide meaning of natural science or natural philosophy....

 creationism 

 1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created out of nothing a soul for each person born; from creation + -ism. As "science teaching based on a fundamentalist interpretation of the Book of Genesis, the scientific theory attributing the origin of m

 logic 

 mid-14c., logike, "branch of philosophy that treats of forms of thinking; the science of distinction of true from false reasoning," from Old French logique (13c.), from Latin (ars) logica "logic," from Greek (he) logike (techne) "(the) reasoning (art)," from fem. of logikos "pert

 animism 

 "attribution of living souls to inanimate objects," 1866, reintroduced by English anthropologist Sir Edward Burnett Taylor (1832-1917), who defined it (1871) as the "theory of the universal animation of nature," from Latin anima "life, breath, soul" (from PIE root *ane- "to breat

 Share philosophy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/philosophy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/philosophy">Etymology of philosophy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of philosophy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/philosophy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of philosophy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/philosophy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of philosophy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/philosophy. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of philosophy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/philosophy (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near philosophy 
 philosopher 
 philosophic 
 philosophical 
 philosophist 
 philosophize 
 philosophy 
 philtre 
 philtrum 
 phimosis 
 phishing 
 phiz 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix