URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppy
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Puppy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Puppy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of puppy 

 puppy (n.) 

 late 15c., "woman's small pet dog," a word of uncertain origin but likely to be from French poupée "doll, toy" (see puppet ). "A little dog appears to have been called puppy because petted as a doll or puppet" [Century Dictionary].

 The meaning shifted from "toy dog" to "young dog" (1590s), replacing native whelp . In early use in English the words puppet and puppy were not always distinguished. The word also was used from about that time in the contemptuous sense of "vain or silly young man."

 Puppy-dog is attested by 1590s (in Shakespeare, puppi-dogges ). Puppy love "juvenile infatuation" is from 1823. Puppy fat "excessive fat on a child or adolescent" is by 1913 (in reference to young dogs by 1894).
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to puppy 

 puppet (n.) 

 1530s, "doll or little figure of a person moved by strings or wires" (later applied to puppets in glove form), a later form of Middle English popet "doll" (c. 1300; compare poppet ), from Old French popette "little doll, puppet," diminutive of popee "doll, puppet" (13c., Modern French poupée ), from Vulgar Latin *puppa , from Latin pupa "girl; doll" (see pupil (n.1)).

 The metaphoric extension to "one actuated by the will of another, one whose actions are manipulated by another" is recorded from 1540s (as poppet ). Puppet show "dramatic performance with puppets" is attested from 1650s, earlier puppet-play (1550s). Puppet government , one managed by the will of another power, is attested from 1884 (in reference to Egypt). Puppet-master "manager of a puppet-show" is by 1630s.

 whelp (n.) 

 Middle English whelp , from Old English hwelp "young dog," from a Germanic root related to Old Saxon hwelp , Old Norse hvelpr , Dutch welp , German hwelf ; of unknown origin. Now largely displaced by puppy . Also applied to wild animals (lions, seals, etc.), but in literal use especially of the dog. The transferred sense of "scamp, saucy or impertinent youth" is by early 14c.; by late 15c. generally for "young child."

 pup 
 puppify 
 puppyish 
 -y 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pup 

 1760, "young dog," shortened form of puppy (q.v.). Used earlier (from 1580s) for "conceited person," from the figurative sense of puppy. An English-Latin wordbook from late 15c. for Latin pupa gives English pup-bairn. Applied to the young of the fur seal from 1815. Used for "inex

 waffle 

 1690s, "to yelp, bark," frequentative of provincial waff "to yelp, to bark like a puppy" (1610); possibly of imitative origin...

 joey 

 on "Australian Colloquialisms": JOEY is a familiar name for anything young or small, and is applied indifferently to a puppy...

 hush 

 Hush-puppy "deep-fried ball of cornmeal batter" first attested 1899; as a type of lightweight soft shoe, it is a proprietary...

 collie 

 Century Dictionary cites Gaelic cuilean, cuilein "a whelp, puppy, cub." Or perhaps it is a convergence of them....

 cynic 

 philosophers, and the popular association even in ancient times was "dog-like" (Lucian has kyniskos "a little cynic," literally "puppy...

 youth 

 Old English geoguð "youth; young people, junior warriors; young of cattle," related to geong "young," from Proto-Germanic *jugunthi- (source also of Old Saxon juguth, Old Frisian jogethe, Middle Dutch joghet, Dutch jeugd, Old High German jugund, German Jugend, Gothic junda "youth

 god 

 also God; Old English god "supreme being, deity; the Christian God; image of a god; godlike person," from Proto-Germanic *guthan (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch god, Old High German got, German Gott, Old Norse guð, Gothic guþ), which is of uncertain origin; perhaps 

 dog 

 "quadruped of the genus Canis," Old English docga, a late, rare word, used in at least one Middle English source in reference specifically to a powerful breed of canine; other early Middle English uses tend to be depreciatory or abusive. Its origin remains one of the great myster

 industry 

 late 15c., "cleverness, skill," from Old French industrie "activity; aptitude, experience" (14c.) or directly from Latin industria "diligence, activity, zeal," noun use of fem. of industrius "active, diligent," from early Latin indostruus "diligent," from indu "in, within" (from 

 Share puppy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppy">Etymology of puppy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of puppy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of puppy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of puppy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppy. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of puppy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppy (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near puppy 
 puppet 
 puppeteer 
 puppetry 
 puppify 
 Puppis 
 puppy 
 puppyish 
 pur- 
 Purana 
 purblind 
 purchase 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix