URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lotus
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:42:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lotus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lotus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lotus 

 lotus (n.) 

 a name given to various plants, not all related or alike, 1540s, from Latin lotus , from Greek lotos , a word used as a name for several plants before it came to mean Egyptian white lotus (a sense attested in English from 1580s). It is perhaps from Semitic (compare Hebrew lot "myrrh"). The plant bears a prominent part in the mythology of India, Egypt, China. The Homeric lotus later was held to be a North African shrub, from which "a kind of wine" [Century Dictionary] can be made. The name has also been given to several species of water-lilies and a bean that grows in water. The yogic sense is attested from 1848.

 It was believed to induce a dreamy forgetfulness, hence lotus-eater "one who finds pleasure in a listless life" (1812) is from Greek lotophagoi , mentioned in "Odyssey," book IX (see lotophagi ).
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to lotus 

 lotophagi (n.) 

 c. 1600, literally "lotus-eaters," from Greek lotophagoi (plural), from lotos (see lotus ) + -phagos "eating" (from PIE root *bhag- "to share out, apportion; to get a share"). Related: Lotophagous .

 lote (n.) 

 c. 1500, Englished form of lotus . Related: Lote-tree .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 navel 

 Another great key I will give you is to be found by the contemplation of the Manipur Lotus, which is in the navel, or thereabouts...

 lot 

 Old English hlot "object used to determine someone's share" (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed on it), also "what falls to a person by lot," from Proto-Germanic *khlutom (source also of Old Norse hlutr "lot, share," Old Frisian hlot "lot,

 white 

 Old English hwit "bright, radiant; clear, fair," also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-Germanic *hweit- (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit, Old Norse hvitr, Dutch wit, Old High German hwiz, German weiß, Gothic hveits), from PIE *kweid-o-, suffixed form of ro

 water 

 Old English wæter, from Proto-Germanic *watr- (source also of Old Saxon watar, Old Frisian wetir, Dutch water, Old High German wazzar, German Wasser, Old Norse vatn, Gothic wato "water"), from PIE *wod-or, suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet." To keep (one's) head above w

 lily 

 Old English lilie, from Latin lilia, plural of lilium "a lily," cognate with Greek leirion, both perhaps borrowed from a corrupted pronunciation of an eastern Mediterranean word (de Vaan compares Coptic hreri, hleli "lily"). Used in Old Testament to translate Hebrew shoshanna and

 sacred 

 late 14c., "hallowed, consecrated, or made holy by association with divinity or divine things or by religious ceremony or sanction," past-participle adjective from a now-obsolete verb sacren "to make holy" (c. 1200), from Old French sacrer "consecrate, anoint, dedicate" (12c.) or

 fantasy 

 early 14c., "illusory appearance," from Old French fantaisie, phantasie "vision, imagination" (14c.), from Latin phantasia, from Greek phantasia "power of imagination; appearance, image, perception," from phantazesthai "picture to oneself," from phantos "visible," from phainestha

 crucial 

 1706, "cross-shaped, having the form of an X," from French crucial, a medical term for ligaments of the interior of the knee-joint (which cross each other), from Latin crux (genitive crucis) "cross" (see crux). The meaning "decisive, critical, finally disproving one of two altern

 Share lotus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lotus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lotus">Etymology of lotus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lotus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lotus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lotus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lotus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lotus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lotus. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lotus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lotus (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lotus 
 lotion 
 lotophagi 
 lottery 
 Lottie 
 lotto 
 lotus 
 louche 
 loud 
 loudly 
 loud-mouth 
 loudness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix