URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/animal
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:58:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Animal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Animal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of animal 

 animal (n.) 

 early 14c., "any sentient living creature" (including humans), from Latin animale "living being, being which breathes," noun use of neuter of animalis (adj.) "animate, living; of the air," from anima "breath, soul; a current of air" (from PIE root *ane- "to breathe;" for sense development, compare deer ).

 A rare word in English before c. 1600, and not in KJV (1611). Commonly only of non-human creatures. It drove out the older beast in common usage. Used derisively of brutish humans (in which the "animal," or non-rational, non-spiritual nature is ascendant) from 1580s.

 Quid est homo? A dedlych best and resonable, animal racionale. ["Battlefield Grammar," c. 1450] 

 The animals in Paradise are the prophet Saleh's camel, the ram which Abraham sacrificed instead of Isaac, Moses's cow, (the red cow, whose ashes were mingled with the water of purification), Soloman's ant (who, when all creatures, in token of their obedience to him, brought him presents, dragged before him a locust, and was therefore preferred before all others because it had brought a creature so much bigger than itself); the queen of Sheba's parrot, who carried messages between her and Solomon ; Ezra's ass ; Jonah's whale ; Kitmer, the dog of the Seven Sleepers, and Mahommed's camel. [Southey, "Omniana," citing Thevenot's Travels into the Levant; for the list, see chapter XXXI] 
 also from early 14c. 

 animal (adj.) 

 late 14c., "pertaining to the animal spirit of man," that is, "pertaining to the merely sentient (as distinguished from the intellectual, rational, or spiritual) qualities of a human being," from Latin animalis , from animale "living being" (see animal (n.)).

 From 1540s as "pertaining to sensation;" by 1630s as "pertaining to or derived from beasts;" 1640s as "pertaining to the animal kingdom" (as opposed to vegetable or mineral ); 1650s as "having life, living."

 Animal rights is attested from 1879; animal liberation from 1973. Animal magnetism originally (1784) referred to mesmerism .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to animal 

 beast (n.) 

 c. 1200, beste , "one of the lower animals" (opposed to man ), especially "a four-footed animal," also "a marvelous creature, a monster" (mermaids, werewolves, lamia, satyrs, the beast of the Apocalypse), "a brutish or stupid man," from Old French beste "animal, wild beast," figuratively "fool, idiot" (11c., Modern French bête ), from Vulgar Latin *besta , from Latin bestia "beast, wild animal," which is of unknown origin.

 The word was used in Middle English to translate Latin animal . It displaced Old English deor (see deer ) as the generic word for "wild creature," only to be ousted 16c. by animal .

 deer (n.) 

 Old English deor "wild animal, beast, any wild quadruped," in early Middle English also used of ants and fish, from Proto-Germanic *deuzam , the general Germanic word for "animal" (as opposed to man), but often restricted to "wild animal" (source also of Old Frisian diar , Dutch dier , Old Norse dyr , Old High German tior , German Tier "animal," Gothic dius "wild animal," also see reindeer ).

 This is perhaps from PIE *dheusom "creature that breathes," from root *dheu- (1) "cloud, breath" (source also of Lithuanian dusti "gasp," dvėsti "gasp, perish;" Old Church Slavonic dychati "breathe"). For possible prehistoric sense development, compare Latin animal from anima "breath").

 The sense specialization to a specific animal began in Old English (the usual Old English word for what we now call a deer was heorot ; see hart ), was common by 15c., and is now complete. It happened probably via hunting, deer being the favorite animal of the chase (compare Sanskrit mrga- "wild animal," used especially for "deer"). 

 Deer-lick "salty spot where deer come to lick," is attested by 1778, in an American context. The deer-mouse (1840) is so called for its agility.

 mesmerism 
 animalcule 
 animalism 
 animalistic 
 *ane- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mesmerism 

 "the doctrine that one person can exercise influence over the will and nervous system of another and produce certain phenomena by virtue of a supposed emanation called animal magnetism," 1798, from French mesmérisme, named for Franz Anton Mesmer (1734-1815), Austrian physician wh

 carnal 

 c. 1400, "physical, human, mortal," from Old French carnal and directly from Latin carnalis "fleshly, of the flesh," from carnis "of the flesh," genitive of caro "flesh, meat," probably originally "a piece of flesh" (from PIE root *sker- (1) "to cut"). The meaning "sensual, perta

 brute 

 early 15c., "of or belonging to animals, non-human," from Old French brut "coarse, brutal, raw, crude," from Latin brutus "heavy, dull, stupid, insensible, unreasonable" (source also of Spanish and Italian bruto), said to be an Oscan word, from PIE *gwruto-, suffixed form of root

 political 

 Political animal translates Greek politikon zōon (Aristotle, "Politics," I.ii.9) "an animal intended to live in a city; a...social animal": From these things therefore it is clear that the city-state is a natural growth, and that man is by nature...a political animal, and a man that is by nature and not merely by fortune citiless is either low in the scale of humanity...

 quadruped 

 "a four-footed animal," especially "a four-footed mammal," 1640s, from French quadrupède (16c.), from Latin quadrupes (genitive...quadrupedis) "four-footed, on all fours," also, as a noun, "a four-footed animal," from quadri- "four" (from PIE root *kwetwer...In zoology, quadrumane (from Latin manus "hand") was "a four-handed animal," in reference to monkeys, apes, lemurs, etc.;...

 treacle 

 Latin theriaca, from Greek thēriakē (antidotos) "antidote for poisonous wild animals," from fem. of thēriakos "of a wild animal...," from thērion "wild animal," diminutive of thēr (genitive thēros) "wild animal," from PIE root *ghwer- "wild beast."...

 prey 

 mid-13c., preie, "animal hunted for food, that which is seized by any carnivorous animal to be devoured" (also, figuratively..., of souls captured by Satan, etc.), also "goods taken in war," from Old French preie "booty, animal taken in the chase"...

 stunt 

 "to check in growth, to dwarf," 1650s; earlier "bring to an abrupt halt" (c. 1600); "provoke, anger, irritate" (1580s), from obsolete Middle English adjective stunt "foolish, stupid; obstinate," from Old English stunt "stupid, foolish" (as in stuntspræc "foolish talk"), from Prot

 racer 

 "one who or that which races," 1640s of persons, 1660s of horses, 1793 of vehicles, by 1809 in American English in reference to a type of snake; agent nouns from race (v.). WHEN a lad, I lived with my father in the then province of New Jersey, where the black snake, with a white

 quarry 

 [what is hunted] early 14c., quirre "entrails of deer placed on the hide and given to dogs of the chase as a reward," from Anglo-French quirreie, Old French cuiriee "the spoil, quarry" (Modern French curée), altered (by influence of Old French cuir "skin," from Latin corium "hide

 Share animal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/animal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/animal">Etymology of animal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of animal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/animal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of animal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/animal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of animal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/animal. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of animal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/animal (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near animal 
 aniline 
 anima 
 anima mundi 
 animadversion 
 animadvert 
 animal 
 animalcule 
 animalism 
 animalistic 
 animate 
 animated 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix