URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Elysium
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:56:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Elysium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Elysium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Elysium 

 Elysium (n.) 

 1590s, from Latin Elysium , from Greek Ēlysion (pedion) "Elysian field," abode of the blessed after death, where heroes and the virtuous dwell, which is of unknown origin, perhaps from Pre-Greek (a non-IE substrate Mediterranean language). Also used figuratively of a situation of complete happiness.
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to Elysium 

 Elysian (adj.) 

 1570s, "pertaining to Elysium (q.v.), the abode of the blessed after death." Hence, "exquisitely happy, full of the highest bliss."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 heaven 

 Old English heofon "home of God," earlier "the visible sky, firmament," probably from Proto-Germanic *hibin-, a dissimilation of *himin- (source also of Low German heben, Old Norse himinn, Gothic himins, Old Frisian himul, Dutch hemel, German Himmel "heaven, sky"), which is of un

 counsel 

 c. 1200, "advice or instruction given;" c. 1300, "mutual advising or interchange of opinions, consultation," from Old French counseil "advice, counsel; deliberation, thought" (10c.), from Latin consilium "plan, opinion," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + 

 method 

 early 15c., "regular, systematic treatment of disease," from Latin methodus "way of teaching or going," from Greek methodos "scientific inquiry, method of inquiry, investigation," originally "pursuit, a following after," from meta "in pursuit or quest of" (see meta-) + hodos "a m

 Jehovah 

 1530, Tyndale's transliteration of Hebrew Tetragrammaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai "my lord" (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation the lord would have been inc

 prism 

 1560s, in geometry, "a solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane polygons, and whose sides are parallelograms" (not always triangular), from Late Latin prisma, from Greek prisma "a geometrical prism, trilateral column," (Euclid), literally "something sa

 Nicholas 

 masc. proper name, from French Nicolas, from Latin Nicholaus, Nicolaus, from Greek Nikolaos, literally "victory-people," from nikē "victory" (see Nike) + laos "people" (see lay (adj.)). The saint associated with Christmas (died 326 C.E.) was a bishop of Myra in Lycia, patron of s

 fret 

 Old English fretan "devour, feed upon, consume," from Proto-Germanic compound *fra-etan "to eat up," from *fra- "completely" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through") + *etan "to eat" (from PIE root *ed- "to eat"). Cognates include Dutch vreten, Old High German frezzan

 sublime 

 1580s, of language, style, etc., "expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner," from French sublime (15c.), or directly from Latin sublimis "uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished," possibly originally "sloping up to the lintel," from sub "up to" (se

 preposition 

 late 14c., preposicioun, in grammar, "indeclinable part of speech regularly placed before and governing a noun in an oblique case and showing its relation to a verb, adjective, or other noun," from Latin praepositionem (nominative praepositio) "a putting before, a prefixing," nou

 denizen 

 early 15c., "a citizen, a dweller, an inhabitant," especially "legally established inhabitant of a city or borough, a citizen as distinguished from a non-resident native or a foreigner," from Anglo-French deinzein, denzein, (Old French deinzein) "one within" (the privileges of a 

 Share Elysium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Elysium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Elysium">Etymology of Elysium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Elysium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Elysium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Elysium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Elysium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Elysium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Elysium. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Elysium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Elysium (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Elysium 
 elven 
 elver 
 Elvira 
 elvish 
 Elysian 
 Elysium 
 elytra 
 elytro- 
 em 
 em- 
 *em- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix