URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/caution
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:42:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caution - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Caution - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of caution 

 caution (n.) 

 c. 1300, caucioun , "bail, guarantee, pledge," from Old French caution "security, surety" (13c.), from Latin cautionem (nominative cautio ) "caution, care, foresight, precaution," noun of action from past-participle stem of cavere "to be on one's guard" (from PIE root *keu- "to see, observe, perceive").

 The Latin sense re-emerged in English as "prudence in regard to danger" (1650s). The meaning "word of warning, monitory advice" is from c. 1600. The meaning "anything which excites alarm or astonishment" is U.S. slang, 1835.
 also from c. 1300 

 caution (v.) 

 "warn, exhort to take heed," 1640s, from caution (n.). Related: Cautioned ; cautioning .
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to caution 

 cautionary (adj.) 

 "conveying a warning," 1590s, from caution (n.) + -ary .

 cautious (adj.) 

 "careful to avoid danger or misfortune," 1640s, from caution + -ous . The Latin word for this was cautus "careful, heedful." Related: Cautiously ; cautiousness .

 precaution 
 *keu- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 precaution 

 "previous caution, prudent foresight (to prevent mischief or secure good results); a measure taken beforehand, an act of foresight," c. 1600, from French précaution (16c.) and directly from Late Latin praecautionem (nominative praecautio) "a safeguarding," noun of action from pas

 admonish 

 mid-14c., amonesten "remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning," from Old French amonester "urge, encourage, warn" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere "bring to mind, remind (of a debt);" also "warn, advise, urge," from ad "to," here probably with frequenta

 care 

 Old English caru, cearu "sorrow, anxiety, grief," also "burdens of mind; serious mental attention," in late Old English also "concern, anxiety caused by apprehension of evil or the weight of many burdens," from Proto-Germanic *karō "lament; grief, care" (source also of Old Saxon 

 monition 

 c. 1400, monicioun, "warning, instruction given by way of caution," from Old French monition (13c.) and directly from Latin...

 admonition 

 The meaning "caution or warning about future conduct based on past failures" is by early 15c....

 circumspection 

 circumspection (Modern French circonspection), from Latin circumspectionem (nominative circumspectio) "a looking around; foresight, caution...

 inquiry 

 There is one word of caution, however, to be given to those who renounce inquiry; it is that they cannot retain the right...

 discernment 

 1580s, "keenness of intellectual perception, insight, acuteness of judgment;" see discern + -ment. From 1680s as "act of perceiving by the intellect." Penetration, or insight, goes to the heart of a subject, reads the inmost character, etc. Discrimination marks the differences i

 race 

 [act of running] late Old English, also rase, "a narrative, an account;" c. 1300, "an act of swift running, a hurried attack," also "a course of life or conduct, a swift current;" from Old Norse rās "a running, a rush (of water)," cognate with Old English ræs "a running, a rush, 

 acre 

 Old English æcer "tilled field, open land," from Proto-Germanic *akraz "field, pasture" (source also of Old Norse akr, Old Saxon akkar, Old Frisian ekker, Middle Dutch acker, Dutch akker, Old High German achar, German acker, Gothic akrs "field"), from PIE root *agro- "field." "[O

 Share caution 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/caution Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/caution">Etymology of caution by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of caution. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/caution Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of caution," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caution. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of caution." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caution. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of caution." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/caution (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near caution 
 causeway 
 caustic 
 cauterization 
 cauterize 
 cautery 
 caution 
 cautionary 
 cautious 
 cavalcade 
 cavalier 
 cavalry 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close