URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/regret
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:23:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Regret - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Regret - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of regret 

 regret (v.) 

  late 14c., regreten , "to look back with distress or sorrowful longing; to grieve for on remembering," from Old French regreter "long after, bewail, lament someone's death; ask the help of" (Modern French regretter ), from re- , intensive prefix (see re- ), + -greter , which is possibly from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old English grætan "to weep;" Old Norse grata "to weep, groan"), from Proto-Germanic *gretan "weep." "Not found in other Romance languages, and variously explained" [Century Dictionary].

 From 1550s as "to grieve at (an event, action, revelation of facts, etc.)." Related: Regretted ; regretting . Replaced Old English ofþyncan , from of- "off, away," here denoting opposition, + þyncan "seem, seem fit" (as in methinks ).
 also from late 14c. 

 regret (n.) 

 1530s, "complaint, lament," a sense now obsolete, from the verb, or from French regret , back-formation from regreter "long after, bewail" (see regret (v.)).

 From 1590s as "pain or distress in the mind due to some external circumstances" (as in to look on (something) with regret ); 1640s as "pain or distress in the mind at something done or left undone." In correspondence, in declining an invitation, etc., regrets "expressions of regret, intimation of regret for inability to do something" is attested by 1851.
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to regret 

 methinks (v.) 

 "it appears to me" (now archaic or poetic only), from Old English me þyncð "it seems to me," from me (pron.), dative of I , + þyncð , third person singular of þyncan "to seem," reflecting the Old English distinction between þyncan "to seem" and related þencan "to think," which bedevils modern students of the language (see think ). The two thinks were constantly confused, then finally merged, in Middle English. Related: Methought .

 greet (v.) 

 Old English gretan "to come in contact with" in any sense ("attack, accost" as well as "salute, welcome," and "touch, take hold of, handle," as in hearpan gretan "to play the harp"), "seek out, approach," from West Germanic *grotjan (source also of Old Saxon grotian , Old Frisian greta , Dutch groeten , Old High German gruozen , German grüßen "to salute, greet"), of uncertain origin.

 In English, German, and Dutch, the primary sense has become "to salute," but the word once had much broader meaning. Perhaps originally "to resound" (via notion of "cause to speak"), causative of Proto-Germanic *grætanan , root of Old English grætan (Anglian gretan ) "weep, bewail," from PIE *gher- (2) "to call out." Greet still can mean "cry, weep" in Scottish & northern England dialect, though this might be from a different root. Grætan probably also is the source of the second element in regret . Related: Greeted ; greeting .

 regretful 
 regrettable 
 repent 
 re- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 regretful 

 1640s, "full of regret," from regret (n.) + -ful. Regretfully (1680s), properly "with regret," often has been incorrectly used in place of regrettably "it is to be regretted that; calling for regret" at least since 1965. "A regrettable use, prob. after HOPEFULLY adv.2" [OED, with

 repent 

 c. 1300, repenten, "be grieved over one's past and seek forgiveness; feel such regret for sins, crimes, or omissions as produces amendment of life," from Old French repentir (11c.), from re-, here perhaps used as an intensive prefix, "very much" (see re-), + Vulgar Latin *penitir

 rue 

 Old English hreowan (class II strong verb; past tense hreaw, past participle hrowen), "make (someone) sorry, cause (someone) to grieve, distress, affect with regret," transitive senses now obsolete, from Proto-Germanic *khrewan (which is source also of Old Frisian riowa, Middle D

 snivel 

 The meaning "be in an (affected) tearful state, utter hypocritical expressions of contrition or regret" is from 1680s....

 ruth 

 " also "pity, compassion, sorrow for the misery of another" (often in have ruth, take ruth); also "remorse, repentance, regret...

 wist 

 Had-I-wiste was used c. 1400-1550 in sense "regret for something done rashly or heedlessly;" see wist....

 sorrow 

 Middle English sorwe, from Old English sorg "grief, regret, trouble, care, pain, anxiety," from Proto-Germanic *sorg- (source...

 decline 

 late 14c., "to turn aside, deviate" (a sense now archaic), also "sink to a lower level," and, figuratively, "fall to an inferior or impaired condition," from Old French decliner "to sink, decline, degenerate, turn aside," from Latin declinare "to lower; avoid, deviate; bend from,

 refuse 

 c. 1300, "reject, spurn, decline" a request, demand, invitation, etc.; also intransitive, "to make refusal;" from Old French refuser "reject, disregard, avoid" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *refusare, a frequentative verb from the past-participle stem of Latin refundere "give back, r

 experience 

 late 14c., "observation as the source of knowledge; actual observation; an event which has affected one," from Old French esperience "experiment, proof, experience" (13c.), from Latin experientia "a trial, proof, experiment; knowledge gained by repeated trials," from experientem 

 Share regret 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/regret Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/regret">Etymology of regret by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of regret. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/regret Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of regret," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/regret. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of regret." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/regret. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of regret." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/regret (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near regret 
 regnant 
 regolith 
 regress 
 regression 
 regressive 
 regret 
 regretful 
 regrettable 
 regroup 
 regrow 
 regrowth 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix