URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/symbol
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Symbol - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Symbol - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of symbol 

 symbol (n.) 

 mid-15c., simbal , "creed, formal summary of religious belief," from Late Latin symbolum "creed, token, mark," from Greek symbolon "token, watchword, sign by which one infers; ticket, a permit, license," etymologically "that which is thrown or cast together." It is from assimilated form of syn- "together" (see syn- ) + bole "a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile, bolt, beam," from bol- , nominative stem of ballein "to throw" (from PIE root *gwele- "to throw, reach").

 The sense evolution in Greek is from "throwing things together" to "contrasting" to "comparing" to "token used in comparisons to determine if something is genuine." The Greek word was applied c. 250 by Cyprian of Carthage to the Apostles' Creed, on the notion of the "mark" or "outward sign" that distinguishes Christians from pagans. 

 Hence also "something which stands for something else," especially "object standing for or representing something sacred, moral, or intellectual" (1580s); "a written character, mark, or sign which stands for something" (1610s).
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to symbol 

 symbolic (adj.) 

 "of, pertaining to, or of the nature of a symbol or symbols; serving as a symbol," 1650s, from symbol + -ic , or from Latinized form of Greek symbolikos . From 1650s as "involving the use of written symbols." Of literature, art by 1910. Symbolic logic is attested from 1856. Related: Symbolical (c. 1600); symbolically .

 symbolism (n.) 

 1650s, "practice of representing things by symbols, the investing of things with symbolic character," from symbol + -ism . Applied to the arts by 1866; attested from 1892 as a movement in French literature, from French symbolisme (see symbolist ).

 symbolist 
 symbolize 
 symbology 
 symbololatry 
 *gwele- 
 syn- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 symbolist 

 1580s, "one who employs symbols," 1from symbol + -ist. It is attested from 1888 in reference to a literary movement that aimed at representing ideas and emotions by indirect suggestion rather than direct expression, from French symboliste, coined in this sense in 1885 by poet Pau

 crantara 

 "The fiery cross which in old times formed the rallying symbol in the Highlands of Scotland in any sudden emergency," Gaelic..."[S]o called because neglect of the symbol implied infamy" [Century Dictionary]....

 ampersand 

 The symbol is based on the Latin word et "and," and comes from an old Roman system of shorthand signs (ligatures) attested...It used a different symbol, something like a reversed capital gamma, to indicate et....This Tironian symbol was maintained by some medieval scribes, including Anglo-Saxon chroniclers, in whose works a symbol...

 caduceus 

 The caduceus is a symbol of peace and prosperity, and in modern times figures as a symbol of commerce, Mercury being the...[Century Dictionary] The word and the thing are sometimes used mistakenly as a symbol of medicine by confusion with the...

 ivory tower 

 symbol of artistic or intellectual aloofness, by 1889, from French tour d'ivoire, used in 1837 by critic Charles-Augustin...Villemain," 1837] Used earlier as a type of a wonder or a symbol of "the ideal."...

 ensign 

 early 15c., "a token, sign, symbol; badge of office, mark or insignia of authority or rank;" also "battle flag, flag or banner..."mark, symbol, signal; flag, standard, pennant," from Latin insignia (plural); see insignia, which is a doublet of this word...

 character 

 mid-14c., carecter, "symbol marked or branded on the body;" mid-15c., "symbol or drawing used in sorcery;" late 15c., "alphabetic...letter, graphic symbol standing for a sound or syllable;" from Old French caratere "feature, character" (13c., Modern French...caractère), from Latin character, from Greek kharaktēr "engraved mark," also "symbol or imprint on the soul," properly "...

 nose 

 Middle English nose, from Old English nosu "the nose of the human head, the special organ of breathing and smelling," from Proto-Germanic *nuso- (source also of Old Norse nös, Old Frisian nose, Dutch neus, Old High German nasa, German Nase), from PIE root *nas- "nose." Used of be

 dollar 

 "monetary unit or standard of value in the U.S. and Canada," 1550s, daler, originally in English the name of a large, silver coin of varying value in the German states, from Low German daler, from German taler (1530s, later thaler), abbreviation of Joachimstaler, literally "(guld

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 Share symbol 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/symbol Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/symbol">Etymology of symbol by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of symbol. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/symbol Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of symbol," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/symbol. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of symbol." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/symbol. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of symbol." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/symbol (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near symbol 
 sylviculture 
 sym- 
 Symbionese 
 symbiosis 
 symbiotic 
 symbol 
 symbolic 
 symbolise 
 symbolism 
 symbolist 
 symbolization 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix