URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nebula
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:33:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nebula - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nebula - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nebula 

 nebula (n.) 

 mid-15c., nebule "a cloud, mist," from Latin nebula , plural nebulae, "mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation," figuratively "darkness, obscurity," from PIE root *nebh- "cloud."

 Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of "cataracts in the eye;" astronomical meaning "luminous cloud-like patch in the heavens" is from c. 1730. As early as Herschel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but the certain distinction of relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies (as these are now properly called) was not made until the 1920s, when the latter were resolved into individual stars (and nebulae) using the new 100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to nebula 

 imbrication (n.) 

 "an overlapping of edges" (as of roof tiles, etc.), 1640s, from French imbrication , noun of action from stem of Latin imbricare "to cover with tiles," from imbricem (nominative imbrex ) "curved roof tile used to draw off rain," from imber (genitive imbris ) "rain, heavy rain; rainwater." This is reconstructed to be from PIE *ombh-ro- "rain" (source also of Sanskrit abhra "cloud, thunder-cloud, rainy weather," Greek ombros "rain, a shower"), from root *nebh- "moist; water" (see nebula ).

 nebular (adj.) 

 1821, "pertaining to an (astronomical) nebula or nebulae," from nebula + -ar .

 nebulizer 
 Praesepe 
 *nebh- 
 ombro- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Messier 

 What caused me to undertake the catalog was the nebula I discovered above the southern horn of Taurus on September 12, 1758...This nebula had such a resemblance to a comet in its form and brightness that I endeavored to find others, so that astronomers...

 spiral 

 Spiral galaxy is attested by 1870; earlier it was a spiral nebula (1846) before their nature was grasped....A spiral nebula has been discovered in the Dog's Ear, so strange and complex, that there is nothing to which it can be likened...

 Neptune 

 Saturn, brother of Jupiter, later identified with Greek Poseidon), probably from PIE root *nebh- "cloud" (source of Latin nebula...

 crab 

   The zodiac constellation name is attested in English from c. 1000; the Crab Nebula (1840), however, is in Taurus,...

 nimbus 

 1610s, "bright cloud surrounding a divine or sacred personage," from Latin nimbus "cloud," which is perhaps related to nebula...

 post 

 "a timber of considerable size set upright," from Old English post "pillar, doorpost," and from Old French post "post, upright beam," both from Latin postis "door, post, doorpost," in Medieval Latin "a beam, rod, pole," which is perhaps from Vulgar Latin *por- "forth," a variant 

 spot 

 c. 1200, "moral stain;" by mid-14c. as "speck, stain left by something on a surface;" probably at least in part from a variant of Old English splott "a spot, blot, patch (of land)," and partly from or related to Middle Dutch spotte "spot, speck." Other cognates are East Frisian s

 stop 

 Middle English stoppen, "obstruct (a passage) with a physical barrier; close up by filling, stuffing, or plugging," from Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian "to stop up, stifle"), a general West Germanic word, cognate with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low Germ

 cloud 

 Old English clud "mass of rock, hill," related to clod. The modern sense "rain-cloud, mass of evaporated water visible and suspended in the sky" is a metaphoric extension that begins to appear c. 1300 in southern texts, based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock masses. The u

 preparation 

 late 14c., preparacioun, "act of preparing or making ready, preliminary act or operation, a previous setting in order," from Old French preparacion (13c.) and directly from Latin praeparationem (nominative praeparatio) "a making ready," noun of action from past participle stem of

 Share nebula 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nebula Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nebula">Etymology of nebula by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nebula. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nebula Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nebula," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nebula. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nebula." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nebula. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nebula." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nebula (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nebula 
 neb 
 nebbish 
 *nebh- 
 Nebraska 
 Nebuchadnezzar 
 nebula 
 nebular 
 nebulizer 
 nebulosity 
 nebulous 
 necessarily 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix