URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/feudal
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:48:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Feudal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Feudal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of feudal 

 feudal (adj.) 

 1610s, "pertaining to feuds ," estates of land granted by a superior on condition of services to be rendered to the grantor, from Medieval Latin feudalis , from feudum "feudal estate, land granted to be held as a benefice," of Germanic origin (cognates: Gothic faihu "property," Old High German fihu "cattle;" see fee ). Related to Middle English feodary "one who holds lands of an overlord in exchange for service" (late 14c.). Not related to feud .
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to feudal 

 fee (n.) 

 Middle English, representing the merger or mutual influence of two words, one from Old English, one from an Old French form of the same Germanic word, and both ultimately from a PIE root meaning "cattle."

 The Old English word is feoh "livestock, cattle; movable property; possessions in livestock, goods, or money; riches, treasure, wealth; money as a medium of exchange or payment," from Proto-Germanic *fehu (source also of Old Saxon fehu , Old High German fihu , German Vieh "cattle," Gothic faihu "money, fortune"). This is from PIE *peku- "cattle" (source also of Sanskrit pasu , Lithuanian pekus "cattle;" Latin pecu "cattle," pecunia "money, property").

 The other word is Anglo-French fee , from Old French fieu , a variant of fief "possession, holding, domain; feudal duties, payment" (see fief ), which apparently is a Germanic compound in which the first element is cognate with Old English feoh .

 Via Anglo-French come the legal senses "estate in land or tenements held on condition of feudal homage; land, property, possession" (c. 1300). Hence fee-simple (late 14c.) "absolute ownership," as opposed to fee-tail (early 15c.) "entailed ownership," inheritance limited to some particular class of heirs (second element from Old French taillir "to cut, to limit").

 The feudal sense was extended from landholdings to inheritable offices of service to a feudal lord (late 14c.; in Anglo-French late 13c.), for example forester of fe "a forester by heritable right." As these often were offices of profit, the word came to be used for "remuneration for service in office" (late 14c.), hence, "payment for (any kind of) work or services" (late 14c.). From late 14c. as "a sum paid for a privilege" (originally admission to a guild); early 15c. as "money payment or charge exacted for a licence, etc."

 feud (n.) 

 c. 1300, fede "enmity, hatred, hostility," northern English and Scottish, ultimately (via an unrecorded Old English word or Old French fede , faide "war, raid, hostility, hatred, enmity, feud, (legal) vengeance," which is from Germanic) from Proto-Germanic *faihitho (compare Old High German fehida "contention, quarrel, feud"), noun of state from adjective *faiho- (source also of Old English fæhð "enmity," fah "hostile;" German Fehde "feud;" Old Frisian feithe "enmity"). Perhaps from the same PIE source as foe . Sense of "vendetta" is early 15c. Alteration of spelling in 16c. is unexplained. Meaning "state of hostility between families or clans" is from 1580s.

 feudalism (n.) 

 a coinage of historians, attested from 1773; see feudal + -ism . Feudal system attested from 1736.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 homage 

 c. 1300, "ceremony or act of acknowledging one's faithfulness to a feudal lord; feudal allegiance," earlier "body of vassals...of a feudal king" (early 13c.), from Old French omage, homage "allegiance or respect for one's feudal lord" (12c., Modern...

 servitude 

 Also "state of being a feudal vassal" (c. 1500)....servantship "state or condition of being a servant" (1570s);  servage "servitude, bondage, slavery; serfdom, subjugation, feudal...

 banal 

 the word's use in designating ovens, mills, etc. that were used in common by serfs, or else in reference to compulsory feudal...The word was earlier used in English with a sense of "pertaining to compulsory feudal service" (1753)....

 disclaim 

 c. 1400, disclaimen, "renounce, relinquish, or repudiate a legal claim," originally in a feudal sense, from Anglo-French...

 privity 

 From 1550s as "participation in the knowledge of something secret;" from 1520s as a legal term in feudal land tenure....

 appanage 

 younger children of royal or noble families," from French appanage (16c.), restored from earlier apanage (13c.), a term in feudal...

 villein 

 early 14c., vileyn, spelling variant of villain in its reference to a feudal class of half-free peasants....

 industry 

 late 15c., "cleverness, skill," from Old French industrie "activity; aptitude, experience" (14c.) or directly from Latin industria "diligence, activity, zeal," noun use of fem. of industrius "active, diligent," from early Latin indostruus "diligent," from indu "in, within" (from 

 race 

 [act of running] late Old English, also rase, "a narrative, an account;" c. 1300, "an act of swift running, a hurried attack," also "a course of life or conduct, a swift current;" from Old Norse rās "a running, a rush (of water)," cognate with Old English ræs "a running, a rush, 

 eclectic 

 1680s, "not confined to or following any one model or system," originally in reference to ancient philosophers who selected doctrines from every system; from French eclectique (1650s), from Greek eklektikos "selective," literally "picking out," from eklektos "selected," from ekle

 Share feudal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/feudal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/feudal">Etymology of feudal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of feudal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/feudal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of feudal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/feudal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of feudal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/feudal. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of feudal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/feudal (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near feudal 
 fettuccine 
 fettuccini 
 fetus 
 feu de joie 
 feud 
 feudal 
 feudalism 
 feuillemorte 
 feuilleton 
 fever 
 feverfew 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix