URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/talc
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Talc - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Talc - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of talc 

 talc (n.) 

 mineral substance, a magnesium silicate, 1580s, talke , from French talc (16c.), probably from Spanish talco and Medieval Latin talcus , also talcum "talc" (ealy 14c.), both from Arabic talq , from Persian talk "talc." "It was applied by the Arab and medieval writers to various transparent, translucent and shining minerals such as talc proper, mica, selenite, etc." [Flood]. Related: Talcoid ; talcose ; talcous . As a verb, "treat or rub with talc," by 1888 (implied in talced ).
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to talc 

 talcum (n.) 

 "talc, soapstone," 1550s ( pouder of Talchum ), from Medieval Latin talcum , used for any of various shiny minerals; see talc . Talcum powder is attested from 1871. As a verb by 1923.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mineral 

 late 14c., "substance obtained by mining," from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin minerale "something mined," noun use of neuter of mineralis "pertaining to mines," from minera "a mine" (see mine (n.1)). Meaning "material substance that is neither animal nor veg

 powder 

  "fine, minute, loose, uncompacted particles," c. 1300, poudre, "ash, cinders; dust of the earth;" early 14c. of any pulverized substance; from Old French poudre "dust, powder; ashes; powdered substance" (13c.), earlier pouldre (11c.), from Latin pulverem (nominative pulvis)

 talk 

 c. 1200, talken, "speak, discourse, say something," probably a diminutive or frequentative form related to Middle English tale "story," and ultimately from the same source as tale (q.v.), with rare English formative -k (compare hark from hear, stalk from steal, smirk from smile) 

 divine 

 late 14c., "pertaining to, of the nature of, or proceeding from God or a god; addressed to God," from Old French divin, devin (12c.), from Latin divinus "of a god," from divus "of or belonging to a god, inspired, prophetic," related to deus "god, deity" (from PIE root *dyeu- "to 

 mask 

 1530s, "a cover for the face (with openings for the eyes and mouth), a false face," from French masque "covering to hide or guard the face" (16c.), from Italian maschera, from Medieval Latin masca "mask, specter, nightmare," a word of uncertain origin. It is perhaps from Arabic m

 voluptuous 

 late 14c., "of or pertaining to desires or appetites," from Old French voluptueux, volumptueuse and directly from Latin voluptuosus "full of pleasure, delightful," from voluptas "pleasure, delight, enjoyment, satisfaction," from volup "pleasurably," perhaps ultimately related to 

 gorgeous 

 c. 1500, "splendid, showy, sumptuously adorned" (of clothing), from French gorgias "elegant, fashionable," a word of unknown origin; perhaps a special use of gorgias "necklace" (and thus "fond of or resembling jewelry"), from Old French gorge "throat," also "something adorning th

 baccalaureate 

 1620s, "university degree of a bachelor," from Modern Latin baccalaureatus, from baccalaureus "student with the first degree," an alteration of Medieval Latin baccalarius "one who has attained the lowest degree in a university, an advanced student lecturing under his master's sup

 elegant 

 late 15c., "tastefully ornate," from Old French élégant (15c.) and directly from Latin elegantem (nominative elegans) "choice, fine, tasteful," collateral form of present participle of eligere "select with care, choose" (see election). Meaning "characterized by refined grace" is 

 firmament 

 mid-13c., "expanse of space above the earth where the heavenly bodies move," hence "the arch or vault of the heavens, the visible sky" (c. 1300), from Old French firmament or directly from Latin firmamentum "firmament," literally "a support, a strengthening," from firmus "strong,

 Share talc 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/talc Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/talc">Etymology of talc by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of talc. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/talc Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of talc," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/talc. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of talc." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/talc. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of talc." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/talc (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near talc 
 takeout 
 takeover 
 taker 
 taking 
 talaria 
 talc 
 talcum 
 tale 
 talebearer 
 talent 
 talented 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix