URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harold
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:21:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Harold - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Harold - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Harold 

 Harold 

 masc. proper name, Old Norse Haraldr , Old Danish, Old Swedish Harald , from Proto-Germanic *harja-waldaz "army commander." For first element, see harry ; second element is related to Proto-Germanic *waldan , source of Old English wealdan (from PIE root *wal- "to be strong"). The name shares an etymology with herald (n.).

 Entries linking to Harold 

 harry (v.) 

 Old English hergian "make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder," the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (source also of Old Frisian urheria "lay waste, ravage, plunder," Old Norse herja "to make a raid, to plunder," Old Saxon and Old High German herion , German verheeren "to destroy, lay waste, devastate"). This is literally "to overrun with an army," from Proto-Germanic *harjan "an armed force" (source also of Old English here , Old Norse herr "crowd, great number; army, troop," Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri , Dutch heir , Old High German har , German Heer , Gothic harjis "a host, army").

 The Germanic words come from PIE root *korio- "war" also "war-band, host, army" (source also of Lithuanian karas "war, quarrel," karias "host, army;" Old Church Slavonic kara "strife;" Middle Irish cuire "troop;" Old Persian kara "host, people, army;" Greek koiranos "ruler, leader, commander"). Weakened sense of "worry, goad, harass" is from c. 1400. Related: Harried ; harrying .

 herald (n.) 

 "messenger, envoy," late 13c. (in Anglo-Latin); c. 1200 as a surname, from Anglo-French heraud , Old French heraut , hiraut (12c.), from Frankish *hariwald "commander of an army" or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *harja "army" (from PIE root *koro- "war;" see harry ) + *waldaz "to command, rule" (see wield ). The form fits, but the sense evolution is difficult to explain, unless it is in reference to the chief officer of a tournament, who introduced knights and made decisions on rules (which was one of the early senses, often as heraud of armes , though not the earliest in English).

 lord 
 *wal- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lord 

 mid-13c., laverd, loverd, from Old English hlaford "master of a household, ruler, feudal lord, superior; husband," also "God," translating Latin dominus, Greek kyrios in the New Testament, Hebrew yahweh in the Old (though Old English dryhten was more frequent). Old English hlafor

 United Nations 

 [Harold Nicholson, "The Evolution of Diplomatic Method," 1954]...

 deuterium 

 1933, coined by U.S. chemist Harold C....

 pluralism 

 In political science, attested from 1919 (in Harold J....

 accentuate 

 negative Latch on to the affirmative Don't mess with Mister In-Between ["Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive," 1944, music by Harold...

 doll 

 The -l- for -r- substitution in nicknames is common in English: compare Hal for Harold, Moll for Mary, Sally for Sarah, etc...

 Spenserian 

 Literature 1770-1880," 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's "Hudibras," Scott's "Lady of the Lake," and notably the "Childe Harold...

 ring 

 [circular band] Old English hring "circlet of metal, especially one of a precious metal for wearing on the finger ornamentally, also a part of a mail coat; anything circular," from Proto-Germanic *hringaz "something curved, circle" (source also of Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hr

 corporation 

 mid-15c., corporacioun, "persons united in a body for some purpose," from such use in Anglo-Latin, from Late Latin corporationem (nominative corporatio) "assumption of a body" (used of the incarnation of Christ), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin corporare "embody

 history 

 late 14c., "relation of incidents" (true or false), from Old French estoire, estorie "story; chronicle, history" (12c., Modern French histoire), from Latin historia "narrative of past events, account, tale, story," from Greek historia "a learning or knowing by inquiry; an account

 Share Harold 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harold Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harold">Etymology of Harold by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Harold. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harold Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Harold," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harold. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Harold." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harold. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Harold." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Harold (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Harold 
 harmonium 
 harmonization 
 harmonize 
 harmony 
 harness 
 Harold 
 harp 
 harper 
 harpist 
 harpoon 
 harpsichord 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix