URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/horror
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Horror - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Horror - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of horror 

 horror (n.) 

 early 14c., "feeling of disgust;" late 14c., "emotion of horror or dread," also "thing which excites horror," from Old French horror (12c., Modern French horreur ) and directly from Latin horror "dread, veneration, religious awe," a figurative use, literally "a shaking, trembling (as with cold or fear), shudder, chill," from horrere "to bristle with fear, shudder," from PIE root *ghers- "to bristle" (source also of Sanskrit harsate "bristles," Avestan zarshayamna- "ruffling one's feathers," Latin eris (genitive) "hedgehog," Welsh garw "rough").

 Also formerly in English "a shivering," especially as a symptom of disease or in reaction to a sour or bitter taste (1530s); "erection of the hairs on the skin" (1650s); "a ruffling as of water surface" (1630s). As a genre in film, 1934. Chamber of horrors originally (1849) was a gallery of notorious criminals in Madame Tussaud's wax exhibition. Other noun forms are horribility (14c., now rare or disused), horribleness (late 14c.), horridity (1620s), horridness (1610s).
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to horror 

 abhor (v.) 

 c. 1400, "to loathe, regard with repugnance, dislike intensely," literally "to shrink back with horror or dread," from Latin abhorrere "shrink back from, have an aversion for, shudder at," from ab "off, away from" (see ab- ) + horrere "tremble at, shudder," literally "to bristle, be shaggy" (from PIE *ghers- "start out, stand out, rise to a point, bristle;" see horror ).

 Formerly also "fill (someone) with horror or loathing" (16c.). In Latin it was less intense: "be remote from, vary from, differ from, be out of harmony with." Related: Abhorred ; abhorring .

 arugula (n.) 

 edible cruciform plant ( Eruca sativa ) used originally in the Mediterranean region as a salad, 1967, the American English and Australian form of the name (via Italian immigrants), from a dialectal variant of Italian ruchetta , a diminutive form of ruca- , from Latin eruca , a name of some cabbage-like plant (from PIE *gher(s)-uka- , from root *ghers- "to bristle;" for which see horror ).

 In England, the usual name is rocket (see rocket (n.1)), which is from Italian ruchetta via French roquette . It also sometimes is called hedge mustard .

 Chersonese 
 gorse 
 hair 
 hirsute 
 horrendous 
 horrible 
 horrid 
 horrific 
 horrify 
 horripilation 
 rocket 
 urchin 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hair 

 Old English hær "hair, a hair," from Proto-Germanic *hēran (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old High German har, Old Frisian her, Dutch and German haar "hair"), perhaps from PIE *ghers- "to stand out, to bristle, rise to a point" (source also of Lithuanian šerys "bristle;" s

 rocket 

 garden plant of the cabbage family, c. 1500, rokette, from French roquette (16c.), perhaps via Italian rochetta, diminutive of ruca "a kind of cabbage," from Latin eruca "colewort," perhaps so called for its downy stems and related to ericus "hedgehog," also "a beam set with spik

 urchin 

 c. 1300, yrichon "hedgehog," from Old North French *irechon (cognate with Picard irechon, Walloon ireson, Hainaut hirchon), from Old French herichun "hedgehog" (Modern French hérisson), formed with diminutive suffix -on + Vulgar Latin *hericionem, from Latin ericius "hedgehog," e

 shiver 

 tremble or quiver, shake suddenly," especially with cold, c. 1400, an alteration of chiveren "to shiver" (with cold, chills, horror...We shiver with cold or a sensation like that of cold ; we quake with fear ; we shudder with horror....

 curdle 

 To curdle (one's) blood, in the figurative sense of "inspire horror" is from c. 1600....

 gruesome 

 1560s, with -some (1) + grue, from Middle English gruen "feel horror, shudder" (c. 1300); not recorded in Old English or...

 electrocution 

 preliminary arrangements: the shaving of the head, the cutting of the clothing, the strapping in a chair, add much to the horror...

 fare 

 Old English fær "journey, road, passage, expedition," from strong neuter of faran "to journey" (see fare (v.)); merged with faru "journey, expedition, companions, baggage," strong fem. of faran. Original sense is obsolete, except in compounds (wayfarer, sea-faring, etc.) Meaning 

 fear 

 Middle English fere, from Old English fær "calamity, sudden danger, peril, sudden attack," from Proto-Germanic *feraz "danger" (source also of Old Saxon far "ambush," Old Norse far "harm, distress, deception," Dutch gevaar, German Gefahr "danger"), from PIE *pēr-, a lengthened fo

 repulsion 

 early 15c., repulsioun, "driving away, repelling, repudiation," especially "divorce" (writ of repulsion), from Old French repulsion and directly from Late Latin repulsionem (nominative repulsio) "a repelling," noun of action from past-participle stem of repellere "to drive back" 

 Share horror 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/horror Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/horror">Etymology of horror by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of horror. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/horror Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of horror," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/horror. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of horror." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/horror. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of horror." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/horror (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near horror 
 horribly 
 horrid 
 horrific 
 horrify 
 horripilation 
 horror 
 hors d'oeuvre 
 hors de combat 
 horse 
 horse sense 
 horseback 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix