URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/zircon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:59:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Zircon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Zircon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of zircon 

 zircon (n.) 

 yellowish mineral occurring in crystal form, 1794, circon , also jargon , a new name given in chemistry to jacinth , from German Zirkon (Klaproth, 1789), which probably is from 18c. French jargon , a vague mineral word used of high-quality diamond-like gemstones.

 This has been traced to Medieval Latin jargonce , which is of uncertain origin. Compare Italian giargone , from the same source. Century Dictionary suggests Arabic zarkun "cinnabar." Related: Zirconic ; zirconian ; zirconate .
 also from 1794 

 Entries linking to zircon 

 jacinth (n.) 

 c. 1200, iacinct , a blue gem (occasionally a red one), from Old French jacinte , iacinte "hyacinth; jacinth," or directly from Late Latin iacintus (see hyacinth ).

 In modern use, a reddish-orange gem. The word is hyacinth with the h- lost and the initial -i- made consonantal (forms in j- begin to be attested late 14c.; see J ).

 zirconium (n.) 

 metallic chemical element, 1808, coined in Modern Latin by German chemist and mineralogist Martin Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817) in 1789; so called because it was obtained from zircon . With -ium , name-ending of metallic elements.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mineral 

 late 14c., "substance obtained by mining," from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin minerale "something mined," noun use of neuter of mineralis "pertaining to mines," from minera "a mine" (see mine (n.1)). Meaning "material substance that is neither animal nor veg

 hyacinth 

 1550s, "the plant hyacinth;" re-Greeked from jacinth (late 14c.) "hyacinth; blue cornflower," which earlier was the name of a precious stone blue (rarely red) in color (c. 1200), from Old French jacinte and Medieval Latin jacintus, ultimately from Greek hyakinthos, which is proba

 jargon 

 mid-14c., "unintelligible talk, gibberish; chattering, jabbering," from Old French jargon "a chattering" (of birds), also "language, speech," especially "idle talk; thieves' Latin" (12c.). Ultimately of echoic origin (compare Latin garrire "to chatter"). From 1640s as "mixed spee

 nightcap 

 also night-cap, late 14c., "covering for the head, worn in bed," from night + cap (n.). In the alcoholic sense, it is attested from 1818. American English sense of "final event in a sporting contest" (especially the second game of a baseball double-header) is by 1924. Sunday's b

 precipitate 

 1520s, "to hurl or fling down" (from a precipice or height), a back formation from precipitation or else from Latin praecipitatus, past participle of praecipitare "to throw or dive headlong; be hasty," from praeceps (genitive praecipitis) "steep, headlong, headfirst," from prae "

 Mississippi 

 originally the name of the river, from the French rendering of an Algonquian name (French missionaries first penetrated the river valley in its upper reaches) meaning "big river;" compare Ojibwa mshi- "big," ziibi "river." Organized as a U.S. territory 1798; admitted as a state 1

 cipher 

 late 14c., "arithmetical symbol for zero," from Old French cifre "nought, zero," Medieval Latin cifra, which, with Spanish and Italian cifra, ultimately is from Arabic sifr "zero," literally "empty, nothing," from safara "to be empty;" a loan-translation of Sanskrit sunya-s "empt

 folk 

 Old English folc "common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army," from Proto-Germanic *fulka- (source also of Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk, Old High German folc, German Volk "people"). Perhaps originally "host of warri

 thesis 

 late 14c., "unaccented syllable or note," from Latin thesis "unaccented syllable in poetry," later (and more correctly) "stressed part of a metrical foot," from Greek thesis "a proposition," also "downbeat" (in music), originally "a setting down, a placing, an arranging; position

 law 

 Old English lagu (plural laga, combining form lah-) "ordinance, rule prescribed by authority, regulation; district governed by the same laws;" also sometimes "right, legal privilege," from Old Norse *lagu "law," collective plural of lag "layer, measure, stroke," literally "someth

 Share zircon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/zircon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/zircon">Etymology of zircon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of zircon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/zircon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of zircon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zircon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of zircon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zircon. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of zircon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/zircon (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near zircon 
 ZIP Code 
 ziphoid 
 zipper 
 Zippo 
 zippy 
 zircon 
 zirconium 
 zit 
 zither 
 ziti 
 zloty 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix