URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/arrack
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:11:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Arrack - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Arrack - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of arrack 

 arrack (n.) 

 c. 1600, probably picked up in India (as were Portuguese araca , Spanish arac , French arack ), via Hindi arak , Tamil araku , etc., ultimately from Arabic araq "distilled spirits, strong liquor," literally "sweat, juice;" used of native liquors in Eastern countries, especially those distilled from fermented sap of coconut palm, sometimes from rice or molasses.
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to arrack 

 ratafia (n.) 

 Also ratafee, ratafea, liquor similar to cherry brandy made from peach and apricot stones, sometimes conflated with rum, 1670s, said to be from French ratafiat, rataphia (1690s) though it is attested earlier in English. A word of unknown origin; perhaps ultimately from the same source as arrack . 17c. sources say it is an East Indian word. OED proposes an unattested post-classical Latin expression * rata fiat , by evidence of French Creole tafia (18c.), a word used as a toast. See also taffy .

 Do I drink Ratafea, like Lady Punk,

 And cry, the Vapours, when I'm maudlin drunk?

 [Edward Ward, "DIALOGUE XI Between a Termagant Court Lady and her Spouse about settling in the Country," The Third Volume consisting of Poems on Divers Subjects, 1706.]

 By 1730 it was also a confection similar to macaroons, made from bitter almonds or apricot kernels and presumably named for similarity of flavor to the drink.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bimbo 

 It is usually made with arrack or rum or brandy, sometimes all of them....

 booze 

 "alcoholic drink," by 1570s, also bouze (in poetry rhyming with carouse), also as a verb, probably a variant of Middle English bous "intoxicating drink," (mid-14c.), which is from Middle Dutch buse "drinking vessel" (also as a verb, busen "to drink heavily"), which is related to 

 liquor 

 c. 1200, likur "any matter in a liquid state, a liquid or fluid substance," from Old French licor "fluid, liquid; sap; oil" (12c., Modern French liqueur), from Latin liquorem (nominative liquor) "a liquid, liquor; wine; the sea," originally "liquidity, fluidity," from liquere "be

 week 

 Old English wucu, wice, etc., from Proto-Germanic *wikō(n)- (source also of Old Norse vika, Old Frisian wike, Middle Dutch weke, Old High German wecha, German woche), probably originally with the sense of "a turning" or "succession" (compare Gothic wikon "in the course of," Old N

 citizen 

 c. 1300, citisein (fem. citeseine) "inhabitant of a city or town," from Anglo-French citesein, citezein "city-dweller, town-dweller, citizen" (Old French citeien, 12c., Modern French citoyen), from cite (see city) + -ain (see -ian). According to Middle English Compendium, the -s-

 communion 

 late 14c., communioun, "participation in something; that which is common to all; union in religious worship, doctrine, or discipline," from Old French comunion "community, communion" (12c.), from Latin communionem (nominative communio) "fellowship, mutual participation, a sharing

 patent 

 late 14c., "open letter or official document from some authority granting permission to do something; a licence granting an office, right, title, etc.," shortened from Anglo-French lettre patent (also in Medieval Latin litteræ patentes), literally "open letter" (late 13c.), from 

 mirror 

 mid-13c., mirour, "polished surface (of metal, coated glass, etc.) used to reflect images of objects," especially the face of a person, from Old French mireoir "a reflecting glass, looking glass; observation, model, example," earlier miradoir (11c.), from mirer "look at" (oneself

 acolyte 

 early 14c., "inferior officer in the church," from Old French acolite or directly from Medieval Latin acolytus (Late Latin acoluthus), from Greek akolouthos "following, attending on," as a noun, "a follower, attendant," literally "having one way," from a- "together with," copulat

 switch 

 1590s, "slender riding whip," probably from a variant of a Flemish or Low German word akin to Middle Dutch swijch "bough, twig," or from swutsche, variant of Low German zwukse "long thin stick, switch," from Germanic *swih- (source also of Old High German zwec "wooden peg," Germa

 Share arrack 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/arrack Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/arrack">Etymology of arrack by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of arrack. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/arrack Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of arrack," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arrack. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of arrack." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arrack. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of arrack." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/arrack (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near arrack 
 arousal 
 arouse 
 ARPANET 
 arpeggio 
 arr 
 arrack 
 arrah 
 arraign 
 arraignment 
 arrange 
 arrangement 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix