URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/raisin
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Raisin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Raisin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of raisin 

 raisin (n.) 

 "dried sweet grape," c. 1300, from Anglo-French raycin (late 13c.), Old French raisin "grape; raisin," from Vulgar Latin *racimus , alteration of Latin racemus "cluster of grapes or berries" (also source of Spanish racimo , Italian racemo ), probably a loan-word from the same ancient lost Mediterranean language that gave Greek rhax (genitive rhagos ) "grape, berry." In Middle English the word also could be used of grapes themselves. Dutch razun also is from French; German Rosine is from an Old French variant form.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to raisin 

 raceme (n.) 

 1785, in reference to a type of flower cluster, from Latin racemus "a cluster of grapes" (see raisin ). In Middle English, "a raisin or currant" (late 14c.).

 racemic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or derived from grapes," 1835, from French racémique , from Latin racemus "cluster of grapes" (see raisin ). Related: Racemism; racemation .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stavesacre 

 which were used medicinally, c. 1200, stephis-agre, from Latin staphisagria, from Greek staphis agria, literally "wild raisin...This is from staphis "raisin" (according to Klein, probably related to staphylē "bunch of grapes;" Beekes agrees and calls...

 currant 

 c. 1500, "very small kind of seedless blackish raisin or dried grape, used in cookery and confections," a shortening of raysyn...

 calendar 

 c. 1200, calender, "the year as divided systematically into days and months;" mid-14c. as "table showing divisions of the year;" from Old French calendier "list, register," from Latin calendarium "account book," from calendae/kalendae "the calends" the first day of the Roman mont

 society 

 1530s, "companionship, friendly association with others," from Old French societe "company" (12c., Modern French société), from Latin societatem (nominative societas) "fellowship, association, alliance, union, community," from socius "companion, ally," from PIE *sokw-yo-, suffixe

 ginger 

 11c., from Old English ginȝifer, ginȝiber, from Late Latin gingiber, from Latin zingiberi, from Greek zingiberis, from Prakrit (Middle Indic) singabera, from Sanskrit srngaveram, from srngam "horn" + vera- "body," so called from the shape of its root. But this may be Sanskrit fol

 stoop 

 Middle English stoupen, "bend forward and downward," especially of persons "lower the body by bending forward," from Old English stupian "to bow, bend," from Proto-Germanic *stupojanan (source also of Middle Dutch stupen "to bow, bend," Norwegian stupa "fall, drop"), perhaps from

 rejoice 

 c. 1300, rejoisen, "to own (goods, property), possess, enjoy the possession of, have the fruition of," from Old French rejoiss-, present participle stem of rejoir, resjoir "gladden, rejoice," from re-, which here is of obscure signification, perhaps an intensive (see re-), + joir

 crucial 

 1706, "cross-shaped, having the form of an X," from French crucial, a medical term for ligaments of the interior of the knee-joint (which cross each other), from Latin crux (genitive crucis) "cross" (see crux). The meaning "decisive, critical, finally disproving one of two altern

 sad 

 Old English sæd "sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of," from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (source also of Old Norse saðr, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High German sat, German satt, Gothic saþs "satiated, sated, full"), from PIE *seto-, from 

 resort 

 late 14c., "that to which one has recourse for aid or assistance, source of comfort and solace," from Old French resort "resource, a help, an aid, a remedy," back-formation from resortir "to resort," literally "to go out again," from re- "again" (see re-) + sortir "go out" (see s

 Share raisin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/raisin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/raisin">Etymology of raisin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of raisin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/raisin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of raisin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/raisin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of raisin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/raisin. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of raisin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/raisin (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near raisin 
 rain-proof 
 rainstorm 
 rainwater 
 rainy 
 raise 
 raisin 
 raising 
 raison d'etat 
 raison d'etre 
 raisonne 
 raj 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix