URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/arson
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:18:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Arson - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Arson - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of arson 

 arson (n.) 

 "malicious burning of property," 1670s, from Anglo-French arsoun (late 13c.), Old French arsion , from Late Latin arsionem (nominative arsio ) "a burning," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin ardere "to burn" (from PIE root *as- "to burn, glow"). The Old English term was bærnet , literally "burning;" and Coke (1640) has indictment of burning .
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to arson 

 arsonist (n.) 

 "one who maliciously sets fires," 1864, from arson + -ist .

 *as- 

 also *es- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to burn, glow." 

 It might form all or part of: ardent ; ardor ; area ; arid ; aridity ; aril ; arson ; ash (n.1) "powdery remains of fire;" azalea ; potash ; potassium .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit asah "ashes, dust;" Hittite hat- "to dry up;" Greek azein "to dry up, parch," azaleos "dry;" Latin aridus "parched, dry," ārēre "to be dry," āra "altar, hearth;" Armenian azazem "I dry up;" Old English æsce "ash," Old High German asca , Gothic azgo "ashes." 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 combustion 

 "action or process of burning," early 15c., from Old French combustion (13c.) and directly from Latin combustionem (nominative combustio) "a burning," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin comburere "to burn up, consume," from com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (s

 indictment 

 formerly also endictment, c. 1300, endytement, "action of accusing," from Anglo-French and Old French enditement, from enditer "accuse, indict" (see indict). The meaning "formal legal document containing a charge proved before a grand jury" is from c. 1500. The Latin spelling was

 conspiracy 

 mid-14c., "a plotting of evil, unlawful design; a combination of persons for an evil purpose," from Anglo-French conspiracie, Old French conspiracie "conspiracy, plot," from Latin conspirationem (nominative conspiratio) "agreement, union, unanimity," noun of action from past-part

 magazine 

 1580s, "warehouse, place for storing goods, especially military ammunition," from French magasin "warehouse, depot, store" (15c.), from Italian magazzino, from Arabic makhazin, plural of makhzan "storehouse" (source of Spanish almacén "warehouse, magazine"), from khazana "to stor

 refugee 

 1680s, "one who flees to a refuge or shelter or place of safety; one who in times of persecution or political disorder flees to a foreign country for safety," from French refugié, a noun use of the past participle of refugier "to take shelter, protect," from Old French refuge "hi

 Florida 

 U.S. state, formerly a Spanish colony, probably from Spanish Pascua florida, literally "flowering Easter," a Spanish name for Palm Sunday, and so named because the peninsula was discovered on that day (March 20, 1513) by the expedition of Spanish explorer Ponce de León. From Lati

 satyr 

 late 14c., satire, "one of a type of woodland deities part human or animal; demigod or spirit of the air or woods, companion of Bacchus," from Old French satire and directly from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, a word of unknown origin. "The etymology of [satyros] is unknown. 

 clean 

 Old English clæne "free from dirt or filth, unmixed with foreign or extraneous matter; morally pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open," of beasts, "not forbidden by ceremonial law to eat," from West Germanic *klainja- "clear, pure" (source also of Old Saxon kleni "dainty, deli

 garden 

 late 13c. (late 12c. in surnames), from Old North French gardin "(kitchen) garden; orchard; palace grounds" (Old French jardin, 13c., Modern French jardin), from Vulgar Latin *hortus gardinus "enclosed garden," via Frankish *gardo or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germani

 graffiti 

 1851, "ancient wall inscriptions found in the ruins of Pompeii," from Italian graffiti, plural of graffito "a scribbling," a diminutive formation from graffio "a scratch or scribble," from graffiare "to scribble," ultimately from Greek graphein "to scratch, draw, write" (see -gra

 Share arson 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/arson Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/arson">Etymology of arson by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of arson. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/arson Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of arson," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arson. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of arson." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arson. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of arson." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/arson (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near arson 
 arsehole 
 arsenal 
 arsenic 
 arse-smart 
 arseward 
 arson 
 arsonist 
 arsy-versy 
 art 
 art brut 
 art deco 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix