URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cathay
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:35:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cathay - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Cathay - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Cathay 

 Cathay (n.) 

 1560s, poetic name for "China," from Medieval Latin Cataya , from Turkish Khitai , from Uighur (Turkic) Khitai , name of a Tatar dynasty that ruled Beijing 936-1122.
 also from 1560s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Hong Kong 

 former British colony in China, from Cantonese pronunciation of Chinese Xianggang, literally "fragrant port." Perhaps so called from the scent of incense factories or opium cargoes, or from the semi-fresh waters of the bay. The Cantonese word hong, literally "row, series" was the

 Chinese 

 "of or pertaining to China," 1570s, from China + -ese. As a noun from c. 1600. Chinee (n.) is a vulgar back-formation from this word on the mistaken notion that Chinese is a plural. As an adjective, Chinian, Chinish also were used 16c. Chinese fire-drill "chaotic situation of man

 chain 

 c. 1300, "connected series of links of metal or other material," from Old French chaeine "chain" (12c., Modern French chane), from Latin catena "chain" (source also of Spanish cadena, Italian catena), which is of unknown origin, perhaps from a PIE root *kat- "to twist, twine" (so

 Peking 

 former transliteration of the name of the Chinese capital city, now (in the pinyin system) called Beijing. In the Wade-Giles system it was Peiping; the form Peking pre-dates Wade-Giles and was formed by the old British-run, Hong Kong-based Chinese postal system. Peking duck, "lar

 canton 

 1530s, "corner, angle," from French canton "angle, corner (of a room); piece, portion of a country" (13c.), from Italian (Lombard dialect) cantone "region," especially in the mountains, augmentative of Latin canto "section of a country," literally "corner" (see cant (n.2)). From 

 shanghai 

 "to drug or otherwise render a man unconscious and ship him as a sailor on a vessel wanting hands," 1854, American English, from the practice of kidnapping to fill the crews of ships making extended voyages, such as to the Chinese seaport of Shanghai. Transferred or general sense

 tuxedo 

 man's evening dress for semiformal occasions, 1889, named for Tuxedo Park, N.Y., a rural resort development for wealthy New Yorkers and site of a country club where it first was worn, supposedly in 1886. The name is an attractive subject for elaborate speculation, and connections

 labyrinth 

 c. 1400, laberynthe (late 14c. in Latinate form laborintus) "labyrinth, maze, great building with many corridors and turns," figuratively "bewildering arguments," from Latin labyrinthus, from Greek labyrinthos "maze, large building with intricate passages," especially the structu

 hyperbole 

 "obvious exaggeration in rhetoric," early 15c., from Latin hyperbole, from Greek hyperbole "exaggeration, extravagance," literally "a throwing beyond," from hyper- "beyond" (see hyper-) + bole "a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile, bolt, beam," from bol-, nominative ste

 superstition 

 early 13c., supersticioun, "false religious belief or system, worship of pagan gods; ignorant fear of the unknown and mysterious, irrational faith in supernatural powers," from Latin superstitionem (nominative superstitio) "prophecy, soothsaying; dread of the supernatural, excess

 Share Cathay 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cathay Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cathay">Etymology of Cathay by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Cathay. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cathay Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Cathay," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cathay. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Cathay." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cathay. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Cathay." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cathay (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Cathay 
 catfish 
 catgut 
 Cathar 
 catharsis 
 cathartic 
 Cathay 
 cat-head 
 cathected 
 cathedra 
 cathedral 
 Catherine 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix