URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/satrap
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:32:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Satrap - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Satrap - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of satrap 

 satrap (n.) 

 late 14c., in translations of the Old Testament, "the governor of a province of ancient Persia," from Latin satrapes , from Greek satrapēs , exatrapēs , from Old Persian xšathrapavan- , literally "guardian of the realm," from xšathra- "realm, province" (related to xšayathiya "king," cognate with Sanskrit kshatra ; see shah ) + pavan- "guardian" (from PIE root *pa- "to feed; to guard, protect").

 Extended by late 14c. to any autocratic superior, and figuratively to a despotic official under a tyrant, a sense, according to OED, also found in Medieval Latin and all the Romanic languages. Related: Satrapy (n.); satrapess (n.); satrapal; satrapial; satrapian .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to satrap 

 shah (n.) 

 title of the king of Persia, 1560s, shaw , from Persian shah "a king, the ruler of a land," shortened from Old Persian xšayathiya "king," from Indo-Iranian *ksayati "he has power over, rules" from PIE *tke- "to gain control of, gain power over" (source also of Sanskrit ksatram "dominion;" Greek krasthai "to acquire, get," kektesthai "to possess"). His wife is a shahbanu (from banu "lady"); his son is a shahzadah (from zadah "son").

 *pa- 

 *pā- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to protect, feed."

 It might form all or part of: antipasto ; appanage ; bannock ; bezoar ; companion ; company ; feed ; fodder ; food ; forage ; foray ; foster ; fur ; furrier ; impanate ; pabulum ; panatela ; panic (n.2) "type of grass;" pannier ; panocha ; pantry ; pastern ; pastor ; pasture ; pester ; repast ; satrap .

 It might also be the source of: Greek pateisthai "to feed;" Latin pabulum "food, fodder," panis "bread," pasci "to feed," pascare "to graze, pasture, feed," pastor "shepherd," literally "feeder;" Avestan pitu- "food;" Old Church Slavonic pasti "feed cattle, pasture;" Russian pishcha "food;" Old English foda , Gothic fodeins "food, nourishment."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mausoleum 

 massive marble tomb adorned with sculpture built 353 B.C.E. at Halicarnassus (Greek city in Asia Minor) for Mausolos, Persian satrap...

 governor 

 c. 1300, gouernour, "personal keeper, protector, guide;" late 14c., "one who governs, a ruler," from Old French governeor "prince, ruler, administrator; helmsman" (11c., Modern French gouverneur) and directly from Latin gubernatorem (nominative gubernator) "director, ruler, gover

 holy 

 Old English halig "holy, consecrated, sacred; godly; ecclesiastical," from Proto-Germanic *hailaga- (source also of Old Norse heilagr, Danish hellig, Old Frisian helich "holy," Old Saxon helag, Middle Dutch helich, Old High German heilag, German heilig, Gothic hailags "holy"), fr

 consult 

 "ask advice of, seek the opinion of as a guide to one's own judgment," 1520s, from French consulter (16c.), from Latin consultare "consult, take the advice of," frequentative of consulere "to take counsel, meet and consider," originally probably "to call together," as in consuler

 excruciate 

 "to torture, torment, inflict very severe pain on," as if by crucifying, 1560s, from Latin excruciatus, past participle of excruciare "to torture, torment, rack, plague;" figuratively "to afflict, harass, vex, torment," from ex "out, out from; thoroughly" (see ex-) + cruciare "ca

 drug 

 late 14c., drogge (early 14c. in Anglo-French), "any substance used in the composition or preparation of medicines," from Old French droge "supply, stock, provision" (14c.), which is of unknown origin. Perhaps it is from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German droge-vate "dry barrels,"

 cereal 

 1832, "grass yielding edible grain and cultivated for food," originally an adjective (1818) "having to do with edible grain," from French céréale (16c., "of Ceres;" 18c. in grain sense), from Latin Cerealis "of grain," originally "of Ceres," from Ceres, Italic goddess of agricult

 moral 

 mid-14c., "associated with or characterized by right behavior," also "associated with or concerning conduct or moral principles" (good or bad), from Old French moral (14c.) and directly from Latin moralis "proper behavior of a person in society," literally "pertaining to manners,

 peculiar 

 mid-15c., "belonging exclusively to one person," also "special, particular," from Old French peculiaire and directly from Latin peculiaris "of one's own (property)," from peculium "private property," literally "property in cattle" (in ancient times the most important form of prop

 opportunity 

 late 14c., opportunitie, "fit, convenient, or seasonable time," from Old French opportunite (13c.) and directly from Latin opportunitatem (nominative opportunitas) "fitness, convenience, suitableness, favorable time," from opportunus "fit, convenient, suitable, favorable," from t

 Share satrap 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/satrap Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/satrap">Etymology of satrap by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of satrap. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/satrap Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of satrap," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/satrap. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of satrap." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/satrap. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of satrap." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/satrap (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near satrap 
 satisfy 
 satisfying 
 satispassion 
 sativa 
 satori 
 satrap 
 sattva 
 saturable 
 saturate 
 saturation 
 Saturday 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix