URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alder
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:33:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alder 

 alder (n.) 

 tree related to the birch, Old English alor "alder," from Proto-Germanic *aliso (source also of Old Norse ölr , Danish elle , Swedish al , Dutch els , German erle ), from the ancient PIE name of the tree (source also of Russian olicha , Polish olcha , Latin alnus (French aune ), Lithuanian alksnis ), from root *el- (2) "red, brown," used in forming animal and tree names (see elk ).

 The unetymological -d- was added 14c.; the historical form aller survived until 18c. in literary English and persists in dialects, such as Lancashire owler , which is partly from Norse.

 Entries linking to alder 

 elk (n.) 

 late Old English elch , from Old Norse elgr or from an alteration of Old English elh , eolh (perhaps via French scribes), or possibly from Middle High German elch (OED's suggestion), all from Proto-Germanic *elkh- (source also of Old High German elaho ). The modern word "is not the normal phonetic representative" of the Old English one [OED].

 The Germanic words are related to the general word for "deer" in Balto-Slavic (such as Russian losu , Czech los ; also see eland ), from PIE *olki- , perhaps with reference to the reddish color from root *el- (2) "red, brown" (in animal and tree names); compare Sanskrit harina- "deer," from hari- "reddish-brown." Greek alke and Latin alces probably are Germanic loan-words. Applied to similar-looking but unrelated animals in North America. Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks founded N.Y.C. 1868, originally a society of actors and writers.

 Alamo 

 nickname of Franciscan Mission San Antonio de Valeroin (begun 1718, dissolved 1793) in San Antonio, Texas; American Spanish, literally "poplar" (in New Spain, also "cottonwood"), from alno "the black poplar," from Latin alnus "alder" (see alder ).

 Perhaps so called in reference to trees growing nearby (compare Alamogordo , New Mexico, literally "big poplar," and Spanish alameda "a shaded public walk with a row of trees on each side"); but the popular name seems to date from the period 1803-13, when the old mission building was the base for a Spanish cavalry company from the Mexican town of Alamo de Parras in Nueva Vizcaya.

 elder 
 Erl-king 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 elder 

 "more old," Old English (Mercian) eldra, comparative of eald, ald (see old); only English survival of umlaut in comparison. Superseded by older since 16c. Elder statesman (1921) originally was a translation of Japanese genro (plural)....type of berry tree, c. 1400, from earlier e

 tree 

 Old English treo, treow "tree" (also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake"), from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o-, suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with speci

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic *widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu- "tree, wood" (source als

 elf 

 "one of a race of powerful supernatural beings in Germanic folklore," Old English elf (Mercian, Kentish), ælf (Northumbrian), ylfe (plural, West Saxon) "sprite, fairy, goblin, incubus," from Proto-Germanic *albiz (source also of Old Saxon alf, Old Norse alfr, German alp "evil spi

 scepter 

 "staff of office peculiar to royalty or independent sovereignty," c. 1300, ceptre, from Old French ceptre, sceptre (12c.) and directly from Latin sceptrum "royal staff," from Greek skēptron "staff to lean on," in a Persian and Asian context, "royal scepter," in transferred use, "

 confidence 

 c. 1400, "assurance or belief in the good will, veracity, etc. of another," from Old French confidence or directly from Latin confidentia, from confidentem (nominative confidens) "firmly trusting, bold," present participle of confidere "to have full trust or reliance," from assim

 harbinger 

 late 15c., herbengar "one sent ahead to arrange lodgings" (for a monarch, an army, etc.), alteration of Middle English herberger "provider of shelter, innkeeper" (late 12c.), from Old French herbergeor "one who offers lodging, innkeeper," agent noun from herbergier "provide lodgi

 covenant 

 c. 1300, covenaunt, "mutual compact to do or not do something, a contract," from Old French covenant, convenant "agreement, pact, promise" (12c.), originally present participle of covenir "agree, meet," from Latin convenire "come together, unite; be suitable, agree," from com- "t

 courage 

 c. 1300, corage, "heart (as the seat of emotions)," hence "spirit, temperament, state or frame of mind,"from Old French corage "heart, innermost feelings; temper" (12c., Modern French courage), from Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin 

 Maranatha 

 late 14c., "at the coming of the Lord," a Bible word, from Greek maranatha, a Greek form of an untranslated Aramaic (Semitic) word in I Corinthians xvi.22, where it follows Greek anathema (with which it has no grammatical connection), and therefore has been taken as part of a phr

 Share alder 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alder Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alder">Etymology of alder by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alder. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alder Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alder," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alder. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alder." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alder. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alder." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alder (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alder 
 Alcoran 
 alcove 
 Alcyone 
 Aldebaran 
 aldehyde 
 alder 
 alderman 
 Aldine 
 aldosterone 
 ale 
 aleatory 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close