URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/microbe
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:27:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Microbe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Microbe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of microbe 

 microbe (n.) 

 popular name for a bacterium or other extremely small living being, 1878, from French microbe , "badly coined ... by Sédillot" [Weekley] in 1878 from Latinized form of Greek mikros "small" (see micro- ) + bios "life" (from PIE root *gwei- "to live"). Intended to mean literally "a small living being," the use of bios is incorrect, as in modern science generally (see bio- ); in Greek the compound would mean "short-lived."
 also from 1878 

 Entries linking to microbe 

 microbial (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to microbes," 1879, from Modern Latin microbion (see microbe ) + -al (1).

 bio- 

 word-forming element, especially in scientific compounds, meaning "life, life and," or "biology, biology and," or "biological, of or pertaining to living organisms or their constituents," from Greek bios "one's life, course or way of living, lifetime" (as opposed to zōē "animal life, organic life"), from PIE root *gwei- "to live."

 The correct usage is that in biography , but since c. 1800 in modern science it has been extended to mean "organic life," as zoo- , the better choice, is restricted in modern use to animal, as opposed to plant, life. Both are from the same PIE root. Compare biology . In the New Testament bios means "period or duration of life, means of life, manner of life."

 *gwei- 
 micro- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bug 

 "insect, beetle," 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably (but not certainly) from or influenced by Middle English bugge "something frightening, scarecrow" (late 14c.), a word or meaning that has become obsolete since the "insect" sense arose, except

 germ 

 mid-15c., "bud, sprout;" 1640s, "rudiment of a new organism in an existing one," from French germe "germ (of egg); bud, seed, fruit; offering," from Latin germen (genitive germinis) "spring, offshoot; sprout, bud," which is of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *gene- "give 

 law 

 Old English lagu (plural laga, combining form lah-) "ordinance, rule prescribed by authority, regulation; district governed by the same laws;" also sometimes "right, legal privilege," from Old Norse *lagu "law," collective plural of lag "layer, measure, stroke," literally "someth

 Saturday 

 seventh or last day of the week, Old English sæterdæg, sæternesdæg, literally "day of the planet Saturn," from Sæternes (genitive of Sætern; see Saturn) + Old English dæg (see day). Partial loan-translation of Latin Saturni dies "Saturn's day" (compare Dutch Zaterdag, Old Frisian

 curmudgeon 

 "churlish, miserly fellow, mean man," 1570s, of unknown origin. Drant (1568) translating Gregory of Nazianus, calls someone "a bolde curmogine chuffe." Liberman says the word "must have been borrowed from Gaelic" (and references muigean "disagreeable person"), with variant spelli

 device 

 c. 1300, devis, "intent, desire; an expressed intent or desire; a plan or design; a literary composition," from Old French devis "division, separation; disposition, wish, desire; coat of arms, emblem; a bequest in a will, act of bequeathing," from deviser "arrange, plan, contrive

 vaccination 

 1800, used by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) for the technique he publicized of preventing smallpox by injecting people with the similar but much milder cowpox virus (variolae vaccinae), from vaccine (adj.) "pertaining to cows, from cows" (1798), from Latin vaccinus 

 statistics 

 1770, "science dealing with data about the condition of a state or community" [Barnhart], from German Statistik, popularized and perhaps coined by German political scientist Gottfried Achenwall (1719-1772) in his "Vorbereitung zur Staatswissenschaft" (1748), from Modern Latin sta

 sabbatical 

 1590s, "recurring in sevens or on every seventh;" 1640s, "of or suitable for the Sabbath," from Latin sabbaticus, from Greek sabbatikos "of the Sabbath," from sabbaton (see Sabbath). By 1836 as "characterized by rest or cessation from labor or tillage." Other adjectives from Sabb

 remorse 

 "intense and painful self-condemnation and penitence due to consciousness of guilt; the pain of a guilty conscience," late 14c., from Old French remors (Modern French remords) and directly from Medieval Latin remorsum "a biting back or in return," noun use of neuter past particip

 Share microbe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/microbe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/microbe">Etymology of microbe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of microbe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/microbe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of microbe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/microbe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of microbe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/microbe. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of microbe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/microbe (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near microbe 
 Mickey Finn 
 Mickey Mouse 
 mickle 
 Micmac 
 micro- 
 microbe 
 microbial 
 microbiologist 
 microbiology 
 microcephalic 
 microchip 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix