URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dinar
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:51:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dinar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dinar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dinar 

 dinar (n.) 

 Middle Eastern unit of currency; generic name of Arab gold coins, 1630s, from Arabic dinar , originally the name of a gold coin issued by the caliphs of Damascus, from late Greek denarion , from Latin denarius (see denarius ).
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to dinar 

 denarius (n.) 

 ancient Roman silver coin, 1570s, from Latin denarius , noun use of adjective meaning "containing ten," and short for denarius nummus "the coin containing ten (aces)," from deni- "by tens," from decem "ten" (from PIE root *dekm- "ten"). In English money reckoning, "a penny," this having been, like the Roman denarius, the largest silver coin (hence d for "pence" in l.s.d. ).

 *dekm- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "ten."

 It might form all or part of: cent ; centenarian ; centenary ; centi- ; centime ; centurion ; century ; centennial ; cinquecento ; dean ; deca- ; decade ; decagon ; Decalogue ; Decameron ; decapod ; decathlon ; December ; decennial ; deci- ; decile ; decimal ; decimate ; decimation ; decuple ; decussate ; denarius ; denier (n.) "French coin;" dicker ; dime ; dinar ; doyen ; dozen ; duodecimal ; duodecimo ; eighteen ; fifteen ; fourteen ; hecatomb ; hendeca- ; hundred ; icosahedron ; nineteen ; nonagenarian ; octogenarian ; Pentecost ; percent ; quattrocento ; Septuagint ; sexagenarian ; seventeen ; sixteen ; ten ; tenth ; thirteen ; thousand ; tithe ; -ty (1).

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dasa , Avestan dasa , Armenian tasn , Greek deka , Latin decem (source of Spanish diez , French dix ), Old Church Slavonic deseti , Lithuanian dešimt , Old Irish deich , Breton dek , Welsh deg , Albanian djetu , Old English ten , Old High German zehan , Gothic taihun "ten."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 regret 

  late 14c., regreten, "to look back with distress or sorrowful longing; to grieve for on remembering," from Old French regreter "long after, bewail, lament someone's death; ask the help of" (Modern French regretter), from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + -greter, which is 

 faith 

 mid-13c., faith, feith, fei, fai "faithfulness to a trust or promise; loyalty to a person; honesty, truthfulness," from Anglo-French and Old French feid, foi "faith, belief, trust, confidence; pledge" (11c.), from Latin fides "trust, faith, confidence, reliance, credence, belief,

 frank 

 c. 1300, "free, liberal, generous;" 1540s, "outspoken," from Old French franc "free (not servile); without hindrance, exempt from; sincere, genuine, open, gracious, generous; worthy, noble, illustrious" (12c.), from Medieval Latin francus "free, at liberty, exempt from service," 

 maverick 

 1867, "calf or yearling found without an owner's brand," a word from the great cattle ranches of the American West, so called for Samuel A. Maverick (1803-1870), Texas cattle owner who was notoriously negligent in branding his calves. All neat stock found running at large in thi

 father 

 Middle English fader, from Old English fæder "he who begets a child, nearest male ancestor;" also "any lineal male ancestor; the Supreme Being," and by late Old English, "one who exercises parental care over another," from Proto-Germanic *fader (source also of Old Saxon fadar, Ol

 address 

 early 14c., "to guide, aim, or direct," from Old French adrecier "go straight toward; straighten, set right; point, direct" (13c.), from Vulgar Latin *addirectiare "make straight" (source also of Spanish aderezar, Italian addirizzare), from ad "to" (see ad-) + *directiare "make s

 conversion 

 mid-14c., originally of religion, "a radical and complete change in spirit, purpose, and direction of life away from sin and toward love of God," from Old French conversion "change, transformation, entry into religious life; way of life, behavior; dwelling, residence; sexual inte

 miracle 

 mid-12c., "a wondrous work of God," from Old French miracle (11c.) "miracle, story of a miracle, miracle play," from Latin miraculum "object of wonder" (in Church Latin, "marvelous event caused by God"), from mirari "to wonder at, marvel, be astonished," figuratively "to regard, 

 psychology 

 1650s, "the study of the soul," from Modern Latin psychologia, probably coined mid-16c. in Germany by Melanchthon from Latinized form of Greek psykhē "breath, spirit, soul" (see psyche) + logia "study of" (see -logy). The meaning "science or study of the phenomena of the mind" is

 Messiah 

 c. 1300, Messias, a designation of Jesus as the savior of the world, from Late Latin Messias, from Greek Messias, from Aramaic (Semitic) meshiha and Hebrew mashiah "the anointed" (of the Lord), from mashah "anoint." It is thus the Hebrew equivalent of Christ, and it is the word r

 Share dinar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dinar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dinar">Etymology of dinar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dinar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dinar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dinar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dinar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dinar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dinar. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dinar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dinar (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dinar 
 dimorphous 
 dimple 
 dimwit 
 din 
 Dinah 
 dinar 
 Dinaric 
 dine 
 diner 
 dinero 
 dinette 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix