URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiquette
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Etiquette - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Etiquette - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of etiquette 

 etiquette (n.) 

 1750, from French étiquette "prescribed behavior," from Old French estiquette "label, ticket" (see ticket (n.)).

 The sense development in French perhaps is from small cards written or printed with instructions for how to behave properly at court (compare Italian etichetta , Spanish etiqueta ), and/or from behavior instructions written on a soldier's billet for lodgings (the main sense of the Old French word).
 also from 1750 

 Entries linking to etiquette 

 ticket (n.) 

 1520s, "short note or document," from a shortened form of French etiquet "label, note," from Old French estiquette "a little note" (late 14c.), especially one affixed to a gate or wall as a public notice, literally "something stuck (up or on)," from estiquer "to affix, stick on, attach," from Frankish *stikkan , cognate with Old English stician "to pierce," from Proto-Germanic *stikken "to be stuck," stative form from PIE *steig- "to stick; pointed" (see stick (v.)).

 Compare etiquette . Especially a written or printed card or paper slip affixed to something to indicate the contents, nature, price, or give some special notice. The specific meaning "card or piece of paper that gives its holder a right or privilege, token or evidence of a right or contract privilege or evidence of debt" is by 1670s, probably developing from the sense of "certificate, licence, permit."

 The political sense of "list of candidates put forward by a faction or party" has been used in American English since 1711. The meaning "official notification of an offense" is from 1930.

 Big ticket item is from 1953, in reference to price tickets. Slang the ticket "the right or correct thing, what is expected" is recorded from 1838 (Halliburton), perhaps with notion of a winning lottery ticket.

 netiquette (n.) 

 "proper style and manners in communicating on the internet," 1993, coined punningly from net , short for internet + etiquette .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Chesterfield 

 Philip Stanhope, the fourth Earl of Chesterfield, (1694-1773) was the writer on manners and etiquette....

 comme il faut 

 "according to etiquette," 1756, French, literally "as it should be."...

 quarter-deck 

 colloquial nautical noun quarter-decker (by 1867) "an officer who is more looked upon as a stickler for small points of etiquette...

 beau 

 The meaning "man who attends excessively to dress, etiquette, etc.; a fop; a dandy" is from 1680s, short for French beau...

 fuss 

 Scott is said to be as particular in matters of etiquette and dress as Gen. Taylor is careless....

 hi 

 ["The New Emily Post's Etiquette," 1922] Extended form hiya attested from 1940....

 protocol 

 signed by friendly powers to secure certain ends by peaceful means), and finally, in French, to "formula of diplomatic etiquette...

 lure 

 early 14c., "something which allures or entices, an attraction" (a figurative use), originally the name of a device for recalling a hawk, from Anglo-French lure, Old French loirre "device used to recall hawks, lure," from Frankish *lothr or some other Germanic source, from Proto-

 rule 

 c. 1200, "principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed" from Old French riule, Norman reule "rule, custom, (religious) order" (in Modern French partially re-Latinized as règle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula "straight stick, bar,

 prerogative 

 "special right or privilege granted to someone; characteristic right inhering in one's nature, office, or position," late 14c., prerogatif, (in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Old French prerogative (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin prerogativa "special right," from Latin

 Share etiquette 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiquette Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiquette">Etymology of etiquette by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of etiquette. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiquette Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of etiquette," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiquette. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of etiquette." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiquette. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of etiquette." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiquette (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near etiquette 
 ethylene 
 etic 
 -etic 
 etiolate 
 etiology 
 etiquette 
 Etna 
 Eton 
 Etruscan 
 Etta 
 -ette 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix