URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosque
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T15:57:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mosque - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mosque - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mosque 

 mosque (n.) 

 "Islamic place of worship and the ecclesiastical organization connected with it," 1717, earlier moseak (c. 1400), also mosquee (16c.), probably in part from French mosquée , from Italian moschea , earlier moscheta , from Spanish mesquita (modern mezquita ), from Arabic masjid "temple, place of worship," from sajada "he worshipped" + prefix ma- denoting "place." Mangled in Middle English as muskey , moseache , etc.
 also from 1717 

 Entries linking to mosque 

 masjid (n.) 

 Islamic place of worship; see mosque .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Parthenon 

 The temple was completed about 438 B.C.E., later served as a church and then a mosque under the Turks, and was shattered...

 synagogue 

 "the regular public worship of the Jews," also the building in which this is done, from Old French sinagoge "synagogue, mosque...

 purpose 

 c. 1300, purpus, "intention, aim, goal; object to be kept in view; proper function for which something exists," from Anglo-French purpos, Old French porpos "an aim, intention" (12c.), from porposer "to put forth," from por- "forth" (from a variant of Latin pro- "forth;" see pur-)

 tank 

 1610s, "pool or lake for irrigation or drinking water," a word originally brought by the Portuguese from India, from a Hindi source, such as Gujarati tankh "cistern, underground reservoir for water," Marathi tanken, or tanka "reservoir of water, tank." Perhaps it is ultimately fr

 enterprise 

 early 15c., "an undertaking," formerly also enterprize, from Old French enterprise "an undertaking," noun use of fem. past participle of entreprendre "undertake, take in hand" (12c.), from entre- "between" (see entre-) + prendre "to take," contraction of prehendere "to catch hold

 constitution 

 mid-14c., constitucioun, "law, regulation, edict; body of rules, customs, or laws," from Old French constitucion (12c.) "constitution, establishment," and directly from Latin constitutionem (nominative constitutio) "act of settling, settled condition, anything arranged or settled

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 carbohydrate 

 general name for a group of organic compounds consisting of carbon atoms in multiples of 6 and hydrogen and oxygen in the proportion of water, 1851, from carbo-, combining form of carbon, + hydrate (n.), denoting compound produced when certain substances combine with water, from 

 deserve 

 mid-13c., "to merit, be worthy of for qualities or actions," from Old French deservir (Modern French desservir) "deserve, be worthy of, earn, merit" and directly from Latin deservire "serve well, serve zealously," from de- "completely" (see de-) + servire "to serve" (see serve (v

 catharsis 

 1770, "a bodily purging" (especially of the bowels), from Latinized form of Greek katharsis "purging, cleansing," from stem of kathairein "to purify, purge," from katharos "pure, clear of dirt, clean, spotless; open, free; clear of shame or guilt; purified" (with most of the exte

 Share mosque 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosque Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosque">Etymology of mosque by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mosque. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosque Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mosque," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosque. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mosque." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosque. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mosque." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosque (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mosque 
 Moselle 
 Moses 
 mosey 
 mosh 
 Moslem 
 mosque 
 mosquito 
 moss 
 mossback 
 mossy 
 most 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix