URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/room
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:30:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Room - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Room - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of room 

 room (n.) 

 Middle English roum , from Old English rum "space, extent; sufficient space, fit occasion (to do something)," from Proto-Germanic *ruman (source also of Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic rum , German Raum "space," Dutch ruim "hold of a ship, nave"), nouns formed from Germanic adjective *ruma- "roomy, spacious," from PIE root *reue- (1) "to open; space" (source also of Avestan ravah- "space," Latin rus "open country," Old Irish roi , roe "plain field," Old Church Slavonic ravinu "level," Russian ravnina "a plain").

 Old English also had a frequent adjective rum "roomy, wide, long, spacious," also an adverb, rumlice "bigly, corpulently" (Middle English roumli ).

 The meaning "chamber, cabin" is recorded by early 14c. as a nautical term; applied by mid-15c. to interior division of a building separated by walls or partitions; the Old English word for this was cofa , ancestor of cove . The sense of "persons assembled in a room" is by 1712.

 Make room "open a passage, make way" is from mid-15c. Room-service is attested from 1913; room-temperature , comfortable for the occupants of a room, is so called from 1879. Roomth "sufficient space" (1530s, with -th (2)) now is obsolete.

 room (v.) 

 "to occupy a room or rooms" (especially with another) as a lodger," by 1825 (implied in roomed ), from room (n.). Related: Rooming . Rooming-house , "house which lets furnished apartments," is by 1889, according to OED "chiefly U.S. " In Old English ( rumian ) and Middle English the verb meant "become clear of obstacles; make clear of, evict."
 also from 1825 

 Entries linking to room 

 cove (n.1) 

 early 14c., "den, cave, hollow nook," from Old English cofa "small chamber, cell," from Proto-Germanic *kubon (compare Old High German kubisi "tent, hut," German Koben "pigsty," Old Norse kofi "hut, shed").

 The extension of meaning to "small bay, inlet, or creek" is from 1580s, apparently via Scottish dialectal meaning "small hollow place in coastal rocks" (a survival of an Old English secondary sense). Also in early Middle English, "chamber, closet, pantry," hence the legal phrase cove and keie "right of the mistress of a household to control 'pantry and key,'" that is, to manage the household (late 13c.).

 ballroom (n.) 

 also ball-room , "a room designed or set aside for dancing parties," 1724, from ball (n.2) + room (n.). Ballroom dancing is attested by 1872.

 bar-room 
 bathroom 
 bedroom 
 boardroom 
 classroom 
 cloak-room 
 courtroom 
 dark-room 
 family-room 
 guest-room 
 headroom 
 homeroom 
 lebensraum 
 leg-room 
 living room 
 newsroom 
 pressroom 
 ream 
 See All Related Words (41) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bathroom 

 also bath-room, 1780, from bath + room (n.). Originally a room with apparatus for bathing (the only definition in "Century Dictionary," 1902); it came to be used 20c. in U.S. as a euphemism for a lavatory and often is noted as a word that confuses British travelers. To go to the 

 ream 

 standard commercial measure of paper, rem, mid-14c., from Old French reyme, from Spanish resma, from Arabic rizmah "bundle" (of paper), from rasama "collect into a bundle." The Moors brought manufacture of cotton paper to Spain. The exact path of transmission of the word to Engli

 board 

 "piece of timber sawn flat and thin, longer than it is wide, wider than it is thick, narrower than a plank;" Old English bord "a plank, flat surface," from Proto-Germanic *burdam (source also of Old Norse borð "plank," Dutch bord "board," Gothic fotu-baurd "foot-stool," German Br

 stove 

 mid-15c., "heated room, bath-room," from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch stove, both meaning "heated room," which was the...original sense in English; a general West Germanic word (Old English stofa "bath-room," which seems not to have survived..., Old High German stuba, German Stube "sitting room")....Of uncertain relationship to similar words in Romance languages (Italian stufa, French étuve "sweating-room;" see stew (v...

 cenacle 

 "dining room," usually with reference to the room in which the Last Supper was held, c. 1400, from Old French cenacle, learned...variant of cenaille (14c., Modern French cénacle), from Latin cenaculum "dining room," from cena "mid-day meal, afternoon...Latin cenaculum was used in the Vulgate for the "upper room" where the Last Supper was eaten....

 vestry 

 mid-15c., probably from Anglo-French *vesterie, from Old French vestiaire "room for vestments, dressing room" (12c.), from...Often also a meeting room for the transaction of parish business, and retained in non-liturgical churches as the name of...a separate room used for Sunday school, prayer meetings, etc., hence transferred secular use (as in vestryman, 1610s)....

 cellar 

 early 13c., "store room," from Anglo-French celer, Old French celier "cellar, underground passage" (12c., Modern French cellier...), from Latin cellarium "pantry, storeroom," literally "group of cells;" which is either directly from cella "small room,...store-room" (from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover, conceal, save"), or from noun use of neuter of adjective cellarius "pertaining...The sense "room under a house or other building, mostly underground and used for storage" gradually emerged in late Middle...

 odor 

 c. 1300, "sweet smell, scent, fragrance," from Anglo-French odour, from Old French odor "smell, perfume, fragrance" (12c., Modern French odeur) and directly from Latin odor "a smell, a scent" (pleasant or disagreeable), from PIE root *hed- "to smell" (source also of Latin olere "

 door 

 "movable barrier, commonly on hinges, for closing a passage into a building, room, or other enclosure," c. 1200, a Middle English merger of two Old English words, both with the general sense of "door, gate": dor (neuter; plural doru) "large door, gate," and duru (fem., plural dur

 rood 

 Middle English rode, "a cross; a crucifix," especially a large one, from Old English rod "cross," especially that upon which Christ suffered, from Proto-Germanic *rod- (source also of Old Saxon ruoda "stake, pile, cross," Old Norse roða, Old Frisian rode, Middle Dutch roede, Old 

 Share room 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/room Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/room">Etymology of room by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of room. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/room Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of room," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/room. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of room." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/room. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of room." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/room (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near room 
 rooftop 
 rooibos 
 rook 
 rookery 
 rookie 
 room 
 roomer 
 roommate 
 roomy 
 roose 
 Roosevelt 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix