URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenal
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Arsenal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Arsenal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of arsenal 

 arsenal (n.) 

 c. 1500, "dockyard, dock with naval stores," from Italian arzenale , from Arabic dar as-sina'ah "workshop," literally "house of manufacture," from dar "house" + sina'ah "art, craft, skill," from sana'a "he made."

 The word was applied by the Venetians to a large wharf in their city, and English picked it up in this sense. The meaning "public place for making or storing weapons and ammunition" is from 1570s. The London football club (1886) was named for the Royal Arsenal , Woolwich, where the original players worked.
 also from c. 1500 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 armory 

 c. 1300, armurie, "arms and weapons collectively; defensive armor;" see arm (n.2) + -ory and compare Old French armeurerie, armoirie. The meaning "place where arms are manufactured" is from mid-15c. (see armor + -y (1)). Also in Middle English as "arsenal, storehouse of weapons" 

 flirt 

 To flirt a fan (1660s) was to snap it open or closed with a brisk jerk and was long considered part of the coquette's arsenal...

 soldier 

 .; such as alert, arsenal, colonel, infantrie, sentinel....

 understand 

 Old English understandan "to comprehend, grasp the idea of, receive from a word or words or from a sign the idea it is intended to convey; to view in a certain way," probably literally "stand in the midst of," from under + standan "to stand" (see stand (v.)). If this is the meani

 vaccination 

 1800, used by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) for the technique he publicized of preventing smallpox by injecting people with the similar but much milder cowpox virus (variolae vaccinae), from vaccine (adj.) "pertaining to cows, from cows" (1798), from Latin vaccinus 

 remedy 

 c. 1200, remedie, "means of counteracting sin or evil of any kind; cure for a vice or temptation;" late 14c., "a cure for a disease or disorder, medicine or process which restores health;" from Anglo-French remedie, Old French remede "remedy, cure" (12c., Modern French remède) an

 afflict 

 late 14c., "to cast down" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare "to damage, harass, torment," frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) "to dash down, overthrow," from ad "to" (see ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) "to strike.

 deserve 

 mid-13c., "to merit, be worthy of for qualities or actions," from Old French deservir (Modern French desservir) "deserve, be worthy of, earn, merit" and directly from Latin deservire "serve well, serve zealously," from de- "completely" (see de-) + servire "to serve" (see serve (v

 Share arsenal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenal">Etymology of arsenal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of arsenal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of arsenal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of arsenal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenal. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of arsenal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/arsenal (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near arsenal 
 arrow-head 
 arrow-root 
 arroyo 
 arse 
 arsehole 
 arsenal 
 arsenic 
 arse-smart 
 arseward 
 arson 
 arsonist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix