URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mithras
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:00:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mithras - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Mithras - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Mithras 

 Mithras 

 ancient Persian god of light or the sun, eventually regarded as ruler of the material and spiritual universe, 1550s, from Latin, from Greek Mithras , from Avestan Mithra- , from Indo-Iranian *mitram "contract," whence *mitras "contractual partner, friend," conceptualized as a god, or, according to Kent, first the epithet of a divinity and eventually his name. Perhaps from PIE root *mei- (1) "to change; exchange," on the notion of "god of the contract" [Watkins].

 Related to Sanskrit Mitrah , a Vedic deity associated with Varuna. "His name is one of the earliest Indic words we possess, being found in clay tablets from Anatolia dating to about 1500 B.C." [Calvert Watkins, "Dictionary of Indo-European Roots," 2000]. His worship was adopted by the Romans and enjoyed great popularity in the early empire. Related: Mithraic ; Mithraism .
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to Mithras 

 *mei- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to change, go, move," "with derivatives referring to the exchange of goods and services within a society as regulated by custom or law" [Watkins].

 It might form all or part of: amiss ; amoeba ; azimuth ; common ; commune ; communicate ; communication ; communism ; commute ; congee ; demean ; emigrate ; emigration ; excommunicate ; excommunication ; immune ; immutable ; incommunicado ; mad ; mean (adj.1) "low-quality;" mew (n.2) "cage;" mews ; migrate ; migration ; mis- (1) "bad, wrong;" mistake ; Mithras ; molt ; Mstislav ; municipal ; munificent ; mutable ; mutant ; mutate ; mutation ; mutatis mutandis ; mutual ; permeable ; permeate ; permutation ; permute ; remunerate ; remuneration ; transmutation ; transmute ; zenith .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit methati "changes, alternates, joins, meets;" Avestan mitho "perverted, false;" Hittite mutai- "be changed into;" Latin mutare "to change," meare "to go, pass," migrare "to move from one place to another," mutuus "done in exchange;" Old Church Slavonic mite "alternately;" Czech mijim "to go by, pass by," Polish mijać "avoid;" Gothic maidjan "to change."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 steward 

 Middle English steuard, steward, "official in charge of the domestic affairs of a (large) household," from Old English stiward, stigweard "one who has charge of the affairs of the household or estate of another," from stig "hall, pen for cattle, part of a house" (see sty (n.1)) +

 resilience 

 1620s, "act of rebounding or springing back," often of immaterial things, from Latin resiliens, present participle of resilire "to rebound, recoil," from re- "back" (see re-) + salire "to jump, leap" (see salient (adj.)). Compare result (v.). In physical sciences, the meaning "el

 lynch 

 1835, "inflict severe (but not deliberately fatal) bodily punishment (on someone) without legal sanction," from earlier Lynch law (1811), in reference to such activity, which was likely named after William Lynch (1742-1820) of Pittsylvania, Virginia, who c. 1780 led a vigilance c

 John Doe 

 fictitious plaintiff in a legal action, attested from 1768 (in Blackstone). The fictitious defendant was Richard Roe. If female, Jane Doe, Jane Roe. Replaced earlier John-a-nokes (1530s) or Jack Nokes, who usually was paired with John-a-stiles or Tom Stiles. Also used of plaintif

 presume 

 late 14c., presumen, "to take upon oneself, to take liberty," also "to take for granted, believe or accept upon probable evidence, presuppose," especially overconfidently, from Old French presumer (12c.) and directly from Latin praesumere "anticipate," in Late Latin, "assume," fr

 log 

 unshaped large piece of tree, early 14c., of unknown origin. Old Norse had lag "felled tree" (from stem of liggja "to lie," hence "a tree that lies prostrate"), but many etymologists deny on phonological grounds that this can be the root of English log. Instead, they suggest an i

 conspicuous 

 1540s, "open to view, catching the eye," from Latin conspicuus "visible, open to view; attracting attention, striking," from conspicere "to look at, observe, see, notice," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + specere "to look at" (from PIE

 balance 

 early 13c., "scales, apparatus for weighing by comparison of mass," from Old French balance "balance, scales for weighing" (12c.), also in figurative sense; from Medieval Latin bilancia, from Late Latin bilanx, from Latin (libra) bilanx "(scale) having two pans," possibly from La

 plague 

 late 14c., plage, "affliction, calamity, evil, scourge, severe trouble or vexation;" early 15c., "malignant disease," from Old French plage (14c., Modern French plaie), from Late Latin plaga "affliction; slaughter, destruction," used in Vulgate for "pestilence," from Latin plaga 

 family 

 early 15c., "servants of a household," from Latin familia "family servants, domestics collectively, the servants in a household," thus also "members of a household, the estate, property; the household, including relatives and servants," abstract noun formed from famulus "servant,

 Share Mithras 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mithras Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mithras">Etymology of Mithras by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Mithras. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mithras Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Mithras," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mithras. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Mithras." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mithras. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Mithras." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mithras (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Mithras 
 misuse 
 MIT 
 Mitchell 
 mite 
 miter 
 Mithras 
 mithridate 
 mithril 
 mitigable 
 mitigant 
 mitigate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix