URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rabbi
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:15:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rabbi - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rabbi - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rabbi 

 rabbi (n.) 

 "Jewish doctor of religious law," early 14c. (in late Old English in biblical context only, as a form of address); in Middle English as a title prefixed to personal names, also "a spiritual master" generally; from Late Latin rabbi , from Greek rhabbi , from Mishnaic Hebrew rabbi "my master."

 This is formed from -i , first person singular pronominal suffix, + rabh "master, great one," title of respect for Jewish doctors of law. This is from the Semitic root r-b-b "to be great or numerous" (compare robh "multitude;" Aramaic rabh "great; chief, master, teacher;" Arabic rabba "was great," rabb "master").
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to rabbi 

 rabbinical (adj.) 

 "pertaining to rabbis or their language, learning, or opinions," 1620s, earlier rabbinic (1610s); see rabbi + -ical . The -n- is perhaps via rabbin "rabbi" (1520s), an alternative form, from French rabbin or directly from Medieval Latin rabbinus (also source of Italian rabbino , Spanish and Portuguese rabino ), perhaps from a presumed Semitic plural in -n , or from Aramaic rabban "our teacher," "distinguishing title given to patriarchs and the presidents of the Sanhedrin since the time of Gamaliel the Elder" [Klein], from Aramaic plural of noun use of rabh "great."

 rebbe (n.) 

 "a rabbi," 1881, from Yiddish, from Hebrew rabbi (see rabbi ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 title 

 c. 1300, "inscription, heading," from Old French title "title or chapter of a book; position; legal permit" (12c., Modern French titre, by dissimilation), and in part from Old English titul, both from Latin titulus "inscription, label, ticket, placard, heading; honorable appellat

 nation 

 c. 1300, nacioun, "a race of people, large group of people with common ancestry and language," from Old French nacion "birth, rank; descendants, relatives; country, homeland" (12c.) and directly from Latin nationem (nominative natio) "birth, origin; breed, stock, kind, species; r

 Rubicon 

 in the figurative phrase cross (or pass) the Rubicon "take a decisive step," 1620s, a reference to a small stream to the Adriatic on the coast of northern Italy which in ancient times formed part of the southern boundary of Cisalpine Gaul. It was crossed by Caesar, Jan. 10, 49 B.

 serve 

 late 12c., serven, "to render habitual obedience to, owe allegiance to," also "minister, give aid, give help," from Old French servir "to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with," from Latin servire "be a servant, be in service, be enslave

 dyslexia 

 "a difficulty in reading due to a condition of the brain," 1885, from German dyslexie (1883), from Greek dys- "bad, abnormal, difficult" (see dys-) + lexis "word" (taken as "reading"), from legein "speak" (from PIE root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives meaning "to

 sincere 

 1530s, "pure, unmixed, unadulterated;" also "free from pretense or falsehood," from French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus, of things, "whole, clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed," figuratively "sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful" (unadulterated by deceit), a word of un

 quarry 

 [what is hunted] early 14c., quirre "entrails of deer placed on the hide and given to dogs of the chase as a reward," from Anglo-French quirreie, Old French cuiriee "the spoil, quarry" (Modern French curée), altered (by influence of Old French cuir "skin," from Latin corium "hide

 prayer 

 c. 1300, preiere, "earnest request, entreaty, petition," also "the practice of praying or of communing with God," from Old French prier "prayer, petition, request" (12c., Modern French prière), from Medieval Latin precaria "petition, prayer," noun use of Latin adjective precaria,

 period 

 early 15c., periode, "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle of the Greek games," from Greek perio

 treadmill 

 invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill (n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s. As a corrective punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the pris

 Share rabbi 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rabbi Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rabbi">Etymology of rabbi by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rabbi. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rabbi Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rabbi," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rabbi. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rabbi." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rabbi. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rabbi." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rabbi (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rabbi 
 R.O.T.C. 
 R.S.V.P. 
 Ra 
 Rabat 
 rabbet 
 rabbi 
 rabbinate 
 rabbinical 
 rabbit 
 rabble 
 rabble-rouser 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix