URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bid
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:14:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bid 

 bid (v.) 

 probably an early Middle English mutual influence or confusion of two older words: The sense in bid farewell is from Old English biddan "to ask, entreat, beg, pray, beseech; order" (class V strong verb, past tense bæd , past participle beden ), from Proto-Germanic *bedjanan "to pray, entreat" (source also of German bitten "to ask," attested in Old High German from 8c., also Old Saxon biddian , Old Frisian bidda "ask, request command," Old Norse biðja , Gothic bidjan "request"). This, according to Kluge and Watkins, is from a PIE root *gwhedh- "to ask, pray" (see bead (n.)).

 To bid at an auction, meanwhile, is from Old English beodan "offer, proclaim" (class II strong verb; past tense bead , past participle boden ), from Proto-Germanic *beudanan "to stretch out, reach out, offer, present," (source also of German bieten "to offer," Old High German biatan , also Old Saxon biodan , Old Frisian biada , Old Norse bjoða , Gothic anabiudan "to command"). This is (with a shift of meaning) from PIE root *bheudh- "be aware, make aware" (source also of bode (v.)).

 bid (n.) 

 1788, "an offer of a price," from bid (v.). From 1880 in card-playing.
 also from 1788 

 Entries linking to bid 

 bead (n.) 

 mid-14c., bede , "prayer bead," from Old English gebed "prayer," with intensive or collective prefix *ge- + Proto-Germanic *bidam "entreaty." This reconstructed word is also the source of Middle Dutch bede , Old High German beta , German bitte , Gothic bida "prayer, request," which according to Watkins is from a PIE root *gwhedh- "to ask, pray."

 The shift in meaning in English comes via rosary beads threaded on a string to count prayers, and in verbal phrases bid one's beads , count one's beads , etc. The German cognate Bitte is the usual word for the conversational request "please." Compare Spanish cuentas "the beads of a rosary," from contar "to count."

 The word is also related to bid (Old English biddan ) and Gothic bidjan "to ask, pray." The sense in Modern English was further transferred to other small globular bodies, such as "drop of liquid" (1590s), "small knob forming front sight of a gun" (1831, Kentucky slang); hence draw a bead on "take aim at," 1841, U.S. colloquial.

 bode (v.) 

 Old English bodian "proclaim, announce; announce beforehand, foretell," from boda "messenger," probably from Proto-Germanic *budon- (source also of Old Saxon gibod , German gebot , Old Norse boð ), from PIE root *bheudh- "be aware, make aware."

 With good or ill , "give a (good or bad) portent or promise," late 14c. As a shortened form of forebode "presage" (usually something evil), it dates from 1740. Related: Boded ; boding .

 bade 
 bidden 
 outbid 
 underbid 
 *bheudh- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 beseech 

 c. 1200, bisecen "to entreat, beg urgently," from Old English besecan; see be- + seek. "In contrast to the simple vb., in which the northern seek has displaced the southern seech, in the compound beseech has become the standard form" [OED 2nd. ed. print, 1989]. Cognate with Old F

 entreat 

 c. 1400, "to enter into negotiations," especially "discuss or arrange peace terms;" also "to treat (someone) in a certain way," from Anglo-French entretier, Old French entraiter "to treat," from en- "make" (see en- (1)) + traiter "to treat" (see treat (v.)). Meaning "to beseech, 

 adjure 

 late 14c., adjuren, "to bind by oath; to question under oath;" c. 1400 as "to charge with an oath or under penalty of a curse," from Latin adiurare "confirm by oath, add an oath, to swear to in addition; call to witness," in Late Latin "to put (someone) to an oath," from ad "to" 

 jussive 

 "of a grammatical mode expressing command," 1825, with -ive + Latin iuss-, past participle stem of iubere "to bid, command...

 pass 

 In cards, "the act of declining to make a bid," by 1923 in bridge....

 heckle 

 Figurative meaning "to question severely in a bid to uncover weakness" is from late 18c....

 reformation 

 The movement began as a bid to "reform" doctrines and practices of the Church of Rome....

 direction 

 late 14c., direccioun, "action of directing or guiding," from Latin directionem (nominative directio) "a making straight, a straight line, a directing (toward something)," noun of action from past-participle stem of dirigere "to set straight, arrange; give a particular direction 

 declaration 

 late 14c., declaracioun, "an explanation, a statement, action of stating clearly," from Old French declaration and directly from Latin declarationem (nominative declaratio) "a making clear or evident, a disclosure, exposition," noun of action from past-participle stem of declarar

 bridge 

 [structure that affords passage over a ravine or river] Middle English brigge, from Old English brycge, from Proto-Germanic *brugjo (source also of Old Saxon bruggia, Old Norse bryggja, Old Frisian brigge, Dutch brug, Old High German brucca, German Brücke), from PIE root *bhru "l

 Share bid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bid">Etymology of bid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bid. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bid (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bid 
 bicoastal 
 bicuspid 
 bicycle 
 bicycling 
 bicyclist 
 bid 
 bidden 
 biddy 
 bide 
 bidet 
 bidirectional 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix