URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/analysis
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:57:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Analysis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Analysis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of analysis 

 analysis (n.) 

 1580s, "resolution of anything complex into simple elements" (opposite of synthesis ), from Medieval Latin analysis (15c.), from Greek analysis "solution of a problem by analysis," literally "a breaking up, a loosening, releasing," noun of action from analyein "unloose, release, set free; to loose a ship from its moorings," in Aristotle, "to analyze," from ana "up, back, throughout" (see ana- ) + lysis "a loosening," from lyein "to unfasten" (from PIE root *leu- "to loosen, divide, cut apart").

 The meaning "statement presenting results of an analytic process" is from 1660s. The psychological sense is from 1890. English also formerly had a noun analyse (1630s), from French analyse , from Medieval Latin analysis . Phrase in the final (or last) analysis (1844), translates French en dernière analyse .
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to analysis 

 synthesis (n.) 

 1610s, "deductive reasoning," from Latin synthesis "collection, set or service of plate, suit of clothes, composition (of a medication)," from Greek synthesis "composition, a putting together," also used of syllables and words, from syntithenai "put together, combine," from syn- "together" (see syn- ) + tithenai "to put, to place" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, put").

 The notion in the senses is "a combining of separate thoughts or conceptions into a whole." It is attested in English by 1733 in the sense of "a combination of parts into a whole," and later in specialized senses in grammar, chemistry, surgery, acoustics. It was earlier borrowed in Middle English as sintecis (mid-15c.). The classical plural is syntheses .

 analyst (n.) 

 1650s, "one versed in algebraic analysis, mathematician skilled in algebraic geometry," from French analyste "a person who analyzes," from analyser , from analyse "analysis," from Medieval Latin analysis (see analysis ). As a short form of psychoanalyst , attested from 1914; the one analyzed is an analysand (1933). Greek analyter meant "a deliverer."

 analyze 
 metanalysis 
 psychoanalysis 
 self-analysis 
 urinalysis 
 ana- 
 *leu- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 analyze 

 c. 1600, of material things, "to dissect, take to pieces," from French analyser, from the noun analyse "analysis" (see analysis). Of literature, "examine critically to get the essence of," from 1610s; the meaning in chemistry ("resolve a compound into elements") dates from 1660s.

 psychoanalysis 

 "the theory or therapy of treating mental disorders by investigating unconscious elements and bringing repressed fears and conflicts to the patient's awareness," from Psychoanalyse, coined 1896 in French by Freud from Latinized form of Greek psykhē "the soul, mind, spirit; unders

 resolve 

 From the notion of "reduce by mental analysis into its basic forms" (late 14c.) comes the meaning "determine, decide upon..." after analysis (1520s), hence "pass a resolution" (1580s); "decide, settle" a dispute, etc. (1610s)....

 nitrogen 

 The gas was identified in part by analysis of nitre....

 breakdown 

 The noun, specifically of machinery, is from 1838; meaning "an analysis in detail" is from 1936 (from the verbal phrase in...

 dianetics 

 "Self Analysis" by Hubbard (1951) quotes an etymology said to have been added to the Funk & Wagnalls New Standard Dictionary...

 isomorphism 

 of form," 1822, in John George Children's translation from French of Berzelius's "The Use of the Blow-pipe in Chemical Analysis...

 criticism 

 c. 1600, "action of criticizing, discrimination or discussion of merit, character or quality; a critical remark or disquisition," from critic + -ism. Meaning "art of judging of and defining the qualities or merits of a thing," especially "estimating literary or artistic worth" is

 psychotherapy 

 "art of curing mental diseases," 1892, from psycho- + therapy, on model of French psychothérapie (1889). In early use also of treatment of diseases by "psychic" methods (mainly hypnotism). Psychotherapeia was used in medical writing in 1853 as "remedial influence of the mind." Re

 style 

 early 14c., stile, "writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative, treatise;" also "characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression," and "way of life, manner, behavior, conduct." This is from Old French stile, estile "style, f

 Share analysis 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/analysis Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/analysis">Etymology of analysis by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of analysis. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/analysis Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of analysis," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/analysis. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of analysis." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/analysis. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of analysis." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/analysis (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near analysis 
 analogize 
 analogous 
 analogue 
 analogy 
 analyse 
 analysis 
 analyst 
 analytic 
 analytical 
 analytics 
 analyze 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix