URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmetic
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:16:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cosmetic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cosmetic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cosmetic 

 cosmetic (n.) 

 c. 1600, "the art of beautifying, art of anointing or decorating the human body," from Latinized form of Greek kosmetike (tekhnē) "the art of dress and ornament," from fem. of kosmetikos "skilled in adornment or arrangement," from kosmein "to arrange, adorn," from kosmos "order; ornament" (see cosmos ). The adjective is feminine because tekhn ē is a feminine noun.

 Meaning "a preparation for beautifying, preparation that renders the n soft and pure or improves the complexion" (originally also the hair) is attested from 1640s. Related: Cosmetics .
 also from c. 1600 

 cosmetic (adj.) 

 1640s, "pertaining to beauty, improving beauty," from French cosmétique (16c.), from Latinized form of Greek kosmetikos "skilled in adornment or arrangement," from kosmein "to arrange, adorn," from kosmos "order; ornament" (see cosmos ). Related: Cosmetical (1550s). Of surgery, from 1926. Figurative sense of "superficial, affecting the appearance only" is from 1955. Related: Cosmetically .
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to cosmetic 

 cosmos (n.) 

 c. 1200, "the universe, the world" (but not popular until 1848, when it was taken as the English equivalent to Humboldt's Kosmos in translations from German), from Latinized form of Greek kosmos "order, good order, orderly arrangement," a word with several main senses rooted in those notions: The verb kosmein meant generally "to dispose, prepare," but especially "to order and arrange (troops for battle), to set (an army) in array;" also "to establish (a government or regime);" "to deck, adorn, equip, dress" (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of "ornaments of a woman's dress, decoration" (compare kosmokomes "dressing the hair," and cosmetic ) as well as "the universe, the world."

 Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to "the universe," perhaps originally meaning "the starry firmament," but it later was extended to the whole physical world, including the earth. For specific reference to "the world of people," the classical phrase was he oikoumene (ge) "the inhabited (earth)." Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene . Kosmos also was used in Christian religious writing with a sense of "worldly life, this world (as opposed to the afterlife)," but the more frequent word for this was aiōn , literally "lifetime, age."

 The word cosmos often suggested especially "the universe as an embodiment of order and harmony."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 decorative 

 early 15c., "beautifying, made to remove or cover up blemishes," from Old French decoratif and directly from decorat-, past-participle stem of Latin decorare "to decorate, adorn, embellish, beautify," from decus (genitive decoris) "an ornament; grace, dignity, honor," from PIE ro

 antimony 

 Probably it is a Latinization of later Greek stimmi "powdered antimony, black antimony" (a cosmetic used to paint the eyelids...Probably it is ultimately from Egyptian stm "powdered antimony;" the substance was used there as a cosmetic from at least...

 rouge 

 1753, "red cosmetic coloring for the skin, fine red powder used to give artificial color to the face," from French rouge...

 liner 

 The cosmetic sense is by 1904, originally of actor's makeup where it might be used to draw wrinkles, as well as outline the...

 cream 

 Cold cream, a cosmetic, is by 1709, translating Latin ceratum refrigerans (see cold (adj.))....

 belladonna 

 Common explanations are that the plant is so called because women made cosmetic eye-drops from its juice (a mid-18c. explanation...

 magnesia 

 Meanwhile, in 18c., a white powder (magnesium carbonate) used as a cosmetic and toothpaste was sold in Rome as magnesia alba...

 depilatory 

 c. 1600, "having the property of removing hair from the skin," from French dépilatorie (adj.), from Latin depilatus "having one's hair plucked," from de- "completely" (see de-) + pilatus, past participle of pilare "deprive of hair," from pilus "hair" (see pile (n.3)). Earlier in 

 pencil 

 mid-14c., pencel, "an artist's small, fine brush of camel hair," used for painting, manuscript illustration, etc., from Old French pincel "artist's paintbrush" (13c., Modern French pinceau) and directly from Medieval Latin pincellus, from Latin penicillus "painter's brush, hair-p

 make-up 

 also makeup, "manner in which something is put together," 1821, from the verbal phrase (see make (v.) + up (adv.)). To make up as "build, collect into one form by bringing together" is from late 14c., also "prepare." It is attested from late 15c. as "supply as an equivalent," fro

 Share cosmetic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmetic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmetic">Etymology of cosmetic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cosmetic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmetic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cosmetic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmetic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cosmetic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmetic. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cosmetic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmetic (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cosmetic 
 cosher 
 cosign 
 cosigner 
 cosily 
 cosine 
 cosmetic 
 cosmetologist 
 cosmetology 
 cosmic 
 cosmo- 
 cosmogony 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix