URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/arctic
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:30:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Arctic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Arctic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of arctic 

 arctic (adj.) 

 late 14c., artik , "of or pertaining to the north pole of the heavens," from Old French artique and directly from Medieval Latin articus , from Latin arcticus , from Greek arktikos "of the north," literally "of the (constellation) Bear," from arktos "bear;" also "Ursa Major; the region of the north," the Bear being the best-known northern circumpolar constellation.

 This is from *rtko- , the usual Indo-European root for "bear" (source also of Avestan aresho , Armenian arj , Albanian ari , Latin ursus , Welsh arth ). For speculation on why Germanic lost the word, see bear (n.). The -c- was restored from 1550s.

 In Middle English typically of the heavens; in reference to the earth it is attested from early 15c. as "northern;" from 1660s as "cold, frigid." As a noun, with capital A- , "the northern polar regions," from 1560s.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to arctic 

 bear (n.) 

 "large carnivorous or omnivorous mammal of the family Ursidae ," Old English bera "a bear," from Proto-Germanic *bero , literally "the brown (one)" (source also of Old Norse björn , Middle Dutch bere , Dutch beer , Old High German bero , German Bär ), usually said to be from PIE root *bher- (2) "bright; brown." There was perhaps a PIE *bheros "dark animal" (compare beaver (n.1) and Greek phrynos "toad," literally "the brown animal").

 Greek arktos and Latin ursus retain the PIE root word for "bear" ( *rtko ; see arctic ), but it is believed to have been ritually replaced in the northern branches because of hunters' taboo on names of wild animals (compare the Irish equivalent "the good calf," Welsh "honey-pig," Lithuanian "the licker," Russian medved "honey-eater"). Others connect the Germanic word with Latin ferus "wild," as if it meant "the wild animal ( par excellence ) of the northern woods."

 Used of rude, gruff, uncouth men since 1570s. Symbolic of Russia since 1794. The stock market meaning "speculator for a fall" is by 1709, a shortening of bearskin jobber (from the proverb sell the bearskin before one has caught the bear ); i.e. "one who sells stock for future delivery, expecting that meanwhile prices will fall." Paired with bull from c. 1720. Bear claw as a type of large pastry is from 1942, originally chiefly western U.S. Bear-garden (1590s) was a place where bears were kept for the amusement of spectators.

 antarctic (adj.) 

 late 14c., antartyk "opposite to the north pole" (adj.), from Old French antartique , from Medieval Latin antarcticus , from Greek antarktikos "opposite the north," from anti- "opposite" (see anti- ) + arktikos "arctic" (see arctic ).

 The first -c- ceased to be pronounced in Medieval Latin and was dropped in Old French. Modern English restores it in spelling from 17c. Also from late 14c. as a noun (with capital A-), "region around the South pole of the sky or the southern regions of the Earth."

 Arctic Circle 
 Arcturus 
 Arthur 
 Charles's Wain 
 Orson 
 sub-arctic 
 ursine 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bear 

 Old English beran "to carry, bring; bring forth, give birth to, produce; to endure without resistance; to support, hold up, sustain; to wear" (class IV strong verb; past tense bær, past participle boren), from Proto-Germanic *beranan (source also of Old Saxon beran, Old Frisian b

 rubber 

 1530s, "thing that rubs" (a brush, cloth, etc.), agent noun from rub (v.). By c. 1600 as "one who applies friction or massage in some process." The meaning "elastic substance from tropical plants" is recorded by 1788, short for India rubber. Earlier known also as catouchou, caout

 frigid 

 1620s, "intensely cold," from Latin frigidus "cold, chill, cool," figuratively "indifferent," also "flat, dull, trivial," from stem of frigere "be cold;" related to noun frigus "cold, coldness, frost," from Proto-Italic *srigos-, from PIE root *srig- "cold" (source also of Greek 

 narwhal 

 "sea-unicorn, dolphin-like Arctic sea mammal" (one of the teeth of the male is enormously developed into a straight spirally...But according to nature writer Barry Lopez ("Arctic Dreams"), Winfred P....

 sourdough 

 This was extended during the 1898 Yukon gold rush to "Arctic prospector or pioneer," from their practice of saving a lump...

 Athabaskan 

 The languages are spoken across a wide area of Alaska and sub-arctic Canada and include Apachean (including Navajo) in the...

 plover 

 Perhaps it was so called because the birds' migration arrival in Western Europe (it breeds in summer in the Arctic) coincides...

 polar 

 1550s, "from or found in the regions near the poles of the Earth," from French polaire (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin polaris "of or pertaining to the poles," from Latin polus "an end of an axis" (see pole (n.2)). By 1816 as "of or pertaining to a pole or poles of a spher

 glacial 

 1650s, "cold, icy," from French glacial or directly from Latin glacialis "icy, frozen, full of ice," from glacies "ice," probably from a suffixed form of PIE root *gel- "cold; to freeze" (source also of Latin gelu "frost"). Geological sense "pertaining to glaciers" apparently was

 glide 

 Old English glidan "move along smoothly and easily; glide away, vanish; slip, slide" (class I strong verb, past tense glad, past participle gliden), from Proto-Germanic *glidan "to glide" (source also of Old Saxon glidan, Old Frisian glida, Old High German glitan, German gleiten)

 Share arctic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/arctic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/arctic">Etymology of arctic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of arctic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/arctic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of arctic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arctic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of arctic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/arctic. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of arctic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/arctic (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near arctic 
 arch-rival 
 arch-villain 
 archway 
 -archy 
 arc-light 
 arctic 
 Arctic Circle 
 Arcturus 
 arcuate 
 -ard 
 ardency 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix