URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chastity
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:31:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chastity - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chastity - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chastity 

 chastity (n.) 

 c. 1200, chastete , "sexual purity" (as defined by the Church), including but not limited to virginity or celibacy, from Old French chastete "chastity, purity" (12c., Modern French chasteté ), from Latin castitatem (nominative castitas ) "purity, chastity" from castus "cut off, separated; pure" (see caste ). Chastity-belt is from 1894 (belt of chastity is from 1878).

 Chastity is merely a social law created to encourage the alliances that most promote the permanent welfare of the race, and to maintain woman in a social position which it is thought advisable she should hold. [Saturday Review, Aug. 10, 1867, quoted in Lecky, "History of European Morals," 1869]
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to chastity 

 caste (n.) 

 1610s, "one of the hereditary social groups of India," from Portuguese casta "breed, race, caste," earlier casta raça , "unmixed race," from Latin castus "cut off, separated" (also "pure," via notion of "cut off" from faults), past participle of carere "to be cut off from," from PIE *kas-to- , from root *kes- "to cut." Caste system is recorded from 1840. An earlier, now-obsolete sense of caste in English is "a race of men" (1550s), from Latin castus "chaste."

 Of the castes, the first three are the natural and gradually established divisions of the Aryan invaders and conquerors of India; the fourth was made up of the subjugated aborigines. The Sanskrit name for caste is 
 varna , color, the different castes having been at first marked by differences of complexion, according to race, and in some degree according to occupation and consequent exposure. [Century Dictionary, 1895]

 chaste (adj.) 

 c. 1200, "virtuous, pure from unlawful sexual intercourse" (as defined by the Church), from Old French chaste "morally pure" (12c.), from Latin castus "clean, pure, morally pure" (see caste ).

 The transferred sense of "sexually pure" is by 15c., perhaps by influence of chastity , though chaste as a noun meaning "virgin person" is recorded from early 14c. Of language, etc., "free from obscenity," 1620s. Of artistic or literary style, "severely simple, unadorned," 1753. Related: Chastely .

 *kes- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to cut."

 It might form all or part of: caret ; cashier (v.) "dismiss;" cassation ; caste ; castellan ; castellated ; Castile ; castle ; castigate ; castrate ; castration ; chaste ; chastity ; chateau ; chatelaine ; Chester ; forecastle ; incest ; quash (v.) "make void, annul."

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit sastra- "knife, dagger;" Greek keazein "to split;" Latin carere "to be cut off from," cassus "empty, void;" Old Church Slavonic kosa "scythe."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 celibacy 

 1660s, "state of being unmarried, voluntary abstention from marriage," formed in English from abstract noun suffix -cy + Latin caelibatus "state of being unmarried," from caelebs "unmarried," a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps it is from PIE *kaiwelo- "alone" + lib(h)s- "living.

 virtue 

 c. 1200, vertu, "moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence," from Anglo-French and Old French vertu "force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities" (10c. in Old French), from Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) "moral strength, high character, goodness; 

 integrity 

 c. 1400, integrite, "innocence, blamelessness; chastity, purity," from Old French integrité and directly from Latin integritatem...

 honesty 

 early 14c., "splendor, honor; elegance," later "honorable position; propriety of behavior, good manners; virginity, chastity...

 honest 

 modern sense of "dealing fairly, truthful, free from deceit" is c. 1400, as is sense of "virtuous, having the virtue of chastity...

 continence 

 14c., "self-restraint, moderation," especially with regard to desires and passions, "moderation in sexual intercourse, chastity...

 seduce 

 one, is attested from 1550s (it apparently was not in Latin), originally specifically "entice (a woman) to a surrender of chastity...

 abstinence 

 mid-14c., "forbearance in indulgence of the appetites," from Old French abstinance (earlier astenance), from Latin abstinentia "abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity," abstract noun from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere/abstenere "wi

 honor 

 c. 1200, onur, "glory, renown, fame earned," from Anglo-French honour, Old French onor, honor "honor, dignity, distinction, position; victory, triumph" (Modern French honneur), from Latin honorem (nominative honos, the form used by Cicero, but later honor) "honor, dignity, office

 morality 

 late 14c., moralite, "moral qualities, virtuous conduct or thought," from Old French moralite (Modern French moralité) "moral (of a story); moral instruction; morals, moral character" (13c.) and directly from Late Latin moralitatem (nominative moralitas) "manner, character," from

 Share chastity 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chastity Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chastity">Etymology of chastity by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chastity. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chastity Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chastity," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chastity. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chastity." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chastity. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chastity." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chastity (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chastity 
 chassis 
 chaste 
 chasten 
 chastise 
 chastisement 
 chastity 
 chasuble 
 chat 
 chateau 
 Chateaubriand 
 chatelaine 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix