URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stitch
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:17:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stitch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stitch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stitch 

 stitch (n.) 

 Middle English stiche , from Old English stice "a prick, puncture, sting, stab" (senses now obsolete), from Proto-Germanic *stikiz (source also of Old Frisian steke , Old High German stih , German Stich "a pricking, prick, sting, stab"), from PIE *stig-i- , from root *steig- "to stick; pointed" (see stick (v.)).

 The sense of "sudden, stabbing pain in the side, acute sudden pain like that of the thrust of a needle" was in late Old English (in the leechdoms).

 The sense in sewing and shoemaking, "one movement of a threaded needle passing in and out of fabric," is by late 13c.; in reference to the part of thread left in the fabric by this, from late 14c. Hence by synecdoche the meaning "bit of clothing" one is (or isn't) wearing, from c. 1500. In reference to a particular type of needlework (as in cross-stitch ), by 1620s.

 The meaning "a stroke of work" (of any kind) is attested from 1580s. The surgical sense is recorded by 1520s. The sense of "amusing person or thing" is by 1968, from the notion of laughing so much one gets stitches of pain (compare verbal expression have (someone) in stitches , attested by 1935).

 stitch (v.) 

 c. 1200, stichen , "to stab, pierce, cause pain," also "to unite or ornament (a garment) with stitches;" from stitch (n.). With up (adv.) from c. 1500. The surgical sense is from 1570s. Related: Stitched ; stitcher ; stitching .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to stitch 

 cross-stitch (n.) 

 1710, in needlework, "a stitch in the form of an X; two stitches, one crossing the other in the middle," from cross- + stitch (n.). As a verb from 1794. Related: Cross-stitched; crossed-stitching .

 stick (v.) 

 Middle English stiken , from Old English stician "to pierce or puncture, to stab with a weapon; transfix; goad," also "to remain embedded, stay fixed, be fastened," from Proto-Germanic *stekanan "pierce, prick, be sharp" (source also of Old Saxon stekan , Old Frisian steka , Dutch stecken , Old High German stehhan , German stechen "to stab, prick").

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *steig- "to stick; pointed" (source also of Latin instigare "to goad," instinguere "to incite, impel;" Greek stizein "to prick, puncture," stigma "mark made by a pointed instrument;" Old Persian tigra- "sharp, pointed;" Avestan tighri- "arrow;" Lithuanian stingu, stigti "to remain in place;" Russian stegati "to quilt").

 Etymologists have tried to connect this to *stegh- , reconstructed PIE root of words for sting , but Boutkan (2005) writes that the attempt has "formal problems" and the relationship "remains unclear."

 Loosely, "put something where it will remain," with or without the notion of penetration. Hence the figurative sense of "remain permanently in mind" (c. 1300). The meaning "persist (in a course of action), insist upon" is mid-15c. The transitive sense of "to fasten (something) in place" is attested from late 13c. Related: Stuck ; sticking .

 To stick out "protrude, project" is recorded from 1560s. Slang stick around "remain" is from 1912; stick it as a rude item of advice is recorded by 1922. Sticking point , beyond which one refuses to go, is from 1956. Sticking-place , where any thing put will stay, is from 1570s; modern use generally is an echo of Shakespeare.

 stitching 
 up 
 backstitch 
 hem-stitch 
 stitchery 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 up 

 Old English up, uppe, from Proto-Germanic *upp- "up" (source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon up "up, upward," Old Norse upp; Danish, Dutch op; Old High German uf, German auf "up"; Gothic iup "up, upward," uf "on, upon, under;" Old High German oba, German ob "over, above, on, upon"

 sew 

 "unite or attach (fabric, etc.) by means of thread or similar material, with or without aid of a needle or awl;" Middle English seuen, from Old English siwian "to stitch, sew, mend, patch, knit together, fasten by sewing," earlier siowian, from Proto-Germanic *siwjanan (source al

 souter 

 or mender of shoes," Middle English soutere, from Old English sutere, from Latin sutor "shoemaker," from suere "to sew, stitch...

 knit 

 Intransitive meaning "do knitting, weave by looping or knotting a continuous thread" (especially in reference to plain stitch...

 point 

 From mid-15c. as "to stitch, mend."...

 saddle 

 Saddle-stitch (n.) is from bookbinding (1887)....

 fishnet 

 From 1881 in reference to a type of stitch that resembles fishnet. By 1912 in reference to women's hosiery....

 fasten 

 Old English fæstnian "make fast, make firm, fix, secure," also "ratify, betroth, confirm," from Proto-Germanic *fastinon "to make firm or fast" (source also of Old Frisian festnia "to make firm, bind fast," Old Saxon fastnon, Old High German fastnion, German festnen, Old Norse fa

 pain 

 late 13c., peine, "the agony suffered by Christ;" c. 1300, "punishment," especially for a crime, "legal punishment of any sort" (including fines and monetary penalties); also "condition one feels when hurt, opposite of pleasure," including mental or emotional suffering, grief, di

 tuck 

 late 14c., "to pull or gather up," earlier "to pluck, stretch" (implied in tucker "one who finishes clothes by stretching them on tenters, late 13c. as a surname), probably from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch tucken "pull up, draw up, tug" (cognate with Old English tucian "mis

 Share stitch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stitch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stitch">Etymology of stitch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stitch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stitch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stitch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stitch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stitch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stitch. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stitch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stitch (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stitch 
 stir-crazy 
 stirp 
 stirrer 
 stirring 
 stirrup 
 stitch 
 stitchery 
 stitching 
 stix 
 Stoa 
 stoat 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix