URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ecclesiastic
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:09:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ecclesiastic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ecclesiastic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ecclesiastic 

 ecclesiastic (adj.) 

 late 15c., from French ecclésiastique and directly from Medieval Latin ecclesiasticus , from Greek ekklesiastikos "of the (ancient Athenian) assembly," in late Greek, "of the church," from ekklesiastes "speaker in an assembly or church, preacher," from ekkalein "to call out," from ek "out" (see ex- ) + kalein "to call" (from PIE root *kele- (2) "to shout"). As a noun, "one holding an office in the Christian ministry," 1650s (the earlier noun was ecclesiast , late 14c.); the Latin word also was used as a noun in Late Latin.
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to ecclesiastic 

 Ecclesiastes (n.) 

 c. 1300, name given to one of the Old Testament books, traditionally ascribed to Solomon, from Greek ekklesiastes (see ecclesiastic ), to render Hebrew qoheleth "one who addresses an assembly," from qahal "assembly." The title is technically the designation of the speaker, but that word throughout is usually rendered into English as "The Preacher" (which Klein calls "erroneous," as the modern meaning of preacher is not synonymous with the Greek word).

 ecclesiastical (adj.) 

 early 15c., from ecclesiastic + -al (1). Related: Ecclesiastically .

 ex- 
 *kele- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cleric 

 "a clergyman," 1620s (also in early use as an adjective), from Church Latin clericus "clergyman, priest," noun use of adjective meaning "priestly, belonging to the clerus;" from Ecclesiastical Greek klērikos "pertaining to an inheritance," but in Greek Christian jargon by 2c., "o

 divine 

 late 14c., "pertaining to, of the nature of, or proceeding from God or a god; addressed to God," from Old French divin, devin (12c.), from Latin divinus "of a god," from divus "of or belonging to a god, inspired, prophetic," related to deus "god, deity" (from PIE root *dyeu- "to 

 banns 

 They were made part of ecclesiastic legislation 1215 by the fourth Lateran council....

 prelate 

 c. 1200, "ecclesiastic of high rank, bishop, pope, superior of a religious house," from Old French prelat (Modern French...

 pontifical 

 .); "vestments of a high ecclesiastic" (c. 1400)....

 reverence 

 As a respectful form of address, with possessive pronoun, to a clergyman or ecclesiastic, late 14c....

 clerk 

 c. 1200, "man ordained in the ministry, a priest, an ecclesiastic," from Old English cleric and Old French clerc "clergyman...

 reverend 

 early 15c., also reverent, "worthy of deep respect, worthy to be revered" due to age, character, etc., from Old French reverent, reverend and directly from Latin reverendus "(he who is) to be respected," gerundive of revereri "to stand in awe of, respect, honor, fear, be afraid o

 circle 

 c. 1300, "figure of a circle, a plane figure whose periphery is everywhere equidistant from its center point," from Old French cercle "circle, ring (for the finger); hoop of a helmet or barrel" (12c.), from Latin circulus "circular figure; small ring, hoop; circular orbit" (also 

 Zeus 

 supreme god of the ancient Greeks and master of the others, 1706, from Greek, from PIE *dewos- "god" (source also of Latin deus "god," Old Persian daiva- "demon, evil god," Old Church Slavonic deivai, Sanskrit deva-), from root *dyeu- "to shine," in derivatives "sky, heaven, god.

 Share ecclesiastic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ecclesiastic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ecclesiastic">Etymology of ecclesiastic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ecclesiastic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ecclesiastic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ecclesiastic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ecclesiastic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ecclesiastic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ecclesiastic. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ecclesiastic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ecclesiastic (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ecclesiastic 
 ecbatic 
 ecce homo 
 eccentric 
 eccentricity 
 Ecclesiastes 
 ecclesiastic 
 ecclesiastical 
 ecdysiast 
 echelon 
 echidna 
 echinoderm 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix