URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/malachite
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:41:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Malachite - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Malachite - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of malachite 

 malachite (n.) 

 common green ore of copper, a basic carbonate of copper having a beautiful green color, late 14c., from French malachite , ultimately from Greek malachitis (lithos) "mallow (stone)," from malakhe "mallow" (see mallow (n.)); the mineral traditionally so called from the resemblance of its color to that of the leaves of the mallow plant.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to malachite 

 mallow (n.) 

 late 14c., spelling alteration of late Old English malwe and directly from Latin malva "mallows" (source also of Modern French mauve , Spanish and Italian malva ), a word from a Mediterranean substrate language. The same lost word apparently yielded Greek malakhe "mallow."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 emerald 

 French esmeraude (12c.), from Medieval Latin esmaraldus, from Latin smaragdus, from Greek smaragdos "green gem" (emerald or malachite...

 mineral 

 late 14c., "substance obtained by mining," from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin minerale "something mined," noun use of neuter of mineralis "pertaining to mines," from minera "a mine" (see mine (n.1)). Meaning "material substance that is neither animal nor veg

 copper 

 malleable metallic element, noted for its peculiar red color, tenacity, malleability, and electric conductivity, late Old English coper, from Proto-Germanic *kupar (source also of Middle Dutch koper, Old Norse koparr, Old High German kupfar), from Late Latin cuprum, contraction o

 shibboleth 

 late 14c., in Bible translations, the Hebrew word shibboleth, meaning "flood, stream," also "ear of corn," as used in Judges xii.4-6. During the slaughter at the fords of Jordan, the Gileadites took it as a password to distinguish their men from fleeing Ephraimites, because Ephra

 spring 

 Middle English springen, from Old English springan "to leap, leap up, jump;" of a fountain, spring, etc., "burst forth;" also "fly up; spread, grow" (class III strong verb; past tense sprang, past participle sprungen). This is from Proto-Germanic *sprenganan (source also of Old N

 cameo 

 early 15c., kaadmaheu, camew, chamehieux and many other spellings (from early 13c. in Anglo-Latin), "engraving in relief upon a precious stone with two layers of colors" (such as onyx, agate, or shell) and done so as to utilize the effect of the colors, from Old French camaieu an

 spill 

 Middle English spillen, from Old English spillan "destroy; destroy the life of, mutilate, kill," especially in a brutal way, also in late Old English "to waste;" a variant of spildan "destroy," from Proto-Germanic *spilthjan (source also of Old High German spildan "to spill," Old

 solemn 

 mid-14c., solemne, solempne, "performed with due religious ceremony or reverence; sacred, devoted to religious observances," also, of a vow, etc., "made under religious sanction, binding," from Old French solempne, solemne (12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin so

 logic 

 mid-14c., logike, "branch of philosophy that treats of forms of thinking; the science of distinction of true from false reasoning," from Old French logique (13c.), from Latin (ars) logica "logic," from Greek (he) logike (techne) "(the) reasoning (art)," from fem. of logikos "pert

 beer 

 alcoholic drink made from grain (generally barley), infused with hops and boiled and fermented, Middle English ber, from Old English beor "strong drink, beer, mead," cognate with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier; a West Germanic wor

 Share malachite 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/malachite Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/malachite">Etymology of malachite by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of malachite. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/malachite Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of malachite," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/malachite. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of malachite." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/malachite. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of malachite." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/malachite (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near malachite 
 mal- 
 mal du siecle 
 Malabar 
 malabsorption 
 Malachi 
 malachite 
 malacia 
 maladaptation 
 maladaptive 
 maladjusted 
 maladjustment 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix