URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Danube
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:33:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Danube - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Danube - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Danube 

 Danube 

 major river of Europe flowing into the Black Sea (German Donau , Hungarian Duna , Russian Dunaj ), from Latin Danuvius (Late Latin Danubius ), from Celtic *danu(w)-yo- , from PIE *danu- "river" (compare Don , Dnieper , Dniester ). Related: Danubian .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Germany 

 Middle English writers, following Latin, sometimes wrote of two Germanies, distinguishing the Alps and the region below the Danube...

 carp 

 A Danube fish (hence the proposed East Germanic origin of its name), introduced in English ponds 14c....

 Roman holiday 

 barbarian gladiator from the fourth canto (1818) of Byron's "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage": But where his rude hut by the Danube...

 Goth 

 C.E. on the lower Danube and later invaded the Roman Empire and were converted to Arian Christianity....

 Hungary 

 c. 1300, from Medieval Latin Hungaria (also source of French Hongrie), probably literally meaning "land of the Huns," who ruled a vast territory from there under Attila in 5c. The people's name for themselves we transliterate as Magyar. Middle English uses the same words for both

 Bulgaria 

 nation in southeastern Europe, Medieval Latin, from Bulgari "Bulgarians," traditionally explained as "the men from the Bolg," the River Volga, upon whose banks they lived until 6c. But evidence is wanting, and the people's name for themselves in Old Bulgarian was Blugarinu, accor

 Ukraine 

 by 1670s, from Russian or Polish Ukraina, a specific use of ukraina "border, frontier," according to Room, from Old Russian oukraina, from ou "by, at" + kraj region. He also notes that "The territory was so called because it was the borderland or 'frontier zone' of medieval Russi

 Austria 

 central European nation, from Medieval Latin Marchia austriaca "eastern borderland." German Österreich is "eastern kingdom," from Old High German ostar "eastern" (from Proto-Germanic *aust- "east," literally "toward the sunrise," from PIE root *aus- (1) "to shine," especially of 

 Romania 

 Eastern European nation, the name taken officially in 1861 at the union of the old lands of Wallachia and Moldavia, from Latin Romani "people from Rome," which was used to describe the descendants of colonists there from Roman times; see Roman + -ia. In late 19c., early 20c. ofte

 sorry 

 Middle English sori, from Old English sarig "distressed, grieved, full of sorrow" (not found in the physical sense of "sore"), from Proto-Germanic *sairiga- "painful" (source also of Old Saxon serag, Middle Dutch seerigh "sore; sad, sorry," Dutch zeerig "sore, full of sores," Old

 Share Danube 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Danube Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Danube">Etymology of Danube by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Danube. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Danube Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Danube," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Danube. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Danube." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Danube. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Danube." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Danube (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Danube 
 Danish 
 dank 
 Danny 
 danseuse 
 Dante 
 Danube 
 Danzig 
 Daoism 
 dap 
 Daphne 
 dapper 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix