URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lime
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:38:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lime - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lime - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lime 

 lime (n.1) 

 "chalky, sticky mineral used in making mortar," from Old English lim "sticky substance, birdlime;" also "mortar, cement, gluten," from Proto-Germanic *leimaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Danish lim , Dutch lijm , German Leim "birdlime"), from PIE root *(s)lei- "slime, slimy, sticky" (source also of Latin limus "slime, mud, mire," linere "to smear;" see slime (n.)).

 Bird-lime is prepared from the bark of the holly, it was spread on twigs and used for catching small birds. The lime used in building, etc. is made by putting limestone or shells in a red heat, which burns off the carbonic acid and leaves a brittle white solid which dissolves easily in water. Hence lime-kiln (late 13c.), lime-burner (early 14c.). As a verb, c. 1200, from the noun.

 lime (n.2) 

 "greenish-yellow citrus fruit," 1630s, probably via Spanish lima or Portuguese limão , said to be via Arabic lima "citrus fruit," from Persian limun , in reference to the Persian lime, which might be a hybrid of the "Key" lime and the lemon.

 The word is perhaps from or related to Sanskrit nimbu "lime." The Key lime is indigenous to India and the Malay archipelago (Arabs introduced it to the Levant, North Africa, Spain, and Persia in the Middle Ages); compare Malay (Austronesian) limaw "lime," also, generically, "citrus fruit," which might be the ultimate source. Yule and Burnell think the English got the word from the Portuguese in India. Lime-green as a color is by 1883.
 also from 1630s 

 lime (n.3) 

 "linden tree," 1620s, earlier line (c. 1500), from Middle English lynde (early 14c.), from Old English lind "lime tree" (see linden ). Klein suggests the change of -n- to -m- began in compounds whose second element began in a labial (such as line-bark, line-bast ). An ornamental European tree, it is unrelated to the tree that produces the citrus fruit.
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to lime 

 linden (n.) 

 "lime tree," 1570s, noun use of an adjective, "of linden wood," from Old English lind "linden" (n.), from Proto-Germanic *lindjo (source also of Old Saxon linda , Old Norse lind , Old High German linta , German linde ), probably from PIE *lent-o- "flexible" (see lithe ); with reference to the tree's pliant bast. Compare Russian lutĭijó "forest of lime trees," Polish łęt "switch, twig," Lithuanian lenta "board, plank."

 For modern tree names from adjectives, compare aspen . OED suggests the use of the adjective as a noun is at least partly creditable to "translations of a German romance" (German linden is the plural form and the form used in compounds).

 slime (n.) 

 "Any soft, ropy, glutinous, or viscous substance" [Century Dictionary], Old English slim "soft mud," from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (source also of Old Norse slim , Old Frisian slym , Dutch slijm "slime, phlegm," German Schleim "slime"), which is probably related to Old English lim "birdlime; sticky substance."

 This is from a PIE root *(s)lei- "slimy, sticky, slippery" (source also of Sanskrit linati "sticks, stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears;" Russian slimak "snail;" Old Church Slavonic slina "spittle;" Old Irish sligim "to smear," leinam "I follow," literally "I stick to;" Welsh llyfn "smooth;" Greek leimax "snail," limne "marsh, pool, lake," alinein "to anoint, besmear;" Latin limus "slime, mud, mire," linere "to daub, besmear, rub out, erase").

 As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Figuratively, of anything clinging and offensive, 1570s. Slime-mold , common name for a type of fungi, is from 1880.

 bird-lime 
 Himalaya 
 lemon 
 limeade 
 lime-juicer 
 limelight 
 limestone 
 limey 
 limy 
 quicklime 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lemon 

 "ovate, pale yellow citrus fruit," c. 1400, lymon, from Old French limon "citrus fruit" (12c.), which comes via Provençal or Italian from Arabic laimun, Persian limun. Apparently brought from India to the Levant by the Arabs 9c. or 10c.; the word is perhaps ultimately from an Aus

 limey 

 1888, Australian, New Zealand, and South African slang for "English immigrant," short for lime-juicer (1857), a nickname given in derisive reference to the British Navy's policy (begun 1795) of issuing lime (n.2) juice on ships to prevent scurvy among sailors. U.S. use is atteste

 caulk 

 14c., "to stop up crevices or cracks," from Old North French cauquer, from Late Latin calicare "to stop up chinks with lime...," from Latin calx (2) "lime, limestone" (see chalk (n.))....

 chalk 

 Old English cealc "chalk, soft white limestone; lime, plaster; pebble," a West Germanic borrowing from Latin calx (2) "limestone..., lime (crushed limestone), small stone," borrowed from Greek khalix "small pebble," which many trace to a PIE root for "...

 gimlet 

 As the name of a cocktail made with gin or vodka and (Rose's) lime juice, by 1927, apparently originally nautical, presumably...Popularized in the U.S. during prohibition as being quick and easy to mix, and the lime masked the scent....

 spessartite 

 One variety, which contains no lime, has been called spessartine, from its locality, Spessart....

 Falernum 

 Carribean liqueur made from rum, lime juice and sugar, 1842. Etymology uncertain.... Of lime juice  one, to make it sour;  Of sugar  two, to make it sweet;  Three of rum, to make...

 citrus 

 any tree of the genus Citrus, or its fruit, 1825, from the Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus "citron tree," the name of an African tree with aromatic wood and lemon-like fruit, the first citrus fruit to become available in the West. The name, like the tree, is probably o

 rustic 

 mid-15c., rustik, "associated with the country, rural," from Latin rusticus "of the country, rural; country-like, plain, simple, rough, coarse, awkward," from rus (genitive ruris) "open land, country" (see rural). From 1580s, of persons, "having the look and manner of country fol

 tree 

 Old English treo, treow "tree" (also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake"), from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o-, suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with speci

 Share lime 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lime Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lime">Etymology of lime by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lime. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lime Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lime," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lime. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lime." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lime. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lime." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lime (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lime 
 limbic 
 limbless 
 limbo 
 Limburger 
 limbus 
 lime 
 limeade 
 lime-juicer 
 limelight 
 limerick 
 limestone 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix