URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcohol
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alcohol - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alcohol - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alcohol 

 alcohol (n.) 

 1540s (early 15c. as alcofol ), "fine powder produced by sublimation," from Medieval Latin alcohol "powdered ore of antimony," from Arabic al-kuhul "kohl," the fine metallic powder used to darken the eyelids, from kahala "to stain, paint." The al- is the Arabic definite article, "the."

 Paracelsus (1493-1541) used the word to refer to a fine powder but also a volatile liquid. By 1670s it was being used in English for "any sublimated substance, the pure spirit of anything," including liquids.

 The sense of "intoxicating ingredient in strong liquor" is attested by 1753, short for alcohol of wine , which then was extended to the intoxicating element in fermented liquors. The formerly preferred terms for the substance were rectified spirits or brandy .

 In organic chemistry, the word was extended by 1808 to the class of compounds of the same type as this (a 1790 translation of Lavoisier's "Elements of Chemistry" has alkoholic gas for "the combination of alkohol with caloric").
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to alcohol 

 brandy (n.) 

 "spirits distilled from other liquors" (especially wine), 1650s, abbreviation of brandy-wine (1620s) from Dutch brandewijn "burnt wine," earlier brand-wijn , so called because it is distilled (compare German cognate Branntwein and Czech palenka "brandy," from paliti "to burn"). The Brandywine Creek in Pennsylvania, site of the 1777 Revolutionary War battle, supposedly was so named 17c. by the Dutch explorers for the color of its waters.

 In familiar use abbreviated as 
 brandy as early as 1657; but the fuller form was retained in official use (customs tariffs, acts of parliament, etc.) down to the end of 17th c., being latterly, as the spelling shows, regarded as a compound of 
 brandy + 
 wine . [OED]

 alcoholic (adj.) 

 1790, "of or pertaining to alcohol;" see alcohol + -ic . The meaning "caused by drunkenness" is attested by 1872; the meaning "habitually drunk" by 1910. The noun sense of "one who is addicted to drinking in excess, chronic drunkard, old rounder" is recorded from 1891; an earlier term for one was alcoholist (1877 in clinical writing, earlier in temperance literature this word simply meant "a drinker of alcohol"). Alcoholics Anonymous was founded 1935 in Akron, Ohio, U.S.

 alcoholism 
 chloral 
 gasohol 
 kohl 
 synovia 
 al- 
 -ol 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 alcoholism 

 "disease of alcohol addiction," by 1882, from alcohol + -ism, or else from Modern Latin alcoholismus, coined in 1852 by Swedish professor of medicine Magnus Huss to mean what we now would call "alcohol poisoning, effects of excessive ingestion of alcohol." In earlier times, alcoh

 synovia 

 a name applied to the albuminous fluid secreted by certain glands; with -al (1). + Modern Latin sinovia (16c.), a word probably coined by Paracelsus (1493-1541), whose coinages tend to be unetymological. Compare sylph, gnome (n.1), zinc, undine, and he influenced gas (n.1) and al

 vinyl 

 from 1851 as the name of a univalent radical derived from ethylene, from Latin vinum "wine" (see wine (n.)), because ethyl alcohol...is the ordinary alcohol present in wine....

 cholesterol 

 The name was changed to the modern form (with chemical suffix -ol, denoting an alcohol) after the compound was discovered...to be a secondary alcohol....

 spirituous 

 The meaning "containing much alcohol" is attested from 1680s....

 ester 

 compound formed by an acid joined to an alcohol, 1852, coined in German in 1848 by German chemist Leopold Gmelin (1788-1853...

 temperance 

 In English, temperance was used to render Latin continentia or abstinentia, specifically in reference to drinking alcohol...

 booze 

 "alcoholic drink," by 1570s, also bouze (in poetry rhyming with carouse), also as a verb, probably a variant of Middle English bous "intoxicating drink," (mid-14c.), which is from Middle Dutch buse "drinking vessel" (also as a verb, busen "to drink heavily"), which is related to 

 wine 

 Old English win "wine," from Proto-Germanic *winam (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German win, Old Norse vin, Dutch wijn, German Wein), an early borrowing from Latin vinum "wine," from PIE *uoin-a-, related to words for "wine" in other southern European languages

 liquor 

 c. 1200, likur "any matter in a liquid state, a liquid or fluid substance," from Old French licor "fluid, liquid; sap; oil" (12c., Modern French liqueur), from Latin liquorem (nominative liquor) "a liquid, liquor; wine; the sea," originally "liquidity, fluidity," from liquere "be

 Share alcohol 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcohol Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcohol">Etymology of alcohol by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alcohol. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcohol Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alcohol," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcohol. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alcohol." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcohol. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alcohol." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcohol (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alcohol 
 Alcatraz 
 Alcestis 
 alchemical 
 alchemist 
 alchemy 
 alcohol 
 alcoholic 
 alcoholism 
 Alcoran 
 alcove 
 Alcyone 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix