URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/burglar
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:09:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Burglar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Burglar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of burglar 

 burglar (n.) 

 "one who commits robbery by breaking into a house," 1540s, shortened from Anglo-Latin burglator (late 13c.), earlier burgator , from Medieval Latin burgator "burglar," from burgare "to break open, commit burglary," from Latin burgus "fortress, castle," a Germanic loan-word akin to borough .

 The unetymological -l- is perhaps from influence of Latin latro "thief" (see larceny ). Middle English had burgur (c. 1200), from Old French burgeor , burgur , also housbreker (c. 1400). Burglar-alarm is by 1840.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to burglar 

 borough (n.) 

 Old English burg , burh "a dwelling or dwellings within a fortified enclosure," from Proto-Germanic *burgs "hill fort, fortress" (source also of Old Frisian burich "castle, city," Old Norse borg "wall, castle," Old High German burg , buruc "fortified place, citadel," German Burg "castle," Gothic baurgs "city"), which Watkins derives from from PIE root *bhergh- (2) "high," with derivatives referring to hills, hill forts, and fortified elevations.

 In German and Old Norse, chiefly as "fortress, castle;" in Gothic, "town, civic community." The meaning shifted in Old English from "fortress," to "fortified town," then simply "town" (16c., especially one possessing municipal organization or sending representatives to Parliament). In some U.S. states (originally Pennsylvania, 1718) often an incorporated town; in Alaska, however, it is the equivalent of a county. As "one of the five administrative divisions of New York City," it dates from the consolidation of 1898; in London, its use dates from the London Government Act of 1899.

 The Scottish form is burgh . The Old English dative singular byrig survives in many place names as -bury .

 larceny (n.) 

 "theft of goods or chattels in the owner's absence; wrongful or fraudulent taking of the personal goods of another with felonious intent," late 15c., larceni , from Anglo-French larcin (late 13c.), Old French larrecin , larcin "theft, robbery" (11c.), from Latin latrocinium "robbery, freebooting, highway-robbery, piracy," from latro "robber, bandit," also "hireling, mercenary."

 This is ultimately from a Greek source akin to latron "pay, hire, wages," reconstructed (Watkins) to be from a suffixed form of PIE root *le- (1) "to get" (source also of Greek latreia "worship, service paid to the gods, hired labor," latron "pay, hire," latris "servant, worshipper").

 Perhaps with -y (3) added in English or the word perhaps was altered by influence of burglary , felony . Formerly distinguished into grand larceny , involving property valued in excess of a stated amount, and petty larceny .

 burglary 
 burgle 
 *bhergh- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 yegg 

 also yegg-man, 1901, a word popular in the first decade of the 20th century and meaning vaguely "hobo burglar; safe-breaker...

 cat 

 Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth....

 wanton 

 early 14c., wan-towen, "resistant to control; willful," from Middle English privative word-forming element wan- "wanting, lacking, deficient," from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with un- (1), and is cognate with Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur "misgovernment," wan

 comprehension 

 mid-15c., "act or fact of understanding," from Old French comprehénsion (15c.), and directly from Latin comprehensionem (nominative comprehensio) "a seizing, laying hold of, arrest," figuratively "perception, comprehension," noun of action from past participle stem of comprehende

 window 

 c. 1200, literally "wind eye," from Old Norse vindauga, from vindr "wind" (see wind (n.1)) + auga "eye" (from PIE root *okw- "to see"). Replaced Old English eagþyrl, literally "eye-hole," and eagduru, literally "eye-door." Compare Old Frisian andern "window," literally "breath-do

 sedulous 

 "diligent in application or pursuit of an object," 1530s, from Latin sedulus "attentive, painstaking, diligent, busy, zealous," probably from sedulo (adv.) "sincerely, diligently," from sedolo "without deception or guile," from se- "without, apart" (see se-) + dolo, ablative of d

 pander 

 "arranger of sexual liaisons, one who caters for the lusts of others," 1520s, "procurer, pimp," from Middle English Pandare (late 14c.), used by Chaucer ("Troylus and Cryseyde"), who borrowed it from Boccaccio (who had it in Italian form Pandaro in "Filostrato") as name of the pr

 chorus 

 1560s, in drama, "person who speaks the prologue and explains or comments on events on stage," from Latin chorus "a dance in a circle, the persons singing and dancing, the chorus of a tragedy," from Greek khoros "round dance; dancing-place; band of dancers; company of persons in 

 catharsis 

 1770, "a bodily purging" (especially of the bowels), from Latinized form of Greek katharsis "purging, cleansing," from stem of kathairein "to purify, purge," from katharos "pure, clear of dirt, clean, spotless; open, free; clear of shame or guilt; purified" (with most of the exte

 obedience 

 c. 1200, "the practice or virtue of submission to a higher power or authority;" late 14c., "dutiful compliance with a command or law," from Old French obedience "obedience, submission" (12c.), from Latin oboedientia "obedience," abstract noun from oboedientem (nominative oboedien

 Share burglar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/burglar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/burglar">Etymology of burglar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of burglar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/burglar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of burglar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/burglar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of burglar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/burglar. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of burglar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/burglar (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near burglar 
 burgeois 
 burgeon 
 burger 
 burgess 
 burgher 
 burglar 
 burglarious 
 burglarize 
 burglary 
 burgle 
 Burgundy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix