URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gyro-
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:59:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gyro- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Gyro- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gyro- 

 gyro- 

 word-forming element meaning "gyrating" or "gyroscope," from Greek gyros "a ring, circle" (see gyre (n.)).

 Entries linking to gyro- 

 gyre (n.) 

 1560s, "a circular motion," from Latin gyrus "circle, circular course, round, ring," from Greek gyros "a circle, ring," related to gyrós "rounded," perhaps from PIE root *geu- "to bend, curve" (source also of Armenian kor "crooked," Lithuanian gurnas "hip, ankle, bone," Norwegian kaure "a curly lock of hair"). The noun is attested in Middle English only in reference to ship's tackle (early 15c.).

 gyrocopter (n.) 

 1915, from gyro- + ending as in helicopter .

 gyromancy 
 gyrostat 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 matrix 

 late 14c., matris, matrice, "uterus, womb," from Old French matrice "womb, uterus" and directly from Latin mātrix (genitive mātricis) "pregnant animal," in Late Latin "womb," also "source, origin," from māter (genitive mātris) "mother" (see mother (n.1)). The many figurative and 

 drone 

 Middle English drane, drone, "male honeybee," from Old English dran, dræn, from Proto-Germanic *dran- (source also of Middle Dutch drane; Old High German treno; German Drohne, which is from Middle Low German drone), probably imitative (compare Lithuanian tranni, Greek thronax "a 

 catharsis 

 1770, "a bodily purging" (especially of the bowels), from Latinized form of Greek katharsis "purging, cleansing," from stem of kathairein "to purify, purge," from katharos "pure, clear of dirt, clean, spotless; open, free; clear of shame or guilt; purified" (with most of the exte

 compass 

 c. 1300, "space, area, extent, circumference," from Old French compas "circle, radius; size, extent; pair of compasses" (12c.), from compasser "to go around, measure (with a compass); divide equally," from Vulgar Latin *compassare "to pace out," from Latin com "with, together" (s

 derogatory 

 c. 1500, "detracting or tending to lessen authority, rights, or standing by taking something away from," from Late Latin derogatorius, from Latin derogatus, past participle of derogare "to take away, detract from, diminish," also "repeal partly, restrict, modify," from de "away" 

 crestfallen 

 "dejected, dispirited," 1580s, creast falne, it has the form of a past-participle adjective, but the verb crestfall is recorded only from 1610s, in reference to diseased horses, and is rare. It's possible that the image behind this use of the word is not having the crest fallen, 

 retreat 

 c. 1300, retrete, "a step backward;" late 14c., "act of retiring or withdrawing; military signal for retiring from action or exercise," from Old French retret, retrait, noun use of past participle of retrere "draw back," from Latin retrahere "draw back, withdraw, call back," from

 tarot 

 1590s, from French tarot (16c.), from Old Italian tarocchi (singular tarocco), a word of unknown origin, perhaps from Arabic taraha "he rejected, put aside." Originally an everyday game deck in much of Europe (though not in Britain), their occult and fortune-telling use seems to 

 pomp 

 c. 1300, "ostentation and display," especially on parade, from Old French pompe "pomp, magnificence" (13c.) and directly from Latin pompa "procession, pomp," from Greek pompē "solemn procession, display, escort," literally "a sending," from pempein "to send," which is of unknown 

 so long 

 parting salutation, 1860, of unknown origin, perhaps from a German idiom (compare German parting salutation adieu so lange, the full sense of which probably is something like "farewell, whilst (we're apart)"); or perhaps from or influenced by Hebrew shalom (via Yiddish sholom). S

 Share gyro- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gyro- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gyro-">Etymology of gyro- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gyro-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gyro- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gyro-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gyro-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gyro-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gyro-. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gyro-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gyro- (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gyro- 
 Gypsy 
 gyrate 
 gyration 
 gyre 
 gyrfalcon 
 gyro- 
 gyro 
 gyrocopter 
 gyromancy 
 gyroscope 
 gyroscopic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix