URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gravel
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gravel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gravel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gravel 

 gravel (n.) 

 "stone in small, irregular fragments," early 13c., from Old French gravele "sand, gravel; sea-shore; sandy bed of a river," diminutive of grave "sand, seashore" (Modern French grève ), possibly from Celtic *graw- (compare Welsh gro "coarse gravel," Breton grouan , Cornish grow "gravel"), perhaps ultimately from PIE *ghreu- "to rub, grind" (see grit (n.)). Gravel-crusher was World War I slang for "infantryman."
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to gravel 

 grit (n.) 

 Old English greot "sand, dust, earth, gravel," from Proto-Germanic *greutan "tiny particles of crushed rock" (source also of Old Saxon griot , Old Frisian gret , Old Norse grjot "rock, stone," German Grieß "grit, sand"), from PIE *ghreu- "rub, grind" (source also of Lithuanian grūdas "corn, kernel," Old Church Slavonic gruda "clod"). Sense of "pluck, spirit, firmness of mind" first recorded American English, 1808.

 If he hadn't a had the clear grit in him, and showed teeth and claws, they'd a nullified him so, you wouldn't have see'd a grease spot of him no more. [Thomas Chandler Haliburton, "Sam Slick in England," 1843]

 gravelly (adj.) 

 late 14c., "covered with gravel or sand," from gravel + -y (2). Of voices, by 1943.

 sand (n.) 

 "water-worn detritus finer than gravel; fine particles of rocks (largely crystalline rocks, especially quartz); the material of the beach, desert, or sea-bed;" Old English sand , from Proto-Germanic *sandam (source also of Old Norse sandr , Old Frisian sond , Middle Dutch sant , Dutch zand , German Sand ), cognate with Greek psammos "sand;" Latin sabulum "coarse sand" (which is the source of Italian sabbia , French sable ). This was said to be from a suffixed form of a PIE root *bhes- "to rub," but de Vaan says the Latin is from a substrate word and Beekes suggests for the origin of psammos "Pre-Greek *sam- 'sand, mud'."

 Historically, the line between sand and gravel was not distinct. A general Germanic word but it is not attested in Gothic, which used in this sense malma , related to Old High German melm "dust" and the first element of the Swedish city name Malmö (the second element meaning "island"), and to Latin molere "to grind."

 Sand has been a figure of innumerability or instability since Old English. In compounds, often it indicates "of the shore, found on sandy beaches." The old U.S. colloquial sense of "grit, endurance, pluck" is by 1867, especially in have sand in (one's) craw . Sands "tract or region composed of sand," is by mid-15c.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 annoy 

 late 13c., anoien, annuien, "to harm, hurt, injure; be troublesome or vexatious to, disquiet, upset," from Anglo-French anuier, Old French enoiier "to weary, vex, anger," anuier "be troublesome or irksome to;" according to French sources these are from Late Latin inodiare "make l

 rag 

 "torn or worn scrap of cloth," early 14c., probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse rögg "shaggy tuft, rough hair," earlier raggw-; Old Danish rag; see rug), or else a back-formation from ragged. It also may represent an unrecorded Old English cognate of Old Norse r

 rile 

 "excite, disturb, vex, annoy," 1825, American English spelling alteration to reflect a dialectal pronunciation of roil (q.v.) in a figurative sense. Compare heist from hoist and in the same era spile for spoil (v.). Bartlett writes that in both England and America roil "is now co

 macadam 

 McAdam (1756-1836), who developed a method of leveling roads and paving them with gravel and outlined the process in his...The idea of mixing tar with the gravel began 1880s....

 drumlin 

 "long, narrow ridge or hill of sand, gravel, and boulders," in areas of Ice Age glaciation and formed somehow by the movement...

 pan 

 "to wash (gravel or sand) in a pan in search of gold," 1839, from pan (n.); thus to pan out "turn out, succeed" (1868) is...

 ore 

 .); and cognate with Low German ur "iron-containing ore," Dutch oer, Old Norse aurr "gravel"); and Old English ar "brass,...

 harry 

 Old English hergian "make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder," the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (source also of Old Frisian urheria "lay waste, ravage, plunder," Old Norse herja "to make a raid, to plunder," 

 nettle 

 "herbaceous plant of the genus Urtica, armed with stinging hairs" (also used of other plants of the genus and of nettle-like plants, generally with a qualifying word), Middle English netle, from Old English netele, from Proto-Germanic *natilon (source also of Old Saxon netila, Mi

 confuse 

 1550s in a literal sense "mix or mingle things or ideas so as to render the elements indistinguishable;" from mid-18c. in the active, figurative sense of "perplex the mind or ideas of, discomfit in mind or feeling," but not in general use until after c. 1800. From 1862 as "errone

 Share gravel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gravel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gravel">Etymology of gravel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gravel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gravel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gravel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gravel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gravel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gravel. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gravel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gravel (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gravel 
 gratulate 
 gratulation 
 gravamen 
 grave 
 grave-digger 
 gravel 
 gravelly 
 gravely 
 graven 
 Gravenstein 
 graver 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix