URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/east
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:32:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: East - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

East - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of east 

 east 

 Old English east , eastan (adj., adv.) "east, easterly, eastward;" easte (n.), from Proto-Germanic *aust- "east," literally "toward the sunrise" (source also of Old Frisian ast "east," aster "eastward," Dutch oost Old Saxon ost , Old High German ostan , German Ost , Old Norse austr "from the east"), from PIE root *aus- (1) "to shine," especially of the dawn. The east is the direction in which dawn breaks. For theory of shift in the geographical sense in Latin, see austral .

 As one of the four cardinal points of the compass, from c. 1200. Meaning "the eastern part of the world" (from Europe) is from c. 1300. Cold War use of East for "communist states" first recorded 1951. French est , Spanish este are borrowings from Middle English, originally nautical. The east wind in Biblical Palestine was scorching and destructive (as in Ezekiel xvii.10); in New England it is bleak, wet, unhealthful. East End of London so called by 1846; East Side of Manhattan so called from 1871; East Indies (India and Southeast Asia) so called 1590s to distinguish them from the West Indies .

 Entries linking to east 

 austral (adj.) 

 "southern, of or pertaining to the south," 1540s, from Latin australis , from auster "south wind; south," from Proto-Italic *aus-tero- (adj.) "towards the dawn," from PIE *heus-tero- (source also of Sanskrit usra- "red; matutinal," usar-budh- "waking at dawn;" Greek aurion "tomorrow;" Lithuanian aušra "dawn;" Old Church Slavonic jutro "dawn, morning; tomorrow;" Old High German ostara "Easter"), from PIE root *aus- (1) "to shine," especially of the dawn.

 The Latin sense shift in auster , if it is indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for "east," for which Latin uses oriens (see Orient (n.)), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian peninsula, "with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy" [Buck]; see Walde, Alois, "Lateinisches etymologisches Wörterbuch," 3rd. ed., vol. I, p.87; Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, "Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue latine," 2nd. ed., p.94.

 Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- "to shine," source of aurora , which also produces words for "burning," with reference to the "hot" south wind that blows into Italy. Thus auster "(hot) south wind," metaphorically extended to "south."

 eastern (adj.) 

 Old English easterne "of the east, from the east; oriental; of the Eastern Orthodox Church; of the eastern part of the globe," from east + -erne , suffix denoting direction. Cognate with Old Saxon ostroni , Old High German ostroni , Old Norse austroenn . Eastern Shore of Maryland and Virginia so called from 1620s.

 eastward 
 Essex 
 northeast 
 Ostmark 
 southeast 
 *aus- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 west 

 Old English west (adv.) "in or toward the west, in a westerly direction," from Proto-Germanic *west- (source also of Old Norse vestr, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Dutch west, Old High German -west, only in compounds, German west), which is of uncertain origin. Perhaps from PIE *wes

 orient 

 by 1741, "to arrange (something) so as to face east," from French s'orienter "to take one's bearings," literally "to face...the east" (also the source of German orientierung), from Old French orient "east," from Latin orientum (see orient (n.))...

 booth 

 a stall for the sale of goods or food or entertainment, at a fair, etc., from Old Danish boþ "temporary dwelling," from East...Lithuanian butas "house," Old Irish both "hut," Bohemian bouda, Polish buda, some of which probably were borrowed from East...

 Ostrogoth 

 c. 1600 (Ostrogothes, plural, is attested from late 14c.), one of the "East Goths," the more easterly of the two great divisions...555 C.E., from Medieval Latin Ostrogothæ, from Germanic, perhaps literally "eastern Goths" from Proto-Germanic *austra- "east...

 pickle 

 or fowl" (early 14c. as a surname), probably from Middle Dutch pekel "pickle, brine," or related words in Low German and East...Frisian (Dutch pekel, East Frisian päkel, German pökel), which are of uncertain origin or original meaning....

 clever 

 1580s, "handy, dexterous, having special manual ability," apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver "expert at seizing...," perhaps from East Frisian klüfer "skillful," or Norwegian dialectic klover "ready, skillful," and perhaps influenced by...

 direction 

 late 14c., direccioun, "action of directing or guiding," from Latin directionem (nominative directio) "a making straight, a straight line, a directing (toward something)," noun of action from past-participle stem of dirigere "to set straight, arrange; give a particular direction 

 us 

 Old English us (cognate with Old Saxon, Old Frisian us, Old Norse, Swedish oss, Dutch ons, German uns), accusative and dative plural of we, from PIE *nes- (2), forming oblique cases of the first person plural personal pronoun (source also of Sanskrit nas, Avestan na, Hittite nash

 stew 

 late 14c., steuen, transitive "to bathe (a person or a body part) in a steam bath" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French estuver "have a hot bath, plunge into a bath; stew" (Modern French étuver), a word of uncertain origin. It is common Romanic (cognates: Spanish estufar, Ital

 Share east 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/east Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/east">Etymology of east by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of east. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/east Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of east," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/east. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of east." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/east. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of east." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/east (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near east 
 ease 
 easeful 
 easel 
 easement 
 easily 
 east 
 Easter 
 Easter Island 
 easterling 
 easterly 
 eastern 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix