URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cremate
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:23:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cremate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cremate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cremate 

 cremate (v.) 

 "to burn, destroy by heat" (especially a dead body, as an alternative to burial), 1851, a back-formation from cremation . Related: Cremated ; cremating .
 also from 1851 

 Entries linking to cremate 

 cremation (n.) 

 "act or custom of burning of the dead," 1620s, from Latin cremationem (nominative crematio ), noun of action from past-participle stem of cremare "to burn, consume by fire" (also used of the dead), from PIE *krem- , extended form of root *ker- (3) "heat, fire."

 The adoption of cremation would relieve us of a muck of threadbare burial-witticisms; but, on the other hand, it would resurrect a lot of mildewed old cremation-jokes that have had a rest for two thousand years. ["Mark Twain," "Life on the Mississippi," 1883]

 *ker- (3) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "heat, fire."

 It might form all or part of: carbon ; carboniferous ; carbuncle ; cremate ; cremation ; hearth .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit kudayati "singes;" Latin carbo "a coal, glowing coal; charcoal," cremare "to burn;" Lithuanian kuriu, kurti "to heat," karštas "hot," krosnis "oven;" Old Church Slavonic kurjo "to smoke," krada "fireplace, hearth;" Russian ceren "brazier;" Old High German harsta "roasting;" Gothic hauri "coal;" Old Norse hyrr "fire;" Old English heorð "hearth."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 burn 

 early 12c., brennen, "be on fire, be consumed by fire; be inflamed with passion or desire, be ardent; destroy (something) with fire, expose to the action of fire, roast, broil, toast; burn (something) in cooking," of objects, "to shine, glitter, sparkle, glow like fire;" chiefly 

 fire 

 Old English fyr "fire, a fire," from Proto-Germanic *fūr- (source also of Old Saxon fiur, Old Frisian fiur, Old Norse fürr, Middle Dutch and Dutch vuur, Old High German fiur, German Feuer "fire"), from PIE *perjos, from root *paewr- "fire." Current spelling is attested as early a

 rife 

 Old English rife "abundant, of common occurrence, prevalent," often of hurtful or obnoxious things, from Proto-Germanic *rif- (source also of Old Norse rifr, Swedish river, Norwegian riv, Middle Dutch riif, Middle Low German rive "abundant, generous"), said to be from PIE root *r

 Friday 

 sixth day of the week, Old English frigedæg "Friday, Frigga's day," from Frige, genitive of *Frigu (see Frigg), Germanic goddess of married love. The day name is a West Germanic translation of Latin dies Veneris "day of (the planet) Venus," which itself translated Greek Aphrodite

 inflation 

 mid-14c., "swelling caused by gathering of 'wind' in the body; flatulence," also, figuratively, "outbursts of pride," from Latin inflationem (nominative inflatio) "a puffing up, a blowing into; flatulence," noun of action from past-participle stem of inflare "blow into, puff up,"

 Adam 

 masc. proper name, the biblical name of the first man, progenitor of the human race, from Hebrew adam "man," literally "(the one formed from the) ground" (Hebrew adamah "ground"); compare Latin homo "man," humanus "human," humus "earth, ground, soil." Compare homunculus. The name

 rigmarole 

 "a long, rambling discourse; incoherent harangue," 1736, apparently from an altered, Kentish colloquial survival of ragman roll "long list, roster, or catalogue" (c. 1500). The origins of this are in Middle English rageman "document recording accusations or offenses," also "an ac

 toast 

 "to brown with heat," late 14c., from Old French toster "to toast, to grill, roast, burn" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *tostare (source of Italian tostare, Spanish tostar), frequentative of Latin torrere (past participle tostus) "to parch," from PIE root *ters- "to dry." Related: To

 helpmeet 

 also help-meet, a ghost word from the 1611 "King James" translation of the Bible, in which it was at first a two-word noun-adjective phrase translating Latin adjutorium simile sibi [Genesis ii.18] as "an help meet for him," and meaning literally "a helper like himself."  Rob

 brown-nose 

 also brownnose, "try excessively to make a good impression on one with authority," 1939, American English colloquial, said to be military slang originally, from brown (adj.) + nose (n.), "from the implication that servility is tantamount to having one's nose in the anus of the pe

 Share cremate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cremate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cremate">Etymology of cremate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cremate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cremate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cremate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cremate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cremate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cremate. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cremate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cremate (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cremate 
 creep 
 creepage 
 creeper 
 creeping 
 creepy 
 cremate 
 cremation 
 crematorium 
 crematory 
 creme 
 creme de la creme 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix