URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tea
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:59:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tea - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tea - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tea 

 tea (n.) 

 1650s, tay , "prepared leaves of the tea plant," also "an infusion of prepared tea leaves used as a beverage," also in early spellings thea , tey , tee and at first pronounced so as to rhyme with obey (Pope); pay (Gay). The modern pronunciation predominates from mid-18c.

 The word is earliest in English as chaa (1590s), also cha , tcha , chia , cia (compare cha , chai ). The two forms reflect two paths of transmission: chaa, etc. are from Portuguese cha , via Macao, from Mandarin (Chinese) ch'a . The later form, which became Modern English tea , is via Dutch thee , from Malay teh and directly from Chinese (Amoy dialect) t'e , which corresponds to Mandarin ch'a .

 The modern English form (along with French thé , Spanish te , German Tee , etc.) reflects the role of the Dutch as chief importers of the leaves in that part of Europe (through the Dutch East India Company, from 1610). Meanwhile, Russian chai , Persian cha , Greek tsai , Arabic shay , and Turkish çay all came by overland trade routes from the Mandarin form.

 Tea was known in Paris by 1635; the practice of drinking it was introduced in England by 1644. The word was extended by 1660s to the tea plant itself, also to similar infusions of the parts of other plants. The slang meaning "marijuana" (which sometimes was brewed in hot water) is attested by 1935, felt as obsolete by late 1960s.

 The meaning "late afternoon meal at which tea is served" is by 1738. Tea-bottle as English slang for "old maid" is attested by 1909. To not do something for all the tea in China "not for anything" is attested by 1905 in Australian English, still earlier without the negative:

 The gallop was a clinking good one, and goes to prove how wonderfully Wings has improved. One could wager all the tea in China that the grey mare was never so well before, for did she not prove it by handily beating Babette, and stretching Goldtop's neck? [sporting notes in "The Daily Advertiser," Wagga Wagga, New South Wales, Dec. 17, 1892] 
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to tea 

 cha (n.) 

 "tea," 1590s, also chaw , ultimately from the Mandarin ch'a "tea;" used in English alongside tea when the beverage was introduced.

 chai (n.) 

 "tea," 1908, from the Russian or Arabic word for "tea" (see tea , and compare cha ). The 1908 citation is in an Arabic context. Now used especially of spiced teas.

 tea party 
 teabag 
 tea-ball 
 teaberry 
 tea-cosy 
 tea-cup 
 tea-garden 
 tea-gown 
 tea-house 
 tea-kettle 
 tea-leaf 
 tea-pot 
 tea-room 
 tea-rose 
 tea-spoon 
 tea-table 
 tea-time 
 tea-tray 
 See All Related Words (21) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Darjeeling 

 As a type of tea, by 1862....The first trial of the tea plant at Darjeeling was made in 1841, with a few seeds grown in Kumaon from China stock....It was quite successful as to its growth, and the quality was approved of by the Assam tea planter who visited Darjeeling...in 1846, and made the first tea here....

 samovar 

 "copper urn, used in Russia and nearby regions, in which water is kept boiling for use as needed in making tea," 1830, from...variti "to cook," from PIE root *wer- "to burn"); but this is perhaps folk-etymology if the word is from Tatar sanabar "tea-urn...

 earl 

 Earl Grey tea (1880s) was originally a Chinese tea blended with bergamot oil, supposedly from a recipe given to Charles,...

 gaol 

 see jail (n.), you tea-sodden football hooligan....

 immense 

 Miss Tippet from the cloisters, could not drink tea with Master Parchment at the White Conduit-house, unless it was an immense...

 coffee 

 houses and coffee had replaced beer as a breakfast drink, but its use there declined 18c. with the introduction of cheaper tea...In the American colonies, however, the tax on tea kept coffee popular....

 grocery 

 This word is not in the English dictionaries except in the sense of grocer's ware, such as tea, sugar, spice, etc.; in which...

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 caffeine 

 trimethyl-derivative of xanthine, 1830, from German Kaffein, coined by chemist F.F. Runge (1795-1867), apparently from German Kaffee "coffee" (see coffee) + chemical suffix -ine (2) (German -in). So called because the alkaloid was found in coffee beans; its presence accounts for 

 bush 

 "many-stemmed woody plant," from Old English bysc (found in place names), from West Germanic *busk "bush, thicket" (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with Old French (busche "firewood") and Medieval Latin

 Share tea 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tea Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tea">Etymology of tea by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tea. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tea Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tea," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tea. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tea." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tea. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tea." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tea (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tea 
 Taylor 
 Tay-Sachs 
 T-bone 
 tchotchke 
 Te Deum 
 tea 
 tea party 
 teabag 
 tea-ball 
 teaberry 
 teach 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close