URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronchitis
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:00:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bronchitis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bronchitis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bronchitis 

 bronchitis (n.) 

 "inflammation of the bronchial membrane," coined in Modern Latin 1808 by Charles Bedham, from bronchia "the bronchial tubes" (see bronchia ) + -itis "inflammation."
 also from 1808 

 Entries linking to bronchitis 

 bronchia (n.) 

 "bronchial tubes," 1670s, from Latinized form of Greek bronkhia , plural of bronkhos "windpipe, throat," which is of unknown etymology.

 -itis 

 word-forming element in medicine denoting "diseases characterized by inflammation" (of the specified part), Modern Latin, from Greek -itis , feminine of adjectival suffix -ites "pertaining to." Feminine because it was used with an implied nosos "disease," a feminine noun; especially in arthritis (nosos) "(disease) of the joints." Arthritis (16c.) was one of the earliest appearances of the suffix in English and from it the suffix was abstracted in other uses.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Caesar 

 "an emperor, a ruler, a dictator," late 14c., cesar, from Cæsar, originally a surname of the Julian gens in Rome, elevated to a title after Caius Julius Caesar (100 B.C.E.-44 B.C.E.) became dictator; it was used as a title of emperors down to Hadrian (138 C.E.). The name is of un

 sarcasm 

 1570s, sarcasmus, "a biting taunt or gibe, a satirical remark or expression," from Late Latin sarcasmus, from late Greek sarkasmos "a sneer, jest, taunt, mockery," from sarkazein "to speak bitterly, sneer," literally "to strip off the flesh" (like dogs), from sarx (genitive sarko

 laconic 

 "concise, abrupt," 1580s, literally "of or pertaining to the region around ancient Sparta" in Greece, probably via Latin Laconicus "of Laconia," from Greek Lakonikos "Laconian, of Laconia," adjective from Lakon "person from Lakonia," the district around Sparta in southern Greece 

 companion 

 c. 1300, "one who accompanies or associates with another," from Old French compagnon "fellow, mate, friend, partner" (12c.), from Late Latin companionem (nominative companio), literally "bread fellow, messmate," from Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + panis "bread," from PIE

 superficial 

 late 14c., in anatomy, "on or at the surface of the skin, external, not deep-seated," from Old French superficial, superficiel and directly from Late Latin superficialis "of or pertaining to a surface," from superficies "surface, upper side, top," from super "above, over" (see su

 lest 

 c. 1200, "that not," especially "for fear that" [OED calls it a negative particle of intention], from a contraction of the Old English phrase þy læs þe "the less that," from þy, instrumental case of demonstrative article þæt "that" + læs (see less) + conjunction þe (see the). The

 save 

 c. 1200, saven, "to deliver from some danger; rescue from peril, bring to safety," also "prevent the death of;" also "to deliver from sin or its consequences; admit to eternal life; gain salvation," from Old French sauver "keep (safe), protect, redeem," from Late Latin salvare "m

 skeptic 

 also sceptic, 1580s, "member of an ancient Greek school that doubted the possibility of real knowledge," from French sceptique and directly from Latin scepticus "the sect of the Skeptics," from Greek skeptikos (plural Skeptikoi "the Skeptics, followers of Pyrrho"), noun use of ad

 celebrate 

 mid-15c., "to perform publicly with appropriate rites," originally of the Mass, from Latin celebratus "much-frequented; kept solemn; famous," past participle of celebrare "assemble to honor," also "to publish; sing praises of; practice often," originally "to frequent in great num

 rack 

 c. 1300, "grating or open frame with bars or pegs upon which things are hung or placed," especially for kitchen use, possibly from Middle Dutch rec "framework," literally "something stretched out, related to recken (modern rekken) "stretch out," cognate with Old English reccan "t

 Share bronchitis 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronchitis Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronchitis">Etymology of bronchitis by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bronchitis. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronchitis Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bronchitis," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronchitis. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bronchitis." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronchitis. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bronchitis." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronchitis (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bronchitis 
 bromine 
 bronchia 
 bronchial 
 bronchiectasis 
 bronchiole 
 bronchitis 
 broncho- 
 bronchoscopy 
 bronchus 
 bronco 
 brontophobia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix