URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cone
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:21:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cone - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cone - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cone 

 cone (n.) 

 1560s, "A solid generated by the revolution of a right-angled triangle upon one of its sides as an axis" [Century Dictionary], from French cone (16c.) or directly from Latin conus "a cone, peak of a helmet," from Greek konos "cone, spinning top, pine cone," which is perhaps from a PIE root *ko- "to sharpen" (source also of Sanskrit sanah "whetstone," Latin catus "sharp," Old English han "stone"), but Beekes considers it likely a Pre-Greek word.

 There is a use from c. 1400 as "angle or corner of a quadrant," from Latin. From 1560s as "dry, cone-shaped fruit of the pine;" from 1771 as "hill surrounding the crater of a volcano; 1867 as "minute structure in the retina of the eye;" by 1909 as "a conical wafer to hold ice-cream." Cone-shell is from 1770, so called for its shape; cone-flower is from 1822, so called for its conical receptacles.

 Probably the greatest "rage" of the year in the eating line has been the ice cream cone. The craze has known no section, although the Middle West has eaten more than any other section, and the South has yet to acquire the habit. As a result of this craze hundreds of cone factories have sprung up, and every one has made large profits. Thus an important side line has come to the fore in aid of the ice cream industry. [The Ice Cream Trade Journal, October 1909]

 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to cone 

 conic (adj.) 

 1560s, "pertaining to a cone;" 1610s, "having the form of a cone," from Modern Latin conicus , from Greek konikos "cone-shaped," from konos (see cone ).

 conifer (n.) 

 "a plant producing cones, a plant of the order Coniferae " (which includes pine, fir, and cypress trees), 1847, from Latin conifer "cone-bearing, bearing conical fruit," from conus "cone" (see cone ) + ferre "to bear, carry" (from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry").

 conus 
 ice-cream 
 pine-cone 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ellipse 

 So called because the conic section of the cutting plane makes a smaller angle with the base than does the side of the cone...B.C.E.). to the curve which previously had been called the section of the acute-angled cone, but the word earlier had been...

 parabola 

 "a curve commonly defined as the intersection of a cone with a plane parallel with its side," 1570s, from Modern Latin parabola...

 pina colada 

 The first word was originally "pine-cone" (and formerly pinna), from Latin pinea (see pineapple)....

 roundness 

 Roundness applies with equal freedom to a circle, a sphere, a cylinder, or a cone, and, by extension, to forms that by approach...

 cinder 

 Geological sense "coarse ash thrown out by volcanoes" is from 1774; cinder cone, formed around a volcano by successive eruptions...

 enjoy 

 modern use it has a tendency to lose its connection with pleasure: newspaper photo captions say someone enjoys an ice cream cone...

 nose 

 (nose cone in the space rocket sense is from 1949). Meaning "sense of smell" is from mid-14c....

 tip 

 c. 1300, "to knock down, overturn, topple, knock askew" (transitive), of uncertain origin, possibly from Scandinavian (compare Swedish tippa "to tip, dump"), or from a special use of tip (n.). Intransitive sense of "to fall over, be overturned" is from mid-15c. Related: Tipped; t

 pit 

 Old English pytt (Kentish *pet), "natural or man-made depression in the ground, water hole, well; grave," from Proto-Germanic *putt- "pool, puddle" (source also of Old Frisian pet, Old Saxon putti, Old Norse pyttr, Middle Dutch putte, Dutch put, Old High German pfuzza, German Pfü

 pinot 

 type of grape vine used in wine-making, 1912, American English variant spelling of French pineau (attested in English from 1763), name of a family of wine grapes, from pin "pine tree" (see pine (n.)) + diminutive suffix -eau. So called from the shape of the grape clusters. Varian

 Share cone 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cone Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cone">Etymology of cone by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cone. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cone Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cone," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cone. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cone." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cone. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cone." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cone (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cone 
 conduction 
 conductive 
 conductor 
 conduit 
 condyle 
 cone 
 Conestoga 
 coney 
 Coney Island 
 confab 
 confabulate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix