URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/shoot
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:58:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Shoot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Shoot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of shoot 

 shoot (v.) 

 Middle English sheten "hasten from place to place; move swiftly; thrust forward; discharge a missile, send an arrow from a bow," from Old English sceotan (class II strong verb; past tense sceat , past participle scoten ), "dart forth, go swiftly and suddenly," also "discharge (a missile or weapon);" also, of a person, "go suddenly from place to place;" also transitive "send out or forth with sudden or violent motion; put forth or extend in any direction; strike with anything shot."

 This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *skeutanan (source also of Old Saxon skiotan , Old Norse skjota "to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch, push, shove quickly," Old Frisian skiata , Middle Dutch skieten , Dutch schieten , Old High German skiozan , German schießen ), often said to be from PIE root *skeud- "to shoot, chase, throw," but Boutkan gives it no IE etymology.

 The sense of "dart along" (as pain through the nerves or a meteor in the sky) is by late 13c.; that of "come forth" (as a plant) is by late 15c. As "increase rapidly, grow quickly" by 1530s (often with up (adv.)). By 1690s as "be emitted in rays or flashes" (as light is); by 1530s in weaving, "variegate by interspersing colors."

 The general sports sense of "kick, hit, throw etc. toward the goal" is by 1874. In reference to pool playing, by 1926. The meaning "strive (for)" is by 1967, American English. The sense of "descend (a river) quickly" is from 1610s. The slang meaning "to inject by means of a hypodermic needle" is attested by 1914 among addicts. The meaning "to photograph" (especially a movie) is from 1890.

 As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit , it is recorded by 1934.

 Shoot the breeze "chat" is attested by 1938 (as shooting the breeze ), perhaps originally U.S. military slang. Shoot to kill is attested from 1867. Slang shoot the cat "vomit" is from 1785.

 To shoot the moon in British slang formerly meant "depart by night with ones goods to escape back rent" (c. 1823).

 O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, 

 And 'tis cash often causes a rumpus at home ; 

 'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ; 

 And 'tis cash always keeps our pipes in tune. 

 Cash! cash! &c. 

 ["The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant Collection of the Most Popular Songs," vol. IV, London, 1829] 

 Shoot against the moon was used by Massinger (1634) as a figure of an impossible attempt. The card-playing sense of shoot the moon perhaps was influenced by gambler's shoot the works (1922) "go for broke" in shooting dice.

 shoot (n.1) 

 "young branch of a tree or plant," mid-15c., from shoot (v.). Also "heavy, sudden rush of water; a river-fall or rapid," especially one through which a canoe or timber can "shoot" (1610s); "artificial channel for water running down" (1707); "conduit for coal, etc." (1844). In some senses influenced by or confused with chute (n.1).
 also from mid-15c. 

 shoot (n.2) 

 1530s, "an act of shooting;" 1852 as "a shooting match or party," from shoot (v.). Also perhaps in part from Middle English shote, schote . "place through which an animal passes quickly."
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to shoot 

 chute (n.1) 

 1725, American English, "fall of water" (earlier shoot , 1610s), from French chute "fall," from Old French cheoite "a fall," fem. past participle of cheoir "to fall," from Latin cadere "to fall," from PIE root *kad- "to fall." Meaning "inclined tube, trough" is from 1804; that of "narrow passage for cattle, etc." first recorded 1871. In North America, absorbing some senses of similar-sounding shoot (n.1).

 up (adv., prep.) 

 "to or toward a point or place higher than another," Old English up , uppe , from Proto-Germanic *upp- "up," from PIE root *upo "under," also "up from under," hence also "over." As a preposition, from late Old English as "down onto, above and touching, sitting on, at the summit of;" from c. 1200 as "to a higher place."

 Often used elliptically for go up , come up , rise up , etc. To be up to (something) "engaged in some activity" (typically reprehensible) is by 1837. Slang up the river "in jail" is recorded by 1891, originally in reference to Sing Sing, which is up the Hudson from New York City. To drive someone up the wall (1951) is from the notion of the behavior of lunatics or caged animals. Insulting retort up yours (scil. ass (n.2)) is attested by late 19c.

 From the same Proto-Germanic source are Old Frisian, Old Saxon up "up, upward," Old Norse upp ; Danish, Dutch op ; Old High German uf , German auf "up;" Gothic iup "up, upward," uf "on, upon, under;" Old High German oba , German ob "over, above, on, upon."

 bloodshot 
 offshoot 
 overshoot 
 scoot 
 sharp-shooter 
 sheet 
 shooter 
 shooting 
 shootist 
 shoot-out 
 shoot-up 
 shot 
 shotten 
 shout 
 shute 
 skeet 
 skit 
 skite 
 See All Related Words (25) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 moon 

 "heavenly body which revolves about the earth monthly," Middle English mone, from Old English mona, from Proto-Germanic *menon- (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German mano, Old Frisian mona, Old Norse mani, Danish maane, Dutch maan, German Mond, Gothic mena "moon"), from P

 scoot 

 1758, "run, fly, make off, move suddenly or swiftly," perhaps originally nautical slang, of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skjota "to shoot," and thus related to shoot (v.). There are similar words in dialect and jargon, but the connection

 shotten 

 of a fish, "having shot its spawn," and accordingly of inferior value, early 15c., past-participle adjective from shoot (v.). Applied to persons, with sense of "exhausted by sickness," from 1590s. Also sometimes used of curdled milk. Go thy ways, old Jack; die when thou wilt, if

 browse 

 , "feed on buds, eat leaves or twigs from" trees or bushes, from Old French broster "to sprout, bud," from brost "young shoot..., twig, green food fit for cattle or deer," probably from Proto-Germanic *brust- "bud, shoot," from PIE *bhreus- "to swell...

 scout 

 contempt" (c. 1600, now obsolete), of Scandinavian origin (compare Old Norse skuta, skute "to taunt"), from skotja "to shoot...notion of a "shooting of words"), which according to Watkins is from a Proto-Germanic *skut- from PIE root *skeud- "to shoot...

 scud 

 "to move quickly, shoot or fly along with haste," 1530s, a word of uncertain origin, perhaps echoic somehow, or perhaps it...OED is against connection with Danish skyde "shoot, push, shove," Old English sceotan "to shoot."...

 spire 

 Old English spir "a sprout or shoot of a plant, spike, blade, tapering stalk of grass," from Proto-Germanic *spiraz (source...also of Old Norse spira "a stalk, slender tree," Dutch spier "shoot, blade of grass," Middle Low German spir "a small point...

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 Share shoot 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/shoot Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/shoot">Etymology of shoot by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of shoot. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/shoot Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of shoot," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shoot. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of shoot." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shoot. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of shoot." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/shoot (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near shoot 
 shogunate 
 shoo 
 shoo-fly 
 shoo-in 
 shook 
 shoot 
 shooter 
 shooting 
 shootist 
 shoot-out 
 shoot-up 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix