URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pound
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pound - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pound - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pound 

 pound (n.1) 

 [fundamental unit of weight] Old English pund "pound" (in weight or money), also "pint," from Proto-Germanic *punda- "pound" as a measure of weight (source of Gothic pund , Old High German phunt , German Pfund , Middle Dutch pont , Old Frisian and Old Norse pund ), an early borrowing from Latin pondo "pound," originally in libra pondo "a pound by weight," from pondo (adv.) "by weight," ablative of pondus "weight," from stem of pendere "to hang, cause to hang; weigh" (from PIE root *(s)pen- "to draw, stretch, spin"). Perhaps the notion is the weight of a thing measured by how much it stretches a cord.

 Meaning "unit of money" was in Old English, originally "a (Tower) pound of silver."

 In the Middle Ages it was reckoned variously: the Tower pound (12 ounces), the merchant's pound (15), the avoirdupois (16), the Troy (12); the 16-ounce pound was established before late 14c. Pound cake (1747) is so called because it has a pound, more or less, of each ingredient. Pound of flesh is from "Merchant of Venice" IV.i. The abbreviations lb. , £ are from libra "pound," and reflect the medieval custom of keeping accounts in Latin (see Libra ).

 A peny yn seson spent wille safe a pounde. [Paston Letters, 1457]

 pound (n.2) 

 "enclosed place for animals," especially an enclosure maintained by authorities for confining cattle or other beasts when at large or trespassing, late 14c., from a late Old English word attested in compounds (such as pundfald "penfold, pound"), related to pyndan "to dam up, enclose (water)," and thus from the same root as pond . Ultimate origin unknown. Also used as a storage place for other goods seized; as a lot for impounded motor vehicles by 1970.
 also from late 14c. 

 pound (v.) 

 Middle English pounen , "pulverize (a herb or an ingredient of a medicine or perfume), grind (grain)," from Old English punian "crush by beating, pulverize, beat, bruise," from West Germanic *puno- (source also of Low German pun , Dutch puin "fragments"). With unetymological -d- from 16c. Meaning "to beat, strike, punch (someone)" is from early 14c. Sense of "beat or thrash as with the fists or a heavy instrument" is by 1790. Related: Pounded ; pounding .

 Entries linking to pound 

 Libra (n.) 

 zodiac constellation represented by a pair of scales, late Old English, from Latin libra "a balance, pair of scales," also "pound (unit of weight)," from Proto-Italic *leithra- "pound." De Vaan compares Greek litra "name of a Sicilian coin," which "was probably borrowed from an Italic language at the stage containing [ -thr- ]."

 Not a separate constellation in ancient Greece, where it was khelae , "the claws" of adjacent Skorpios. Nativized in Old Norse as skala-merki . Meaning "person born under the sign of Libra" is from 1894. Related: Libral ; Libran .

 pond (n.) 

 c. 1300 (by mid-13c. in compounds, c. 1200 in surnames, possibly in Old English), "artificially banked body of water," variant of pound "enclosed place" (for livestock, etc.; see pound (n.2)). Applied locally to natural pools and small lakes from late 15c. Jocular use in reference to the Atlantic Ocean dates from 1640s. Pond scum "free-floating freshwater algae" ( Spirogyra ) is from 1864 (also called frog-spittle and brook-silk ; as figurative for "someone extremely repulsive," it is attested from 1984.

 D 
 expend 
 expense 
 impound 
 kettle 
 pension 
 peso 
 poundage 
 recompense 
 stipend 
 *(s)pen- 
 -pounder 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 expense 

 also formerly expence, late 14c., "action of spending or giving away, a laying out or expending," also "funds provided for expenses, expense money; damage or loss from any cause," from Anglo-French expense, Old French espense "money provided for expenses," from Late Latin expensa

 kettle 

 "metal vessel used for boiling or heating liquids over a flame," Old English cetil, citel (Mercian), from Proto-Germanic *katilaz (compare Old Saxon ketel, Old Frisian zetel, Middle Dutch ketel, Old High German kezzil, German Kessel), which usually is said to be derived from Lati

 pension 

 late 14c., pensioun, "payment for services," especially "a regular reward or annual payment out of a will or benefice" (early 14c., in Anglo-Latin), from Old French pension "payment, rent" (13c.) and directly from Latin pensionem (nominative pensio) "a payment, installment, rent,

 ounce 

 unit of weight, the twelfth part of a pound, early 14c., from Old French once, unce, a measure of weight or time (12c.),...from Latin uncia "one-twelfth part" (of a pound, a foot, etc.), from Latin unus "one" (from PIE root *oi-no- "one, unique...It was one-twelfth of a pound in the Troy system of weights, but one-sixteenth in avoirdupois....In figurative expressions and proverbs, an ounce of X is compared or contrasted with a pound of Y from 1520s....

 imagism 

 a movement in poetry that sought clarity of expression through use of precise visual images, "hard light, clear edges" [Pound...], coined 1912 by Ezra Pound; see image (n.) + -ism....

 piston 

 " in Middle French "large pestle," from Old Italian pistone "a piston," variant of pestone "a pestle," from pestare "to pound...," from Late Latin pistare, frequentative of Latin pinsere (past participle pistus) "to pound" (see pestle)....

 logopoeia 

 based on context and prior usage, a term introduced, along with phanopoeia (visual image) and melopoeia (sound), by Ezra Pound...[Pound, "ABC of Reading," 1934]...

 flutter 

 Old English floterian "to flutter (of birds), to fly before, flicker, float to and fro, be tossed by waves," frequentative of flotian "to float" (see float (v.)). Meaning "throw (someone) into confusion" is from 1660s. Related: Fluttered; fluttering. As a noun, "quick, irregular 

 piaster 

 also piastre, 1620s, "Spanish dollar, piece of eight," also used as the name of a monetary unit and coin of Turkey (1610s, in Turkish called ghurush, but originally debased Spanish dollars), from French piastre, from Italian piastra "thin metal plate," short for impiastro "plaste

 traipse 

 1590s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French trepasser "pass over or beyond," from Old French trespasser "cross, traverse, transgress" (see trespass). Or from a source related to Middle Dutch trappen, dialectal Norwegian trappa "to tread, stamp" (see trap (n.)). Libe

 Share pound 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pound Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pound">Etymology of pound by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pound. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pound Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pound," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pound. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pound." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pound. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pound." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pound (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pound 
 poulter 
 poulterer 
 poultice 
 poultry 
 pounce 
 pound 
 poundage 
 -pounder 
 pour 
 pouring 
 pourpoint 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix