URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/more
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:02:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: More - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

More - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of more 

 more (adj.) 

 Old English mara "greater, relatively greater, more, stronger, mightier," used as a comparative of micel "great" (see mickle ), from Proto-Germanic *maiz (source also of Old Saxon mera , Old Norse meiri , Old Frisian mara , Middle Dutch mere , Old High German meriro , German mehr , Gothic maiza ), from PIE *meis- (source also of Avestan mazja "greater," Old Irish mor "great," Welsh mawr "great," Greek -moros "great," Oscan mais "more"), perhaps from a root *me- "big."

 Sometimes used as an adverb in Old English ("in addition"), but Old English generally used related ma "more" as adverb and noun. This became Middle English mo , but more in this sense began to predominate in later Middle English.

 "Take some more tea," the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

 "I've had nothing yet," Alice replied in an offended tone, "so I can't take more."

 "You mean you can't take less," said the Hatter: "it's very easy to take more than nothing."

 As a noun, "a greater quantity, amount, or number," in Old English. More and more  "larger and larger amounts" is from 12c. More or less "in a greater or lesser degree" is from early 13c.; appended to a statement to indicate nearness but not precision, from 1580s. The more the merrier "the larger the company the greater the enjoyment" is from late 14c. ( þe mo þe myryer ).

 Entries linking to more 

 mickle (adj., n.) 

 "great, large; much, abundant; a great deal," a dialectal survival of Old English micel , mycel "great, intense, big, long, much, many," from Proto-Germanic *mekilaz (source also of Old Saxon mikil , Old Norse mikill , Old High German mihhil , Gothic mikils ), from PIE root *meg- "great." Its main modern form is much (q.v.); the common Middle English form was muchel . The phonetic development of the dialectal survival is obscure and might reflect Old Norse influence. Related: Mickleness . Middle English had muchel-what (pron.) "many various things."

 mo 

 representing African-American vernacular pronunciation of more , by 1902; it was an acceptable variant form of more in the Middle Ages and has roots in Old English; see more .

 Grief is but a wound to woe ;

 Gentlest fair, mourn, mourn no mo.

 [John Fletcher (1579–1625), rhymed couplet from "Queen of Corinth"] 

 anymore 
 claymore 
 evermore 
 furthermore 
 moreover 
 most 
 nevermore 
 -more 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 claymore 

 1749, "two-edged, heavy broadsword of ancient Scottish Highlanders," from Gaelic claidheamh mor "great sword," from claidheb "sword" (compare Welsh cleddyf), which is possibly from a PIE root *kel- "to strike" (see holt) + mor "great" (compare Welsh mawr; see more). An antiquaria

 most 

 Old English mast "greatest in number, amount, or extent; largest," earlier mæst, from Proto-Germanic *maistaz (source also of Old Saxon mest, Old Frisian mast, Old Norse mestr, Dutch meest, German meist, Gothic maists "most"), superlative form of Proto-Germanic *maiz, root of Old

 less 

 Old English læs (adv.) "less, lest;" læssa (adj.) "less, smaller, fewer" (Northumbrian leassa), from Proto-Germanic *laisizan (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian les "less;" Middle Dutch lise "soft, gentle," German leise "soft"), from PIE root *leis- (2) "small" (source also o

 aggravate 

 1520s, "make heavy, burden down," from Latin aggravatus, past participle of aggravare "to render more troublesome," literally...The earlier English verb was aggrege "make heavier or more burdensome; make more oppressive; increase, intensify" (late 14c...To aggravate has properly only one meaning — to make (an evil) worse or more serious. [Fowler]...

 plurality 

 late 14c., pluralite, "state of being more than one; a number greater than one," from Old French pluralite (14c.), from Late...Latin pluralitatem (nominative pluralitas) "the plural number," from Latin pluralis "of or belonging to more than one" (...Church sense of "holding of two or more offices concurrently" is from mid-14c....Meaning "greater number, more than half" is from 1570s but is etymologically improper, perhaps modeled on majority....

 Pliocene 

 in geology, in reference to the most recent division of the Tertiary, 1833, from plio- "more" (Latinized form of pleio-)...Roughly 5.3 million to 2.6 million years ago, it is distinguished from the other two epochs by having more fossils of still-existing...The Pliocene and the more recent Pleistocene, both comparatively brief, commonly now are combined as the Plio-Pleistocene...

 specially 

 As "more than others, above and beyond," mid-14c. A doublet of especially....Special is more common than especial, which has the same meaning; but especially is for rhythmical reasons (because...unaccented particle occurs, and where, therefore, a word with an accent on the first syllable is instinctively avoided) much more...

 Rome 

 capital of Italy; seat of an ancient republic and empire; city of the Papacy, Old English, from Old French Rome, from Latin Roma, a word of uncertain origin. "The original Roma quadrata was the fortified enclosure on the Palatine hill," according to Tucker, who finds "no probabil

 extent 

 c. 1300, extente, "tax levied on value; value of property for taxation," from Anglo-French extente, estente "extent, extension;" in law, "valuation of land, stretch of land," from fem. past participle of Old French extendre "extend," from Latin extendere "to spread out, spread" (

 than 

 Old English þan, conjunctive particle used after a comparative adjective or adverb, from þanne, þænne, þonne "then" (see then). Developed from the adverb then, and not distinguished from it by spelling until c. 1700. The earliest use is in West Germanic comparative forms introduc

 Share more 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/more Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/more">Etymology of more by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of more. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/more Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of more," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/more. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of more." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/more. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of more." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/more (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near more 
 morbid 
 morbidity 
 mordacious 
 mordant 
 Mordecai 
 more 
 -more 
 morel 
 morello 
 moreover 
 mores 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix