URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/platinum
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Platinum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Platinum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of platinum 

 platinum (n.) 

 metallic element, 1812, Modern Latin, altered from earlier platina , from Spanish platina "platinum," diminutive of plata "silver," from Old French plate or Old Provençal plata "sheet of metal" (see plate (n.)). Related: Platiniferous .

 The metal looks like silver, and the Spaniards at first thought it an inferior sort of silver, hence the name platina . It was first obtained from Spanish colonies in Mexico and Colombia, brought to Europe in 1735, and identified as an element 1741. Taken into English as platina (1750), it took its modern form (with element ending -ium ) in 1812, at the time the names of elements were being regularized.

 As a grayish-white color (similar to that of the metal) it is attested by 1923; especially as a shade of blond hair, it is attested by 1927 (in platinum blonde "woman with platinum-blonde hair;" Jean Harlow, famously associated with the label, starred in a popular movie of that name in 1931).

 There is a blonde type to me more irresistibly lovely than all the rest of the women who come under the "preferred" classification. She is the platinum blonde. ... There are thousands of blondes with gold in their hair, and as many with red, and quite as many again with the yellow of corn, some real and sometimes corned with the aid of a well known bleaching ingredient—but the platinum blonde maintains her supremacy by her rarity. [Antoinette Donnelly, beauty advice column in New York "Daily News," Jan. 25, 1927]

  As a designation for a recording that has sold at least one million copies, platinum is attested from 1960 ("The Battle of New Orleans"); in the late '50s it had been used to commemorate 3 million sales of a record (Pat Boone "Love Letters in the Sand"), and, from 1954, 25 million in total record sales (Jo Stafford, Gene Autry). 
 also from 1812 

 Entries linking to platinum 

 plate (n.) 

 mid-13c., "flat sheet of gold or silver," also "flat, round coin," from Old French plate "thin piece of metal" (late 12c.), from Medieval Latin plata "plate, piece of metal," perhaps via Vulgar Latin *plattus , formed on model of Greek platys "flat, broad" (from PIE root *plat- "to spread"). The cognate in Spanish ( plata ) and Portuguese ( prata ) has become the usual word for "silver," superseding argento via a shortening of *plata d'argento "plate of silver, coin."

 From 14c. as "armor made of sheets of metal." Meaning "table utensils" (originally of silver or gold only) is from Middle English. Meaning "shallow dish on which food is served at table," now usually of china or earthenware, originally of metal or wood, is from mid-15c. Meaning "articles which have been covered with a plating of precious metal" is from 1540s.

 In photography, "common rectangular piece of glass used to receive the picture," by 1840. The baseball sense "home base" is from 1857. Geological sense "nearly rigid part of the earth's lithosphere" is attested from 1904; plate tectonics is attested from 1967. Plate-glass for a superior kind of thick glass used for mirrors, shop-windows, etc., is recorded from 1729.

 *plat- 

 also *pletə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to spread;" extension of root *pele- (2) "flat; to spread."

 It might form all or part of: clan ; flan ; flat (adj.) "without curvature or projection;" flat (n.) "a story of a house;" flatter (v.); flounder (n.) "flatfish;" implant ; piazza ; place ; plaice ; plane ; (n.4) type of tree; plant ; plantain (n.2); plantar ; plantation ; plantigrade ; plat ; plate ; plateau ; platen ; platform ; platinum ; platitude ; Platonic ; Plattdeutsch ; platter ; platypus ; plaza ; supplant ; transplant .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit prathati "spreads out;" Hittite palhi "broad;" Greek platys "broad, flat;" Latin planta "sole of the foot;" Lithuanian platus "broad;" German Fladen "flat cake;" Old Norse flatr "flat;" Old English flet "floor, dwelling;" Old Irish lethan "broad."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 osmium 

 metallic element of the platinum group, 1803, coined in Modern Latin by its discoverer, English chemist Smithson Tennant...

 precious 

 Precious metals (1776) "gold and silver (and sometimes platinum)" are those that are rare and costly enough to be used as...

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 set 

 Middle English setten, from Old English settan (transitive) "cause to sit; make or cause to rest as on a seat; cause to be put, placed, or seated;" also "put in a definite place," also "arrange, fix adjust; fix or appoint (a time) for some affair or transaction," and "cause (thou

 god 

 also God; Old English god "supreme being, deity; the Christian God; image of a god; godlike person," from Proto-Germanic *guthan (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch god, Old High German got, German Gott, Old Norse guð, Gothic guþ), which is of uncertain origin; perhaps 

 issue 

 c. 1300, "an exit," from Old French issue "a way out, a going out, exit; final event," from fem. past participle of issir "to go out," from Latin exire "go out, go forth; become public; flow, gush, pour forth" (source also of Italian uscire, Catalan exir), from ex- "out" (see ex-

 abandon 

 late 14c., "to give up (something) absolutely, relinquish control, give over utterly;" also reflexively, "surrender (oneself), yield (oneself) utterly" (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandonner "surrender, release; give freely, permit," also reflexive, "devote 

 chow 

 "food," originally especially "Chinese food," 1856, American English (originally in California), from Chinese pidgin English chow-chow (1795) "food; mixed pickle or preserve; mix or medley of any sort," perhaps a reduplication of Chinese cha or tsa "mixed," or Cantonese chaau "to

 bosom 

 Old English bosm "breast; womb; surface; ship's hold," from West Germanic *bōsmaz (source also of Old Frisian bosm, Old Saxon bosom, Middle Dutch boesem, Dutch boezem, Old High German buosam, German Busen "bosom, breast"), which is perhaps from PIE root *bhou- "to grow, swell," o

 Share platinum 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/platinum Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/platinum">Etymology of platinum by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of platinum. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/platinum Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of platinum," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/platinum. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of platinum." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/platinum. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of platinum." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/platinum (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near platinum 
 plateau 
 platelet 
 platen 
 platform 
 plating 
 platinum 
 platitude 
 Platonic 
 Platonism 
 Platonist 
 platoon 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix