URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/churl
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:55:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Churl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Churl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of churl 

 churl (n.) 

 Old English ceorl "peasant, one of the lowest class of freemen, man without rank," from Proto-Germanic *kerlaz, *karlaz (source also of Old Frisian zerl "man, fellow," Middle Low German kerle , Dutch kerel "freeman of low degree," German Kerl "man, husband," Old Norse karl "old man, man").

 It had various meaning in early Middle English, including "man of the common people," "a country man," "husbandman," "free peasant;" by 1300, it meant "bondman, villain," also "fellow of low birth or rude manners."

 For words for "common man" that acquire an insulting flavor over time, compare boor , villain . In this case, however, the same word also has come to mean "king" in many languages (such as Lithuanian karalius , Czech kral , Polish król ) via Charlemagne .

 Entries linking to churl 

 boor (n.) 

 early 14c., "country-man, peasant farmer, rustic," from Old French bovier "herdsman," from Latin bovis , genitive of bos "cow, ox." This was reinforced by or merged with native Old English gebur "dweller, farmer, peasant" (unrelated but similar in sound and sense), and 16c. by its Dutch cognate boer , from Middle Dutch gheboer "fellow dweller," from Proto-Germanic *buram "dweller," especially "farmer" (compare German Bauer ), from PIE root *bheue- "to be, exist, grow."

 "A word of involved history in and out of English, though the ultimate etymology is clear enough" [OED]. In English it often was applied to agricultural laborers in or from other lands, as opposed to the native yeoman ; the negative transferred sense of "one who is rude in manners," attested by 1560s (in boorish ), is from the city-dweller's notion of clownish rustics. Related: Boorishness .

 Charlemagne 

 king of the Franks (742-814), literally "Carl the Great," from French form of Medieval Latin Carolus Magnus (see Charles + Magnus ).

 villain 
 carl 
 churlish 
 farmer 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 carl 

 c. 1300, "bondsman; common man, man of low birth," from Old Norse karl "man" (as opposed to "woman"), "male, freeman," from Proto-Germanic *karlon- (source also of Dutch karel "a fellow," Old High German karl "a man, husband"). The same Proto-Germanic source produced Old English 

 grouch 

 "ill-tempered person," 1896, earlier "state of irritable glumness" (1890, in expressions such as to have a grouch on), U.S. college student slang, of uncertain origin, possibly from grutching "complaint, grumbling" (see grutch). The Grouch, on the other Hand, gave a correct Imit

 skinflint 

 "miser, one who makes use of contemptible economy to keep money," c. 1700 ("Dictionary of the Canting Crew"), slang ; literally "kind of person who would skin a flint to save or gain something," from skin (v.) + flint. Flay-flint in same sense is from 1670s. Among the 18c. slang 

 earl 

 Old English eorl "brave man, warrior, leader, chief" (contrasted with ceorl "churl"), from Proto-Germanic *erlaz, which is...

 serf 

 Middle English sometimes included this class under bond-man, or theu (from Old English þeow), also carl or churl....

 boy 

 ME boi meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate 1400....

 fire-eater 

 1670s, "juggler who appears to swallow fire as part of an act," from fire (n.) + eater. From 1804 as "person of irascible or recklessly defiant disposition;" especially in U.S. history in reference to vehement Southern partizans (1851). Perhaps due to the extended senses, fire-sw

 barbarian 

 mid-14c., "foreign, of another nation or culture," from Medieval Latin barbarinus (see barbarian (n.)). The meaning "of or pertaining to savages, rude, uncivilized" is from 1590s....early 15c., in reference to classical history, "a non-Roman or non-Greek," earlier barbar (late 14

 crab 

 popular name for a stalk-eyed, short-tailed, ten-legged crustacean, Middle English crabbe, from Old English crabba, from Proto-Germanic *krabbo- (source also of Dutch krab, Old High German krebiz, German Krabbe, Old Norse krabbi "crab"), related to Low German krabben, Dutch krabe

 peasant 

 "rural person of inferior rank or condition," usually engaged in agricultural labor, early 15c., paisaunt, from Anglo-French paisant (early 14c.), Old French paisant, paisent "local inhabitant" (12c., Modern French paysan), earlier paisenc, from pais "country, region" (Modern Fre

 Share churl 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/churl Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/churl">Etymology of churl by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of churl. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/churl Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of churl," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/churl. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of churl." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/churl. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of churl." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/churl (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near churl 
 Chunnel 
 church 
 church-going 
 churchman 
 churchyard 
 churl 
 churlish 
 churn 
 chute 
 chutney 
 chutzpah 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close