URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chinch
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:04:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chinch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chinch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chinch 

 chinch (n.) 

 "bedbug," 1620s, from Spanish/Portuguese chinche (diminutive chinchilla ) "bug," from Latin cimicem (nominative cimex ) "bedbug," a word of uncertain origin. Related: Chinch-bug .
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to chinch 

 chinchilla (n.) 

 small South American rodent, 1590s, from Spanish, literally "little bug," diminutive of chinche (see chinch ); perhaps a folk-etymology alteration of a word from Quechua (Inca) or Aymara.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bedbug 

 also bed-bug, "blood-sucking insect that infests beds and bedding," 1772, from bed (n.) + bug (n.). [The bed bug] is supposed to have been first introduced to this country in the fir timber that was brought over to rebuild London after it had suffered by the great fire; for it i

 bug 

 "insect, beetle," 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably (but not certainly) from or influenced by Middle English bugge "something frightening, scarecrow" (late 14c.), a word or meaning that has become obsolete since the "insect" sense arose, except

 bed 

 Old English bedd "bed, couch, resting place; garden plot," from Proto-Germanic *badja- (source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon bed, Middle Dutch bedde, Old Norse beðr, Old High German betti, German Bett, Gothic badi "bed"). This is said to mean perhaps "sleeping place dug in the g

 yield 

 Old English gieldan (West Saxon), geldan (Anglian) "to pay, pay for; reward, render; worship, serve, sacrifice to" (class III strong verb; past tense geald, past participle golden), from Proto-Germanic *geldan "pay" (source also of Old Saxon geldan "to be worth," Old Norse gjaldo

 spoil 

 c. 1300, spoilen, "strip (someone) violently of clothes, strip a slain enemy," from Anglo-French espoiller, Old French espoillier, espillier "strip, plunder, pillage" and directly from Latin spoliare "strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder, pillage," a verb fro

 penny 

 English coin, Middle English peni, from Old English pening, penig, Northumbrian penning "penny," from Proto-Germanic *panninga- (source also of Old Norse penningr, Swedish pänning, Danish penge, Old Frisian panning, Old Saxon pending, Middle Dutch pennic, Dutch penning, Old High 

 exorcism 

 early 15c., "a calling up or driving out of evil spirits," from Late Latin exorcismus, from Greek exorkismos "administration of an oath," in Ecclesiastical Greek, "exorcism," from exorkizein "exorcise, bind by oath," from ex "out of" (see ex-) + horkizein "cause to swear," from h

 character 

 mid-14c., carecter, "symbol marked or branded on the body;" mid-15c., "symbol or drawing used in sorcery;" late 15c., "alphabetic letter, graphic symbol standing for a sound or syllable;" from Old French caratere "feature, character" (13c., Modern French caractère), from Latin ch

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 attrition 

 early 15c., attricioun, "a breaking;" 1540s, "abrasion, scraping, the rubbing of one thing against another," from Latin attritionem (nominative attritio), literally "a rubbing against," noun of action from past-participle stem of atterere "to wear, rub away," figuratively "to des

 Share chinch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chinch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chinch">Etymology of chinch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chinch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chinch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chinch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chinch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chinch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chinch. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chinch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chinch (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chinch 
 chimpanzee 
 chin 
 china 
 Chinaman 
 Chinatown 
 chinch 
 chinchilla 
 chine 
 Chinese 
 chink 
 chinkapin 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix