URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/caliber
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:42:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caliber - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Caliber - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of caliber 

 caliber (n.) 

 "inside diameter of a gun barrel," 1580s, from French calibre (by mid-16c., perhaps late 15c.), often said to be ultimately from Arabic qalib "a mold for casting." Barnhart remarks that Spanish calibre , Italian calibro "appear too late to act as intermediate forms" between the Arabic word and the French.

 But English Words of Arabic Ancestry finds that the idea of an Arabic source "comes with no evidence and no background historical context to support it. It is far more likely that the word was formed in French" from Medieval Latin qua libra "of what weight" (a theory first published 19c. by Mahn), from fem. ablative of quis (from PIE root *kwo- , stem of relative and interrogative pronouns) + ablative of libra "balance" (see Libra ).

 In U.S., expressed in decimal parts of an inch ( .44-caliber = ".44-inch caliber"). The earliest sense in English is a figurative one, "degree of merit or importance" (1560s), from French. Later, figuratively, "the capacity of one's mind, one's intellectual endowments."
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to caliber 

 Libra (n.) 

 zodiac constellation represented by a pair of scales, late Old English, from Latin libra "a balance, pair of scales," also "pound (unit of weight)," from Proto-Italic *leithra- "pound." De Vaan compares Greek litra "name of a Sicilian coin," which "was probably borrowed from an Italic language at the stage containing [ -thr- ]."

 Not a separate constellation in ancient Greece, where it was khelae , "the claws" of adjacent Skorpios. Nativized in Old Norse as skala-merki . Meaning "person born under the sign of Libra" is from 1894. Related: Libral ; Libran .

 calibrate (v.) 

 "determine the caliber of," 1839, verb formed from caliber + -ate (2). Also "determine the relative value of" different parts of an arbitrary scale (1869). Related: calibrated ; calibrating .

 calibre 
 caliper 
 subcaliber 
 *kwo- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 quality 

 c. 1300, qualite, "temperament, character, disposition," from Old French calite, qualite "quality, nature, characteristic" (12c., Modern French qualité), from Latin qualitatem (nominative qualitas) "a quality, property; nature, state, condition" (said [Tucker, etc.] to have been 

 bore 

 "pierce or perforate with a rotatory cutting instrument, make a circular hole in by turning an auger, drill, etc.," Old English borian "to bore through, perforate," from bor "auger," from Proto-Germanic *buron (source also of Old Norse bora, Swedish borra, Old High German boron, 

 gauge 

 "ascertain by exact measurements," mid-15c., from Anglo-French gauge (mid-14c.), from Old North French gauger "standardize, calibrate, measure" (Old French jaugier), from gauge "gauging rod," a word of unknown origin. Perhaps from Frankish *galgo "rod, pole for measuring" or anot

 heavy 

 Heavy metal attested by 1839 in chemistry; in nautical jargon from at least 1744 in sense "large-caliber guns on a ship."...

 Saturday 

 Saturday-night special "cheap, low-caliber handgun" is American English, attested from 1976 (earlier Saturday-night pistol...

 Boer 

 "Dutch colonist in South Africa," 1824, from Dutch boer "farmer," from Middle Dutch, cognate with Old English gebur "dweller, farmer, peasant," and thus related to bower, German Bauer, and the final syllable of neighbor; from PIE root *bheue- "to be, exist, grow." The Boer War (1

 robe 

 "long, loose outer garment reaching almost to the floor, worn by men or women over other dress," late 13c., from Old French robe "long, loose outer garment" (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Old High German rouba "vestments"), from West Germanic *raubo "booty" (cognate with

 degree 

 c. 1200, "a step, a stair," also "a position in a hierarchy," and "a stage of progress, a single movement toward an end," from Old French degré (12c.) "a step (of a stair), pace, degree (of relationship), academic degree; rank, status, position," which is said to be from Vulgar L

 grade 

 1510s, "degree of measurement," from French grade "grade, degree" (16c.), from Latin gradus "a step, a pace, gait; a step climbed (on a ladder or stair);" figuratively "a step toward something, a degree of something rising by stages," from gradi (past participle gressus) "to walk

 level 

 mid-14c., "tool to indicate a horizontal line," from Old French livel "a level" (13c.), ultimately from Latin libella "a balance, level" (also a monetary unit), diminutive of libra "balance, scale, unit of weight" (see Libra). Spanish nivel, Modern French niveau are from the same

 Share caliber 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/caliber Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/caliber">Etymology of caliber by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of caliber. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/caliber Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of caliber," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caliber. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of caliber." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caliber. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of caliber." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/caliber (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near caliber 
 calendar 
 calender 
 calends 
 calf 
 Caliban 
 caliber 
 calibrate 
 calibration 
 calibre 
 calice 
 caliche 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix