URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sanskrit
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:21:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sanskrit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sanskrit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Sanskrit 

 Sanskrit (n.) 

 also Sanscrit , ancient sacred language of India, 1610s, from Sanskrit samskrtam "put together, well-formed, perfected," neuter of samskrta , from sam "together" (from PIE root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with") + krta- "to make, do, perform" (from PIE *kwer- "to make, form;" see terato- ). "[S]o called as being the cultivated or literary language, distinguished from the vulgar dialects, or, some say, because regarded as a perfect language, the speech of the gods, formed by infallible rules" [Century Dictionary]. It continued as a learned tongue long after it ceased to exist as a vernacular.
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to Sanskrit 

 karma (n.) 

 1800, in an Indian context, "the sum of a person's actions in one life," which determines his form in the next; from Sanskrit karma "action, work, deed; fate," related to Sanskrit krnoti , Avestan kerenaoiti "makes," Old Persian kunautiy "he makes;" from PIE root *kwer- "to make, form" (see terato- ). "Latterly adopted by Western popular 'meditative' groups" [OED, 1989]. It is related to the second element in Sanskrit .

 Prakrit (n.) 

 collective name for the popular dialects of ancient northern and central India (distinguished from and succeeding Sanskrit ), sometimes also applied to modern languages (Hindi, Bengali, etc.), 1766, from Sanskrit prakrta- "natural, original" (opposed to samskrta- "prepared, refined"), from pra- "before, forward, forth" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "before") + krta- "to make, do, perform," from PIE root *k(w)er- "to make, form" (related to karma ). Related: Prakritic .

 *sem- 
 terato- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lac 

 All these are from Persian lak, from Hindi lakh (Prakrit lakkha), from Sanskrit laksha "red dye," which is of uncertain origin...But others say lakh is perhaps an alteration of Sanskrit rakh, from an IE root word for "color, dye" [Watkins]....Still another guess is that Sanskrit laksha is related to English lax, lox "salmon," and the substance perhaps was so called...

 rajah 

 also raja, "king or prince in India," ruling either independently or as a feudatory, 1550s, from Hindi, from Sanskrit rajan...Related: Rajput, "member of the ruling caste in northern India" (1590s), from Sanskrit rajaputrah "prince," literally "king's...

 crocus 

 from Greek krokos "crocus," also "saffron," a word probably of Semitic origin (compare Arabic kurkum), ultimately from Sanskrit...kunkumam, unless the Sanskrit word is from the Semitic one....

 Bhagavad-Gita 

 in Hindu scripture, a dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna inserted in Mahabharata; Sanskrit, from Bhaga, a god of wealth,...from Sanskrit bhagah, literally "allotter, distributor, master, lord," from bhajati "assigns, allots, apportions, enjoys...

 Gondwana 

 name of a region in north central India, from Sanskrit gondavana, from vana "forest" + Gonda, Sanskrit name of a Dravidian...

 deva 

 "god, divinity, good spirit" in Hindu religion, 1819, from Sanskrit deva "a god" (as opposed to asuras "wicked spirits"),...Also Devanagari, the formal alphabet of Sanskrit writings (1781), which is literally "divine city (script)," from nagara...

 ginger 

 ginȝiber, from Late Latin gingiber, from Latin zingiberi, from Greek zingiberis, from Prakrit (Middle Indic) singabera, from Sanskrit...But this may be Sanskrit folk etymology, and the word may be from an ancient Dravidian word that also produced the modern...Burnell and Gundert considered that the Tamil iñci must have had an initial ś- formerly, that the Sanskrit śṛṅgabera was...

 Urdu 

 official language of Pakistan, 1796, formerly also known as Hindustani, from Urdu urdu "camp," from Turkish ordu (source of horde); short for zaban-i-urdu "language of the camp." Compare Dzongkha, a variant of Tibetan and the official language of Bhutan, literally "the language o

 SAM 

 1958, acronym for surface to air missile (see surface (n.))....masc. proper name, typically a shortening of Samuel (q.v.). Sam Browne in reference to a type of belt with shoulder strap is by 1915, from Sir Samuel James Browne (1824-1901), the British general who invented it. Sam 

 language 

 late 13c., langage "words, what is said, conversation, talk," from Old French langage "speech, words, oratory; a tribe, people, nation" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *linguaticum, from Latin lingua "tongue," also "speech, language," from PIE root *dnghu- "tongue." The -u- is an Anglo

 Share Sanskrit 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sanskrit Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sanskrit">Etymology of Sanskrit by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Sanskrit. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sanskrit Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Sanskrit," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sanskrit. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Sanskrit." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sanskrit. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Sanskrit." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Sanskrit (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Sanskrit 
 sank 
 Sanka 
 sans 
 sansculotte 
 sansei 
 Sanskrit 
 sans-serif 
 Santa 
 Santa Claus 
 santeria 
 sap 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix