URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dad
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:42:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dad - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dad - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dad 

 dad (n.) 

 "a father, papa," recorded from c. 1500, but probably much older, from child's speech, nearly universal and probably prehistoric (compare Welsh tad , Irish daid , Lithuanian tėtė , Sanskrit tatah, Czech tata , Latin tata "father," Greek tata , used by youths to their elders). Compare papa .
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to dad 

 papa (n.) 

 "father," 1680s, from French papa , from Latin papa , originally a reduplicated child's word, similar to Greek pappa (vocative) "o father," pappas "father," pappos "grandfather." The native word is daddy ; according to OED the first use of papa was in courtly speech, as a continental affectation, and it was not used by common folk until late 18c.

 da (n.) 

 "father," by 1851, a nursery or provincial abbreviation of dad .

 Dada 
 daddy 
 grandad 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 daddy 

 c. 1500, colloquial diminutive of dad, with -y (3). Slang daddy-o is attested by 1949, from bop talk. Daddy-long-legs is from 1814 in Britain as "crane-fly," a slender, long-legged summer fly. In the U.S., it was used by 1865 as the word for a spider-like arachnid with a small ro

 Dada 

 1920, from French dada "hobbyhorse," child's nonsense word, selected 1916 by Romanian poet Tristan Tzara (1896-1963), leader of the movement, for its resemblance to meaningless babble. Freedom: DADA DADA DADA, the howl of clashing colors, the intertwining of all contradictions, 

 pop 

 "a hit with a smart, explosive sound," c. 1400, of imitative origin. Meaning "effervescent carbonated beverage" is from 1812. A new manufactory of a nectar, between soda-water and ginger-beer, and called pop, because 'pop goes the cork' when it is drawn. [Southey, letter, 1812] 

 spaz 

 you think of her "shades," which you are canny enough to know are her sunglasses, and you say, "cool," and she says, "oh dad...

 deed 

 small," Old English dæd "a doing, act, action; transaction, event," from Proto-Germanic *dethi- (source also of Old Saxon dad...

 father 

 Middle English fader, from Old English fæder "he who begets a child, nearest male ancestor;" also "any lineal male ancestor; the Supreme Being," and by late Old English, "one who exercises parental care over another," from Proto-Germanic *fader (source also of Old Saxon fadar, Ol

 nature 

 late 13c., "restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth;" from Old French nature "nature, being, principle of life; character, essence," from Latin natura "course of things; natural character, constitution, quality; the universe," literally "birth," from na

 frank 

 c. 1300, "free, liberal, generous;" 1540s, "outspoken," from Old French franc "free (not servile); without hindrance, exempt from; sincere, genuine, open, gracious, generous; worthy, noble, illustrious" (12c.), from Medieval Latin francus "free, at liberty, exempt from service," 

 sand 

 "water-worn detritus finer than gravel; fine particles of rocks (largely crystalline rocks, especially quartz); the material of the beach, desert, or sea-bed;" Old English sand, from Proto-Germanic *sandam (source also of Old Norse sandr, Old Frisian sond, Middle Dutch sant, Dutc

 random 

 1650s, "having no definite aim or purpose, haphazard, not sent in a special direction," from phrase at random (1560s), "at great speed" (thus, "carelessly, haphazardly"), from an alteration of the Middle English noun randon, randoun "impetuosity; speed" (c. 1300). This is from Ol

 Share dad 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dad Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dad">Etymology of dad by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dad. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dad Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dad," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dad. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dad." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dad. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dad." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dad (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dad 
 Dacron 
 dactyl 
 dactylic 
 dactylogram 
 dactylography 
 dad 
 Dada 
 daddy 
 dado 
 DAE 
 daedal 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix