URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/eclipse
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:15:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Eclipse - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Eclipse - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of eclipse 

 eclipse (n.) 

 "interception or obscuration of the light of the sun, moon, or other heavenly body by the intervention of another heavenly body," c. 1300, from Old French eclipse "eclipse, darkness" (12c.), from Latin eclipsis , from Greek ekleipsis "an eclipse; an abandonment," literally "a failing, forsaking," from ekleipein "to forsake a usual place, fail to appear, be eclipsed," from ek "out" (see ex- ) + leipein "to leave" (from PIE root *leikw- "to leave"). Compare ellipsis , ecliptic .

 also from c. 1300 

 eclipse (v.) 

 late 13c., "to cause an eclipse of," from Old French eclipser , from eclipse (see eclipse (n.)).Figurative use from 1570s. Also in Middle English in an intransitive sense "to suffer an eclipse," now obsolete. Related: Eclipsed ; eclipsing .

 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to eclipse 

 ecliptic (n.) 

 "the circle in the sky followed by the Sun," late 14c., from Medieval Latin ecliptica , from Late Latin (linea) ecliptica , from Greek ekliptikos "of an eclipse" (see eclipse (n.)). So called because eclipses happen only when the Moon is near the line. Related: Ecliptical .

 ellipsis (n.) 

 1560s, "an ellipse" in geometry, from Latin ellipsis , from Greek elleipsis "a falling short, defect, ellipse in grammar," noun of action from elleipein "to fall short, leave out," from en- "in" (see en- (1)) + leipein "to leave" (reconstructed to be from PIE root *leikw- "to leave").

 The grammatical and rhetorical sense in English is attested by 1610s: "a figure of syntax in which a part of a sentence or phrase is used for the whole, by the omission of one or more words, leaving the full form to be understood or completed by the reader or hearer." Earlier, in prosody, ellipsis was used of any word or term omitted but understood (1580s).

 In printing, "a mark or marks denoting the omission of letters, words, or sentences," by 1867. Dashes, asterisks, and period have been used to indicate it. In reading aloud, a short pause was proper at a grammatical ellipsis in the writing.

 WHEN a word or words are omitted by the figure ellipsis, a pause is necessary where the ellipsis occurs. [Robert James Ball, "The Academic Cicero; or Exercises in Modern Oratory," Dublin, 1823] 

 Probably the association of the typographical symbol with a pause in speaking is why 20c. writers began to use the three periods to denote a pause or an interruption in dialogue, creating a potential confusion noted by 1939. Related: Ellipticity .

 ex- 
 *leikw- 
 ec- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dominate 

 1610s, "to rule over, control by mastery," a back-formation from domination or else from Latin dominatus, past participle of dominari "to rule, dominate, to govern," from dominus "lord, master," from domus "house" (from PIE root *dem- "house, household"). Meaning "have chief infl

 occult 

 1530s, "secret, not divulged," from French occulte and directly from Latin occultus "hidden, concealed, secret," past participle of occulere "cover over, conceal," from assimilated form of ob "over" (see ob-) + a verb related to celare "to hide" (from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover

 annular 

 An annular eclipse (1727) is one in which the dark body of the moon is smaller than the disk of the sun, so that at the height...

 penumbra 

 shadow of an opaque body, a partial shadow," from Modern Latin penumbra "partial shadow outside the complete shadow of an eclipse...

 intramercurial 

 orbit of the planet Mercury," 1859, especially in reference to a supposed planet orbiting there (sought in vain in the eclipse...

 murk 

 Mirk Monday was long the name in Scotland for the great solar eclipse of March 29, 1652 (April 8, New Style)....

 brood 

 Old English brod "offspring of egg-laying animals, hatchlings, young birds hatched in one nest," from Proto-Germanic *brod (source also of Middle Dutch broet, Old High German bruot, German Brut "brood"), etymologically "that which is hatched by heat," from *bro- "to warm, heat," 

 brake 

 mid-15c., "instrument for crushing or pounding," from Middle Dutch braeke "flax brake," from breken "to break" (see break (v.)). The word was applied to many crushing implements, especially the tool for breaking up the woody part of flax to loosen the fibers. It also was applied 

 break 

 Old English brecan "to divide solid matter violently into parts or fragments; to injure, violate (a promise, etc.), destroy, curtail; to break into, rush into; to burst forth, spring out; to subdue, tame" (class IV strong verb; past tense bræc, past participle brocen), from Proto

 baker 

 Old English bæcere "baker, one who bakes (especially bread)," agent noun from bacan "to bake" (see bake (v.)). Cognate with Dutch bakker, German Bäcker, Becker. In the Middle Ages, the craft had two divisions, braun-bakeres and whit-bakeres. White bakers shall bake no hors brede

 Share eclipse 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/eclipse Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/eclipse">Etymology of eclipse by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of eclipse. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/eclipse Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of eclipse," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eclipse. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of eclipse." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eclipse. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of eclipse." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/eclipse (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near eclipse 
 eclair 
 eclampsia 
 eclat 
 eclectic 
 eclecticism 
 eclipse 
 ecliptic 
 eclogue 
 eco- 
 ecocentric 
 ecofriendly 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix