URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/doctor
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:46:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Doctor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Doctor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of doctor 

 doctor (n.) 

 c. 1300, doctour , "Church father," from Old French doctour and directly from Medieval Latin doctor "religious teacher, adviser, scholar," in classical Latin "teacher," agent noun from docere "to show, teach, cause to know," originally "make to appear right," causative of decere "be seemly, fitting" (reconstructed to be from PIE root *dek- "to take, accept").

 The meaning "holder of the highest degree in a university, one who has passed all the degrees of a faculty and is thereby empowered to teach the subjects included in it" is from late 14c. Hence "teacher, instructor, learned man; one skilled in a learned profession" (late 14c.).

 The sense of "medical professional, person duly licensed to practice medicine" (replacing native leech (n.2)) grew gradually out of this from c. 1400, though this use of the word was not common until late 16c. The transitional stage is exemplified in Chaucer's Doctor of phesike (Latin physica came to be used extensively in Medieval Latin for medicina ).

 That no man ... practyse in Fisyk ... but he be Bacheler or Doctour of Fisyk, havynge Lettres testimonyalx sufficeantz of on of those degrees of the Universite. [Rolls of Parliament, 1421]

 Middle English also used medicin for "a medical doctor" (mid-15c.), from French. Similar usage of the equivalent of doctor is colloquial in most European languages: Italian dottore , French docteur , German Doktor , Lithuanian daktaras , though these typically are not the main word in those languages for a medical healer.

 For similar evolution, compare Sanskrit vaidya- "medical doctor," literally "one versed in science." German Arzt , Dutch arts are from Late Latin archiater , from Greek arkhiatros "chief healer," hence "court physician." French médecin is a back-formation from médicine , replacing Old French miege , from Latin medicus .

 The sense of "scholar, teacher" is preserved in related words such as doctrine . Blount's "Glossographia" (1656) also has doctible "apt to be taught," doctibility , doctiloquent "that speaks learnedly."

 Phrase what the doctor ordered "just the thing" is attested by 1914.

 also from c. 1300 

 doctor (v.) 

 1590s, "to confer the degree of doctor on," from doctor (n.). Meaning "to treat as a doctor, administer medical treatment to" is from 1712; sense of "alter, disguise for the purpose of deception, falsify" is from 1774. Related: Doctored ; doctoring .
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to doctor 

 doctrine (n.) 

 late 14c., "the body of principles, dogmas, etc., in a religion or field of knowledge," from Old French doctrine (12c.) "teaching, doctrine" and directly from Latin doctrina "a teaching, body of teachings, learning," from doctor "teacher" (see doctor (n.)) + -ina , fem. of -inus , suffix forming fem. abstract nouns (see -ine (1)).

 The notion is "whatever is taught or laid down as true by a master or instructor," hence "any set of principles held as true." In Middle English, it could be used generally for "learning, instruction, education." In U.S. history, the Monroe doctrine was put forward in a message to Congress Dec. 2, 1823; the exact phrase is attested by 1848.

 leech (n.2) 

 "physician" (obsolete, poetical, or archaic), from Old English læce "leech," probably from Old Danish læke , from Proto-Germanic *lekjaz "enchanter, one who speaks magic words; healer, physician" (source also of Old Frisian letza , Old Saxon laki , Old Norse læknir , Old High German lahhi , Gothic lekeis "physician"), literally "one who counsels," perhaps connected with a root found in Celtic (compare Irish liaig "charmer, exorcist, physician") and Slavic (compare Serbo-Croatian lijekar , Polish lekarz ), from PIE *lep-agi "conjurer," from root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives meaning "to speak (to 'pick out words')."

 For sense development, compare Old Church Slavonic baliji "doctor," originally "conjurer," related to Serbo-Croatian bajati "enchant, conjure;" Old Church Slavonic vrači , Russian vrač "doctor," related to Serbo-Croatian vrač "sorcerer, fortune-teller." The form merged with leech (n.1) in Middle English, apparently by folk etymology. In early Middle English the word also was used of God and Christ; but by 17c. the sense had so deteriorated that leech typically was applied only to veterinary practitioners, and soon it was entirely archaic.

 The fourth finger of the hand, in Old English, was læcfinger , translating Latin digitus medicus , Greek daktylus iatrikos , supposedly because a vein from that finger stretches straight to the heart.

 doc 
 doctoral 
 doctorate 
 *dek- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 doctrine 

 late 14c., "the body of principles, dogmas, etc., in a religion or field of knowledge," from Old French doctrine (12c.) "teaching, doctrine" and directly from Latin doctrina "a teaching, body of teachings, learning," from doctor "teacher" (see doctor (n.)) + -ina, fem. of -inus, 

 repair 

 "to mend, put back in order, restore to a sound, good, or complete condition," mid-14c., reparen, from Old French reparer "repair, mend" (12c.) and directly from Latin reparare "restore, put back in order," from re- "again" (see re-) + parare "make ready, prepare" (from PIE root 

 mend 

 c. 1200, "to repair" (clothes, a tool, a building), "remove defects" (from something broken, defaced, deranged, or worn), from a shortened form of Old French amender "correct, set right, make better, improve" (see amend). Meaning "to put right, atone for (faults and errors), amen

 intern 

 "one working under supervision as part of professional training," originally "assistant resident physician, doctor in training...in a hospital," 1879, American English, from French interne "assistant doctor," noun use of interne "internal," from Latin...

 physician 

 1200, fisicien, fisitien, later phisicien, "healer, one who practices the art of healing disease and of preserving health, doctor...of medicine" (as distinguished from a surgeon), from Old French fisiciien "physician, doctor, sage" (12c., Modern French...

 barefoot 

 dates to 1943; as barefooted and pregnant attested from at least 1938, in Arthur Hertzler's best-selling "Horse and Buggy Doctor...," about his life as a country doctor in Kansas: "Some vulgar person has said that when the wife is kept barefooted and pregnant...

 veterinarian 

 "animal doctor, one who practices the art of treating disease and injuries in domestic animals," 1640s, from Latin veterinarius..."of or having to do with beasts of burden," also, as a noun, "cattle doctor," from veterinum "beast of burden," perhaps...

 play 

 Middle English pleien, from Old English plegan, plegian "move lightly and quickly, occupy or busy oneself, amuse oneself; engage in active exercise; frolic; engage in children's play; make sport of, mock; perform music." It is from Proto-West Germanic *plegōjanan "occupy oneself 

 specialist 

 1843, "person devoted to a particular branch of a profession, science, or art" (originally in the medical sense and much scorned by the GPs); see special (adj.) + -ist. Perhaps immediately from French spécialiste (1842). A remarkable feature in this contest is great hostility sh

 improve 

 late 15c., "to use to one's profit, to increase (income)," from Anglo-French emprouwer "to turn to profit" (late 13c.), from Old French en-, a causative prefix or from em-, + prou "profit," from Latin prode "advantageous" (see proud (adj.)). Spelling with -v- was rare before 17c.

 Share doctor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/doctor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/doctor">Etymology of doctor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of doctor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/doctor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of doctor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/doctor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of doctor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/doctor. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of doctor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/doctor (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near doctor 
 dock 
 docked 
 docket 
 docksider 
 dockyard 
 doctor 
 Doctor Martens 
 doctoral 
 doctorate 
 doctrinaire 
 doctrinal 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix