URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/isosceles
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Isosceles - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Isosceles - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of isosceles 

 isosceles (adj.) 

 "having two equal sides," 1550s, from Late Latin isosceles , from Greek isoskeles "with equal legs; isosceles; that can be divided into two equal parts," from isos "equal, identical" (see iso- ) + skelos "leg," from PIE *skel-es- , from root *skel- "bend, curve" (see scoliosis ).
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to isosceles 

 scoliosis (n.) 

 "sideways curvature or crookedness of the spine," 1634, medical Latin, from Latinized form of Greek skoliosis "crookedness," from skolios "bent, curved," from PIE root *skel- "bend, curve," with derivatives referring to crooked parts of the body (as in Greek skelos "leg, limb; Latin scelus "malice, badness, crime;" Old High German scelah , Old English sceolh "oblique, curved, squinting;" Albanian çalë "lame"). Distinguished from lordosis and kyphosis . Related: Scoliotic .

 iso- 

 before vowels often is- , word-forming element meaning "equal, similar, identical; isometric," from Greek isos "equal to, the same as; equally divided; fair, impartial (of persons); even, level (of ground)," as in isometor "like one's mother." In English used properly only with words of Greek origin; the Latin equivalent is equi- (see equi- ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 oligarchy 

 "form of government in which supreme power is vested in a small exclusive class," 1570s, from French oligarchie (14c.), from Latinized form of Greek oligarkhia "government by the few," from stem of oligos "few, small, little" (a word of uncertain origin) + -arkhia, from arkhein "

 sequester 

 late 14c., sequestren, transitive, "remove (something), set aside; quarantine, isolate (someone); excommunicate;" also intransitive, "separate oneself from," from Old French sequestrer (14c.) and directly from Late Latin sequestrare "to place in safekeeping," from Latin sequester

 nightingale 

 "small migratory bird of the Old World, noted for the male's melodious song, heard by night as well as day," Middle English nighte-gale, from Old English næctigalæ, in late Old English nihtegale, a compound formed in Proto-Germanic (compare Dutch nachtegaal, German Nachtigall) fr

 indulgence 

 mid-14c., in the Church sense, "a freeing from temporal punishment for sin, remission from punishment for sin that remains due after absolution," from Old French indulgence or directly from Latin indulgentia "complaisance, a yielding; fondness, tenderness, affection; remission," 

 pander 

 "arranger of sexual liaisons, one who caters for the lusts of others," 1520s, "procurer, pimp," from Middle English Pandare (late 14c.), used by Chaucer ("Troylus and Cryseyde"), who borrowed it from Boccaccio (who had it in Italian form Pandaro in "Filostrato") as name of the pr

 adversary 

 "unfriendly opponent, enemy" (originally especially of Satan as the enemy of mankind), mid-14c., aduersere, from Anglo-French adverser (13c.), Old French adversarie (12c., Modern French adversaire) "hostile opponent, enemy," or directly from Latin adversarius "an opponent, rival,

 quorum 

 early 15c., in law, "the senior justices of the peace," whose presence was necessary to constitute a court, from Latin quorum "of whom," genitive plural (masc. and neuter; fem. quarum) of qui "who" (from PIE root *kwo-, stem of relative and interrogative pronouns). The traditiona

 pandemonium 

 1667, Pandæmonium, in "Paradise Lost" the name of the palace built in the middle of Hell, "the high capital of Satan and all his peers," and the abode of all the demons; coined by John Milton (1608-1674) from Greek pan- "all" (see pan-) + Late Latin daemonium "evil spirit," from 

 spell 

 early 14c., spellen, "read letter by letter, write or say the letters of;" c. 1400, "form words by means of letters," said in most etymology sources to be from Anglo-French espeller, Old French espelir "to mean, signify; explain, interpret," also "spell out letters, pronounce, re

 implement 

 mid-15c., "supplementary payment, amount needed to complete repayment," from Late Latin implementem "a filling up" (as with provisions), from Latin implere "to fill, fill up, make full; fatten; fulfill, satisfy," from assimilated form of in- "into, in, on, upon" (from PIE root *e

 Share isosceles 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/isosceles Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/isosceles">Etymology of isosceles by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of isosceles. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/isosceles Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of isosceles," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/isosceles. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of isosceles." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/isosceles. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of isosceles." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/isosceles (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near isosceles 
 isomorphic 
 isomorphism 
 isonomia 
 isopod 
 isopolity 
 isosceles 
 isostasy 
 isostatic 
 isotherm 
 isothermal 
 isotonic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close