URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/greet
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:23:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Greet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Greet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of greet 

 greet (v.) 

 Old English gretan "to come in contact with" in any sense ("attack, accost" as well as "salute, welcome," and "touch, take hold of, handle," as in hearpan gretan "to play the harp"), "seek out, approach," from West Germanic *grotjan (source also of Old Saxon grotian , Old Frisian greta , Dutch groeten , Old High German gruozen , German grüßen "to salute, greet"), of uncertain origin.

 In English, German, and Dutch, the primary sense has become "to salute," but the word once had much broader meaning. Perhaps originally "to resound" (via notion of "cause to speak"), causative of Proto-Germanic *grætanan , root of Old English grætan (Anglian gretan ) "weep, bewail," from PIE *gher- (2) "to call out." Greet still can mean "cry, weep" in Scottish & northern England dialect, though this might be from a different root. Grætan probably also is the source of the second element in regret . Related: Greeted ; greeting .

 Entries linking to greet 

 greeting (n.) 

 Old English greting "salutation," verbal noun from gretan (see greet ). Related: Greetings . First record of greeting card is from 1876.

 regret (v.) 

  late 14c., regreten , "to look back with distress or sorrowful longing; to grieve for on remembering," from Old French regreter "long after, bewail, lament someone's death; ask the help of" (Modern French regretter ), from re- , intensive prefix (see re- ), + -greter , which is possibly from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old English grætan "to weep;" Old Norse grata "to weep, groan"), from Proto-Germanic *gretan "weep." "Not found in other Romance languages, and variously explained" [Century Dictionary].

 From 1550s as "to grieve at (an event, action, revelation of facts, etc.)." Related: Regretted ; regretting . Replaced Old English ofþyncan , from of- "off, away," here denoting opposition, + þyncan "seem, seem fit" (as in methinks ).

 greeter (n.) 

 late 14c., agent noun from greet .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 recognize 

 early 15c., recognisen, "resume possession of land," a back-formation from recognizance, or else from Old French reconoiss-, present-participle stem of reconoistre "to know again, identify, recognize," from Latin recognoscere "acknowledge, recall to mind, know again; examine; cer

 salute 

 late 14c., saluten, "to greet courteously and respectfully," earlier salue (c. 1300, from Old French salver), from Latin...salutare "to greet, pay respects," literally "wish health to," from salus (genitive salutis) "greeting, good health," which...In 18c. use often "to greet with a kiss."...

 bird 

 expression give the big bird "to hiss someone like a goose," which was kept alive in vaudeville slang with sense of "to greet...

 button-hole 

 A man couldn't greet a friend from another county without unconsciously inserting his thumb into his coat button-hole from...

 hail 

 "to greet or address with 'hail!...

 agape 

 Ecclesiastical use "the love of God for man and man for God," a late and mostly Christian formation from the verb agapan "greet...

 salutation 

 Latin salutationem (nominative salutatio) "a greeting, saluting," noun of action from past-participle stem of salutare "to greet...

 accost 

 1570s, "come side-by-side or face-to-face with," for any reason, from French accoster "move up to, come alongside" (Old French acoster), from Late Latin accostare "come up to the side," from assimilated form of Latin ad "to" (see ad-) + costa "a rib, side" (see coast (n.)). Now u

 address 

 early 14c., "to guide, aim, or direct," from Old French adrecier "go straight toward; straighten, set right; point, direct" (13c.), from Vulgar Latin *addirectiare "make straight" (source also of Spanish aderezar, Italian addirizzare), from ad "to" (see ad-) + *directiare "make s

 wish 

 Old English wyscan "to wish, cherish a desire," from Proto-Germanic *wunsk- (source also of Old Norse œskja, Danish ønske, Swedish önska, Middle Dutch wonscen, Dutch wensen, Old High German wunsken, German wunschen "to wish"), from PIE root *wen- (1) "to desire, strive for." Rela

 Share greet 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/greet Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/greet">Etymology of greet by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of greet. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/greet Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of greet," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/greet. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of greet." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/greet. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of greet." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/greet (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near greet 
 greenish 
 Greenland 
 greenness 
 greens 
 Greenwich 
 greet 
 greeter 
 greeting 
 gregarious 
 Gregorian 
 Gregory 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix