URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ab-
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T22:55:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ab- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Ab- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ab- 

 ab- 

 word-forming element meaning "away, from, from off, down," denoting disjunction, separation, departure; from Latin ab (prep.) "off, away from" in reference to space or distance, also of time, from PIE root *apo- "off, away" (also the source of Greek apo "off, away from, from," Sanskrit apa "away from," Gothic af , English of , off ; see apo- ).

 The Latin word also denoted "agency by; source, origin; relation to, in consequence of." Since classical times usually reduced to a- before -m- , -p- , or -v- ; typically abs- before -c- , -q- , or -t- .

 Entries linking to ab- 

 of (prep.) 

 Old English of , unstressed form of æf (prep., adv.) "away, away from," from Proto-Germanic *af (source also of Old Norse af , Old Frisian af, of "of," Dutch af "off, down," German ab "off, from, down"), from PIE root *apo- "off, away." Compare off (prep.).

 The primary sense in Old English still was "away," but it shifted in Middle English with use of the word to translate Latin de , ex , and especially Old French de , which had come to be the substitute for the genitive case. " Of shares with another word of the same length, as , the evil glory of being accessory to more crimes against grammar than any other." [Fowler]

 Also by 1837 of in print could be a non-standard or dialectal representation of have as pronounced in unstressed positions ( could of , must of , etc.)

 off (prep., adv.) 

 by c. 1200 as an emphatic form of Old English of (see of ), employed in the adverbial use of that word. The prepositional meaning "away from" and the adjectival sense of "farther" were not firmly fixed in this variant until 17c., but once they were they left the original of with the transferred and weakened senses of the word. Meaning "not working" is from 1861.

 Off the cuff "extemporaneously, without preparation" (1938) is from the notion of speaking from notes written in haste on one's shirt cuffs. In reference to clothing, off the rack (adj.) "not tailored, not made to individual requirements, ready-made" is by 1963, on the notion of buying it from the rack of a clothing store; off the record "not to be publicly disclosed" is from 1933; off the wall "crazy" is 1968, probably from the notion of a lunatic "bouncing off the walls" or else in reference to carom shots in squash, handball, etc.

 a posteriori 
 a priori 
 ab initio 
 ab ovo 
 ab urbe condita 
 abalienate 
 abalienation 
 abaxile 
 abdicate 
 abdication 
 abduce 
 abducent 
 abduction 
 abductor 
 aberrant 
 aberration 
 abhor 
 Abitur 
 See All Related Words (77) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 abalienate 

 in civil law, "transfer title of ownership to another," 1550s, from Latin abalienatus, past participle of abalienare "to remove, separate, alienate, make formal transfer of," literally "to convey away," from ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + alienare "to separate" (from alius "anot

 abalienation 

 "act of transferring title of ownership," 1650s, from Latin abalienationem (nominative abalienatio), in law, "transfer of property, sale," noun of action from past-participle stem of abalienare "to separate, transfer the ownership of," from ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + alienar

 abdicate 

 1540s, "to disown, disinherit (children)," from Latin abdicatus, past participle of abdicare "to disown, disavow, reject" (specifically abdicare magistratu "renounce office"), literally "proclaim as not belonging to one," from ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + dicare "proclaim" (fr

 Spenserian 

 which he employed in the "Faerie Queen," consists of eight decasyllabic lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab...ab bc bcc....

 julep 

 Persian gulab "a sweet drink," also "rose water," from gul "rose" (related to Greek rhodon, Latin rosa; see rose (n.1)) + ab...

 abdomen 

 obsolete), from Latin abdomen "the belly," a word of unknown origin, Perhaps [OED, Watkins] from abdere "conceal" (from ab...

 catharsis 

 It will therefore be rendered throughout the text by "ab-react," the literal meaning is to react away from or to react off...

 blacklist 

 also black-list, "list of persons who have incurred suspicion, earned punishment, or are for any reason deemed objectionable by the makers and users of the list," 1610s, from black (adj.), here indicative of disgrace, censure, punishment (a sense attested from 1590s, in black boo

 serve 

 late 12c., serven, "to render habitual obedience to, owe allegiance to," also "minister, give aid, give help," from Old French servir "to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with," from Latin servire "be a servant, be in service, be enslave

 rigmarole 

 "a long, rambling discourse; incoherent harangue," 1736, apparently from an altered, Kentish colloquial survival of ragman roll "long list, roster, or catalogue" (c. 1500). The origins of this are in Middle English rageman "document recording accusations or offenses," also "an ac

 Share ab- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ab- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ab-">Etymology of ab- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ab-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ab- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ab-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ab-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ab-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ab-. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ab-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ab- (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ab- 
 A.V. 
 A-1 
 aardvark 
 aardwolf 
 Aaron 
 ab- 
 ab initio 
 ab ovo 
 ab urbe condita 
 aba 
 aback 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix