URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bridegroom
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:01:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bridegroom - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bridegroom - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bridegroom 

 bridegroom (n.) 

 "man newly married or about to be," Old English brydguma "suitor," from bryd "bride" (see bride ) + guma "man," from Proto-Germanic *gumon- (source also of Old Norse gumi , Old High German gomo ), literally "earthling, earthly being," as opposed to the gods, from suffixed form of PIE root *dhghem- "earth."

 The ending was altered 16c. by folk etymology after groom (n.) "groom, boy, lad" (q.v.). A common Germanic compound (compare Old Saxon brudigumo , Old Norse bruðgumi , Old High German brutigomo , German Bräutigam ), except in Gothic, which used bruþsfaþs , literally "bride's lord."

 Entries linking to bridegroom 

 bride (n.) 

 "woman newly married or about to be," Old English bryd "bride, betrothed or newly married woman," from Proto-Germanic *bruthiz "woman being married" (source also of Old Frisian breid , Dutch bruid , Old High German brut , German Braut "bride"), a word of uncertain origin.

 Gothic cognate bruþs , however, meant "daughter-in-law," and the form of the word borrowed from Old High German into Medieval Latin ( bruta ) and Old French ( bruy ) had only this sense. In ancient Indo-European custom, the married woman went to live with her husband's family, thus the sole "newly wed female" in such a household would have been the daughter-in-law. On the same notion, some trace the word itself to the PIE verbal root *bhreu- , which forms words for cooking and brewing, as this likely was the daughter-in-law's job. An Old Frisian word for "bride" was fletieve , literally "house-gift."

 groom (n.1) 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), grome "male child, boy;" c. 1300, "a youth, young man," also "male servant, attendant, minor officer in a royal or noble household ranking higher than a page; a knight's squire." A word of unknown origin with no certain cognates in other Germanic languages.

 Perhaps it is from an unrecorded Old English *grom , *groma , which could be related to growan "to grow," and influenced by guma "man." Or perhaps it is from or influenced by Old French grommet "boy, young man in service, serving-man" (compare Middle English gromet "ship's boy," early 13c.). As the title of an officer of the English royal house from mid-15c. The specific meaning "male servant who attends to horses and stables" is from 1660s, from earlier combinations such as horse-groom , Groom of the Stables , etc.

 human 
 *dhghem- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 human 

 mid-15c., humain, humaigne, "human," from Old French humain, umain (adj.) "of or belonging to man" (12c.), from Latin humanus "of man, human," also "humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined, civilized." This is in part from PIE *(dh)ghomon-, literally "earthl

 spouse 

 French spous (fem. spouse) "marriage partner," variant of espous/espouse (Modern French épous/épouse), from Latin sponsus "bridegroom...

 wedding 

 Old English weddung "state of being wed; pledge, betrothal; action of marrying," verbal noun from wed (v.). Meaning "nuptials, ceremony of marriage" is recorded from early 13c.; the usual Old English word for the ceremony was bridelope, literally "bridal run," in reference to con

 newlywed 

 also newly-wed, 1907, from newly + wed. It probably owes its origin to a then-popular newspaper comic strip, "The Newlyweds and Their Baby," about Mr. and Mrs. Newlywed, by George McManus in the New York "World." As an adjective, newly-wed is attested from 1833. An earlier adject

 hangover 

 also hang-over, 1894, "a survival, a thing left over from before," from hang (v.) + over. Meaning "after-effect of excessive drinking" is attested by 1902, American English, on notion of something left over from the night before. As an adjective, in reference to a person, overhun

 obey 

 c. 1300, obeien, "carry out the commands of (someone); submit to (a command, rule, etc.); be ruled by," from Old French obeir "obey, be obedient, do one's duty" (12c.), from Latin obedire, oboedire "obey, be subject, serve; pay attention to, give ear," literally "listen to," from

 Nicholas 

 masc. proper name, from French Nicolas, from Latin Nicholaus, Nicolaus, from Greek Nikolaos, literally "victory-people," from nikē "victory" (see Nike) + laos "people" (see lay (adj.)). The saint associated with Christmas (died 326 C.E.) was a bishop of Myra in Lycia, patron of s

 proselyte 

 "one who changes from one sect, creed, etc. to another," late 14c., proselite, "a convert, especially "a heathen convert to Judaism" (in Biblical writings, e.g. Matthew xxiii.15, Ezekiel xiv.7), from Old French proselite (13c., Modern French prosélyte), from Late Latin proselytus

 Russia 

 nation in Eastern Europe with a large possession in north Asia, 1530s, from Medieval Latin Russi "the people of Russia," from Rus, the native name of the people and the country (source of Arabic Rus, Medieval Greek Rhos), originally the name of a group of Swedish merchant/warrior

 onomatopoeia 

 "formation of words or names by imitation of natural sounds; the naming of something by a reproduction of the sound made by it or a sound associated with it," 1570s, from Late Latin onomatopoeia, from Greek onomatopoiia "the making of a name or word" (in imitation of a sound asso

 Share bridegroom 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bridegroom Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bridegroom">Etymology of bridegroom by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bridegroom. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bridegroom Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bridegroom," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bridegroom. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bridegroom." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bridegroom. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bridegroom." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bridegroom (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bridegroom 
 brickwork 
 brickyard 
 bricolage 
 bridal 
 bride 
 bridegroom 
 bridesmaid 
 bridewell 
 bridge 
 bridgehead 
 Bridget 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix