URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tread
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:12:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tread - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tread - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tread 

 tread (v.) 

 Middle English treden (past tense trad , past participle troden ), from Old English tredan "go by feet, walk; step on, trample; traverse, pass through or over" (class V strong verb; past tense træd , past participle treden ), from Proto-Germanic *tred- (source also of Old Saxon tredan , Old Frisian treda , Middle Dutch treden , Old High German tretan , German treten , Gothic trudan , Old Norse troða ). This is said by Watkins to be from PIE *der- (1) "assumed base of roots meaning 'to run, walk, step.' " Related: Trod ; treaded ; treading .

 Especially "crush with the feet, thresh grain, press grapes" (late 14c.). In reference to a male bird, especially a domestic cock, "to copulate, cover (a female)," early 14c.; hence treader , treading-fowl , treadfowl , "vigorously sexual male bird," also used of men. 

 To tread a measure "dance" is from 1590s. To tread water in swimming, "move the feet and hands regularly up and down while keeping the body in an erect position in order to keep the head above the water," is attested by 1764. To tread the stage "perform in a drama" is by 1690s (as tread the boards by 1858). To tread (one's) shoe amiss , said of a woman, was an old euphemism for "be unchaste" (late 14c.).

 tread (n.) 

 mid-13c., trede , "a step or stepping, pressure with the foot; mark made in treading, footprint," from tread (v.). Given many extended technical senses from 18c., notably "bearing surface of a wheel; part of a shoe or boot which touches the ground (1720). In reference the thick, moulded surface of automobile tires, by 1906.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to tread 

 downtrodden (adj.) 

 1560s, "stepped on, trampled upon," from down (adv.) + past participle of tread (v.). Figurative sense of "oppressed, tyrannized" is from 1590s. To tread down in the sense of "overcome, destroy" is from late 12c.; also Middle English has down trede for Latin conculcabunt .

 retread (v.) 

 "put a new tread on (a tire)," 1908; see re- "back, again" + tread (n.). The noun is attested from 1914; in World War I it was Australian slang for "a re-enlisted soldier."

 trade 
 tramp 
 trap 
 treadle 
 treadmill 
 treadway 
 trip 
 trod 
 trodden 
 trot 
 untrodden 
 *der- 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 trade 

 late 14c., "path, track, course of action," introduced by the Hanse merchants, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German trade "track, course" (probably originally of a ship), cognate with Old English tredan (see tread (v.)). Sense of "one's habitual business" (1540s) developed from

 trap 

 "contrivance for catching unawares," late Old English træppe, treppe "snare, trap," from Proto-Germanic *trep- (source also of Middle Dutch trappe "trap, snare"), related to Germanic words for "stair, step, tread" (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe "st

 treadmill 

 invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill (n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s. As a corrective punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the pris

 march 

 "to walk with measured steps or a regular tread," either individually or as a body, early 15c., from Old French marcher "...to stride, march, walk," originally "to trample, tread underfoot," a word of uncertain origin....

 trip 

 late 14c., "tread or step lightly and nimbly, skip, dance, caper," from Old French triper "jump around, dance around, strike...trippen "to skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample," Low German trippeln, Frisian tripje, Dutch trappen, Old English treppan "to tread...

 find 

 The Germanic word is from PIE root *pent- "to tread, go" (source also of Old High German fendeo "pedestrian;" Sanskrit panthah..."path, way;" Avestan panta "way;" Greek pontos "open sea," patein "to tread, walk;" Latin pons (genitive pontis) "bridge...

 punt 

 transport (Caesar), also "floating bridge" (Gellius), from Latin pontem (nominative pons) "bridge" (from PIE root *pent- "to tread...

 cape 

 "sleeveless cloak, circular covering for the shoulders," a Spanish style, late 16c., from French cape, from Spanish capa, from Late Latin cappa "hooded cloak" (see cap (n.), which is a doublet). Late Old English had capa, cæppe "cloak with a hood," directly from Latin...."promont

 pace 

 late 13c., "a step in walking," also "rate of motion; the space traveled by the foot in one completed movement in walking," from Old French pas "a step, pace, trace," and directly from Latin passus, passum "a step, pace, stride," noun use of past participle of pandere "to stretch

 apply 

 late 14c., "join or combine (with); attach (to something), adhere," from Old French aploiier "apply, use, attach" (12c., Modern French appliquer), from Latin applicare "attach to, join, connect;" figuratively, "devote (oneself) to, give attention," from ad "to" (see ad-) + plicar

 Share tread 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tread Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tread">Etymology of tread by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tread. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tread Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tread," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tread. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tread." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tread. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tread." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tread (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tread 
 trawler 
 tray 
 treacherous 
 treachery 
 treacle 
 tread 
 treadle 
 treadmill 
 treadway 
 treason 
 treasonable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix