URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/senate
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:59:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Senate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Senate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of senate 

 senate (n.) 

 c. 1200, "the legal and administrative body of ancient Rome," from Old French senat or Latin senatus "highest council of the state in ancient Rome," literally "council of elders," from senex (genitive senis ) "old man, old" (from PIE root *sen- "old").

 It is attested from late 14c. in reference to governing bodies of free cities in Europe (Italy); of national governing bodies from 1550s (typically the upper or less-numerous branch of the legislature). The specific sense of "upper house of the U.S. legislature" is recorded from 1775.
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to senate 

 *sen- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "old."

 It might form all or part of: monseigneur ; seignior ; senate ; senescent ; seneschal ; senicide ; senile ; senility ; senior ; seniority ; senor ; senora ; senorita ; shanachie ; Shannon ; signor ; sir ; sire ; surly .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit sanah "old;" Avestan hana- "old," Old Persian hanata- "old age, lapse of time;" Armenian hin "old;" Greek enos "old, of last year;" Latin senilis "of old age," senex "old, old man;" Lithuanian senas "old," senis "an old man;" Gothic sineigs "old" (used only of persons), sinistra "elder, senior;" Old Norse sina "dry standing grass from the previous year;" Old Irish sen , Old Welsh hen "old."

 -ate (1) 

 word-forming element used in forming nouns from Latin words ending in -atus , -atum (such as estate , primate , senate ). Those that came to English via French often arrived with -at , but an -e was added after c. 1400 to indicate the long vowel. The suffix also can mark adjectives formed from Latin past participles in -atus , -ata (such as desolate , moderate , separate ); again, they often were adopted in Middle English as -at , with an -e appended after c. 1400.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 consultation 

 of consulere "to deliberate, consider," originally probably "to call together," as in consulere senatum "to gather the senate...from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) +  *selere "take, gather," for a total sense of "gather (the Senate...

 McCarthyism 

 He entered the Senate in 1947, but his rise to national attention began with a widely reported speech on Feb. 9, 1950, in...Senate ran from April to June 1954....

 congressman 

 Technically of members of both the Senate and the House of Representatives, but typically meaning only the House members....

 witch hunt 

 Senate subcommittee hearings, 1919]...

 emperor 

 Originally a title conferred by vote of the Roman army on a successful general, later by the Senate on Julius and Augustus...

 consult 

 consulere "to take counsel, meet and consider," originally probably "to call together," as in consulere senatum "to gather the senate...

 decolonization 

 Seward of New York in the Senate, February 8, 1853, in Appendix to the Congressional Globe, 2nd Session, 32nd Congress]...

 congress 

 c. 1400, "a body of attendants; also "meeting of armed forces" (mid-15c.); the sense of "a coming together of people, a meeting of individuals" is from 1520s; from Latin congressus "a friendly meeting; a hostile encounter," past participle of congredi "to meet with; to fight with

 virtual 

 late 14c., "influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent natural qualities," from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus "excellence, potency, efficacy," literally "manliness, manhood" (see virtue). The meaning "being something in essen

 peace 

 mid-12c., pes, "freedom from civil disorder, internal peace of a nation," from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais "peace, reconciliation, silence, permission" (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) "compact, agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence o

 Share senate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/senate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/senate">Etymology of senate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of senate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/senate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of senate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/senate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of senate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/senate. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of senate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/senate (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near senate 
 semolina 
 semper- 
 semper idem 
 sempiternal 
 *sen- 
 senate 
 senator 
 senatorial 
 send 
 sended 
 sender 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close