URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/plastic
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Plastic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Plastic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of plastic 

 plastic (adj.) 

 1630s, "capable of shaping or molding a mass of matter," from Latin plasticus , from Greek plastikos "fit for molding, capable of being molded into various forms; pertaining to molding," also in reference to the arts, from plastos "molded, formed," verbal adjective from plassein "to mold" (see plasma ). Related: Plastically .

 Hence "capable of change or of receiving a new direction" (1791). The surgical sense of "remedying a deficiency of structure" is recorded by 1839 (in plastic surgery ). Meaning "made of plastic" is from 1909; this was picked up in counterculture slang and given an extended meaning "false, superficial" (1963). Plastic explosive (n.) "explosive material with a putty-like consistency" is attested from 1894.
 also from 1630s 

 plastic (n.) 

 1905, "solid substance that can be molded," originally of dental molds, from plastic (adj.). The main current meaning, "synthetic product made from oil derivatives," is recorded by 1909, used in this sense by Leo Baekeland (see Bakelite ).
 also from 1905 

 Entries linking to plastic 

 Bakelite (n.) 

 type of plastic widely used early 20c., 1909, from German Bakelit , named for Belgian-born U.S. physicist Leo Baekeland (1863-1944), who invented it. Originally a proprietary name, it is formed by the condensation of a phenol with an aldehyde.

 plasma (n.) 

 1712, "form, shape" (a sense now obsolete), a more classical form of earlier plasm ; from Late Latin plasma , from Greek plasma "something molded or created," hence "image, figure; counterfeit, forgery; formed style, affectation," from plassein "to mold," originally "to spread thin," from PIE *plath-yein , from root *pele- (2) "flat; to spread."

 Sense of "the liquid part of blood, etc., as distinguished from the corpuscles" is from 1845. In physics, the sense of "ionized gas" is by 1928.

 Plasticine 
 plasticity 
 pleather 
 thermoplastic 
 *pele- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fictile 

 1620s, "molded or formed by art," from Latin fictilis "made of clay, earthen," from fictio "a fashioning or feigning," noun of action from past participle stem of fingere "to shape, form, devise, feign," originally "to knead, form out of clay" (from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, bu

 pliant 

 late 14c., pliaunt, "capable of being easily bent, flexible, supple," from Old French ploiant "bending, supple; compliant, fickle," as a noun, "turncoat" (13c.), present participle of ploier "to bend," from Latin plicare "to fold, lay" (from PIE root *plek- "to plait"). Figurativ

 foam 

 The plastic variety used in packaging, etc., so called from 1937....

 laminate 

 Many modern senses in English are from the noun meaning "an artificial thin layer" (1939), especially a type of plastic adhesive...

 vinyl 

 in modern use, in reference to a plastic or synthetic resin, 1939, short for polyvinyl; not in widespread use until late...

 celluloid 

 transparent plastic made from nitro-celluloses and camphor, 1871, trademark name (reg....

 mold 

 By 1570s as "a form of metal or earthenware (later plastic) to give shape to jellies or other food....

 solid 

 late 14c., "not empty or hollow, hardened;" of figures or bodies, "having three dimensions," from Old French solide "firm, dense, compact," from Latin solidus "firm, whole, undivided, entire," figuratively "sound, trustworthy, genuine," from suffixed form of PIE root *sol- "whole

 Teflon 

 commercially important synthetic polymer, 1945, proprietary name registered in U.S. by du Pont, from chemical name (poly)te(tra)fl(uoroethylene) + arbitrary ending -on; popularized as a coating of non-stick pans in 1960s; metaphoric extension, especially in reference to U.S. Pres

 plaint 

 c. 1200, pleinte, "lamentation, mourning, audible expression of sorrow," from Old French plainte "lament, lamentation" (12c.), from Latin planctus "lamentation, wailing, beating of the breast," from past-participle stem of plangere "to lament; to strike (the breast, in grief or m

 Share plastic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/plastic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/plastic">Etymology of plastic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of plastic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/plastic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of plastic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/plastic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of plastic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/plastic. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of plastic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/plastic (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near plastic 
 plasmid 
 plasmodium 
 plasmolysis 
 -plast 
 plaster 
 plastic 
 Plasticine 
 plasticity 
 plastid 
 plastron 
 -plasty 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix