URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dome
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:00:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dome - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dome - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dome 

 dome (n.) 

 "a round, vaulted roof, a hemispherical covering of a building," 1650s, from French dome "a town-house; a dome, a cupola" (16c.), from Provençal doma , from Greek dōma "a house, housetop" (especially in reference to a style of roof from the east), related to domos "house," from PIE root *dem- "house, household."

 In the Middle Ages, German dom and Italian duomo were used for "cathedral" (on the notion of "God's house"), so English began to use this word in the sense "cupola," a dome at the intersection of the nave and the transept, or over the sanctuary, being a characteristic architectural feature of Italian cathedrals.

 The word was used in U.S. also with reference to round summits of mountains, roofs of railroad cars, etc. The etymological sense "a building, a house," especially a stately one, was borrowed earlier in English (1510s) but mostly was restricted to poetry. 
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to dome 

 *dem- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "house, household." It represents the usual Indo-European word for "house" (Italian, Spanish casa are from Latin casa "cottage, hut;" Germanic *hus is of obscure origin).

 It might form all or part of: Anno Domini ; belladonna ; condominium ; dame ; damsel ; dan "title of address to members of religious orders;" danger ; dangerous ; demesne ; despot ; Dom Perignon ; domain ; dome ; domestic ; domesticate ; domicile ; dominate ; domination ; dominion ; domino ; don (n.) "Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese title of respect;" Donna ; dungeon ; ma'am ; madam ; madame ; mademoiselle ; madonna ; major-domo ; predominant ; predominate ; timber ; toft .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit damah "house;" Avestan demana- "house;" Greek domos "house," despotēs "master, lord;" Latin domus "house," dominus "master of a household;" Armenian tanu-ter "house-lord;" Old Church Slavonic domu , Russian dom "house;" Lithuanian dimstis "enclosed court, property;" Old Norse topt "homestead."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Attic 

 1590s, "pertaining to Attica" (q.v.), the region around Athens, from Latin Atticus "Athenian," from Greek Attikos "Athenian, of Attica." The Attic dialect came to be regarded as the literary standard of ancient Greece, and it passed into the koine of the Alexandrine and Roman per

 bean 

 Old English bean "bean, pea, legume," from Proto-Germanic *bauno (source also of Old Norse baun, Middle Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), and related to Latin faba "bean;" Greek phakos "lentil;" Albanian bathë "horse-bean;" Old Prussian babo, Russian bo

 pendentive 

 in architecture, "one of the triangular segments of the lower part of a hemispherical dome left by the penetration of the...dome by two semicircular vaults intersection at right angles" (oh, hell, just look at a picture), 1727, from French pendentif...

 cupola 

 in architecture, a type of vault or small dome, 1540s, from Italian cupola, from Late Latin cupula "a little tub," diminutive...In colloquial use, the cupola is often considered as a diminutive dome, or the name is specifically applied to a small structure...rising above a roof and often having the character of a tower or lantern, and in no sense that of a dome....

 con 

 Conning tower "dome-shaped pilot house of an ironclad warship or submarine" is attested from 1865....

 silo 

 Over the bottom a vaulted dome is built, rising eight and a half feet, and surrounding the tube through which the corn is...

 palace 

 De Vaan connects it with palatum "roof of the mouth; dome, vault," and writes, "Since the 'palate' can be referred to as...

 arena 

 1620s, "place of combat," from Latin harena "place of combat, enclosed space in the middle of Roman amphitheaters," originally "sand, sandy place" (source also of Spanish arena, Italian rena, French arène "sand"), a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from Etruscan. The central sta

 roof 

 "outer upper covering of a house or other building," Middle English rof, from Old English hrof "roof," also "ceiling," hence figuratively "highest point, top, summit" also "heaven, the sky;" from Proto-Germanic *khrofam (source also of Old Frisian rhoof "roof," Middle Dutch roof,

 bane 

 Middle English bane, from Old English bana "killer, slayer, murderer, a worker of death" (human, animal, or object), also "the devil," from Proto-Germanic *banon, cognate with *banja- "wound" (source also of Old Frisian bona "murderer," Old Norse bani "death; that which causes de

 Share dome 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dome Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dome">Etymology of dome by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dome. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dome Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dome," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dome. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dome." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dome. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dome." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dome (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dome 
 dolphin 
 dolt 
 -dom 
 Dom Perignon 
 domain 
 dome 
 Domesday book 
 domestic 
 domesticate 
 domestication 
 domesticity 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix