URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheel
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:14:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Wheel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Wheel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of wheel 

 wheel (n.) 

 Middle English whele , disk or circular frame attached to the axle of a vehicle to help it go, from Old English hweol , hweogol , from Proto-Germanic *hwewlaz (source also of Old Norse hvel , Old Swedish hiughl , Old Frisian hwel , Middle Dutch weel ), from PIE *kw(e)-kwl-o- "wheel, circle," suffixed, reduplicated form of root *kwel- (1) "revolve, move round; sojourn, dwell."

 The figurative sense is by early 14c. To go on wheels in figurative use, implying rapid and continuous action, is by 1540s.

 Also from c. 1200 as an instrument of torture, variously used. Of cheese made in a circular form by 1977. The phrase wheel of fortune is attested from early 15c. (the image of Fortune's wheel is in English from 12c.).

 Wheels is by 1959 in slang as "automobile." Earlier wheels was "machinery," hence "motive power, principle of life." Wheel as slang for "important person, big shot" is by 1933, American English. The U.S. wheel-bug is so called by 1815.

 wheel (v.) 

 c. 1200, whelen , "turn like a wheel, turn on or as on an axis or about a center," c. 1200, from wheel (n.); the transitive sense of "cause to move in a circle, cause to turn as on an axis" is attested from late 14c. As "turn and face a different direction," by 1630s. Related: Wheeled ; wheeling .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to wheel 

 cartwheel (n.) 

 also cart-wheel , late 14c., "wheel of a cart," from cart (n.) + wheel (n.). The meaning "lateral somersault" is recorded from 1861; as a verb from 1907. Related: Cartwheeled ; cartwheeling .

 cog-wheel (n.) 

 "wheel having teeth or cogs," early 15c., from cog (n.) + wheel (n.).

 driving-wheel 
 flywheel 
 four-wheeled 
 free-wheeling 
 hell on wheels 
 mill-wheel 
 paddle-wheel 
 pinwheel 
 water-wheel 
 wheelbarrow 
 wheel-base 
 wheelchair 
 wheeled 
 wheeler 
 wheel-horse 
 wheel-house 
 wheelie 
 wheelwright 
 See All Related Words (21) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 roll 

 c. 1200, rolle, "rolled-up piece of parchment or paper, scroll" (especially one inscribed with an official record), from Old French rolle "document, parchment scroll, decree" (12c.), Medieval Latin rotulus "a roll of paper" (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian rullo), from Lati

 bicycle 

 1868, from bi- "two" + a Latinized form of Greek kyklos "circle, wheel" (see cycle (n.)), on the pattern of tricycle; both the word and the vehicle superseding earlier velocipede. The English word is said in some dictionaries to be probably not from French, but the 1868 citations

 cycle 

 late 14c., cicle, "perpetual circulating period of time, on the completion of which certain phenomena return in the same order," especially and originally in reference to astronomical phenomena, from Old French cicle and directly from Late Latin cyclus, from Greek kyklos "circle,

 rotary 

 1731, from Medieval Latin rotarius "pertaining to wheels," from Latin rota "a wheel, a potter's wheel; wheel for torture,...root *ret- "to run, to turn, to roll" (source also of Sanskrit rathah "car, chariot;" Avestan ratho; Lithuanian ratas "wheel...," ritu "I roll;" Old Irish roth, Welsh rhod "carriage wheel")....The root also forms the common West Germanic word for "wheel" (originally "spoked wheel"): Old High German rad, German Rad...

 truckle 

 "small wheel or roller," late 14c., from Anglo-French trocle, from Latin trochlea "a small wheel, sheaf of a pulley," from...Greek trokhileia "a system of pulleys," from trokhos "wheel," from trekhein "to run," from PIE root *dhregh- "to run" (source...also of Old Irish droch "wheel," Lithuanian drožti "to run fast")....

 spoke 

 "bar or rod inserted in the hub of a wheel to support the rim," Middle English spoke, spake, from Old English spaca "spoke...of a wheel, radius," related to spicing "large nail," from Proto-Germanic *spaikon (source also of Old Saxon speca, Old...Also extended to the rungs of ladders, and to a bar placed in the wheel of a vehicle to keep it from rolling (1580s, figurative...

 tire 

 late 15c., "iron plates forming a rim of a carriage wheel," probably from tire "equipment, dress, covering" (c. 1300), a...The notion is of the tire as the dressing of the wheel....A tire-iron originally was one of the iron plates; as a device for separating a tire from a wheel, by 1909....

 travel 

 late 14c., "to journey," from travailen (1300) "to make a journey," originally "to toil, labor" (see travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced 

 dire 

 "causing or attended by great fear, dreadful, awful," 1560s, from Latin dirus "fearful, awful, boding ill," a religious term, which is of unknown origin. Apparently a dialect word in Latin; perhaps from Oscan and Umbrian and perhaps cognate with Greek deinos "terrible," Sanskrit 

 ride 

 Middle English riden, from Old English ridan "sit or be carried on" (as on horseback), "move forward; rock; float, sail" (class I strong verb; past tense rad, past participle riden), from Proto-Germanic *ridan (source also of Old Norse riða, Old Saxon ridan, Old Frisian rida "to 

 Share wheel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheel">Etymology of wheel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of wheel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of wheel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of wheel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheel. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of wheel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheel (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near wheel 
 wheat 
 wheatear 
 wheaten 
 whee 
 wheedle 
 wheel 
 wheelbarrow 
 wheel-base 
 wheelchair 
 wheeled 
 wheeler 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close