URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/albatross
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Albatross - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Albatross - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of albatross 

 albatross (n.) 

 "large web-footed sea-bird of the petrel family," 1670s, probably from Spanish or Portuguese albatros , an alteration of alcatraz "web-footed sea-bird; cormorant," originally "pelican" (16c.).

 This name is perhaps from Arabic al-ghattas "sea eagle" [Barnhart]; or from Portuguese alcatruz "the bucket of a water wheel" [OED 1989], from Arabic al-qadus "machine for drawing water, jar" (which is said to be from Greek kados "jar"). If the second, the name would be a reference to the pelican's pouch (compare Arabic saqqa "pelican," literally "water carrier").

 The spelling was influenced by Latin albus "white." The name was extended by 17c. English sailors to a larger sea-bird (order Tubinares ), which is not found in the North Atlantic. [In English the word also formerly was extended to the frigate-bird.]

 These albatrosses follow ships for days without resting and were held in superstitious awe by sailors. The figurative sense of "burden" (by 1936) is from Coleridge's "Rime of the Ancient Mariner" (1798) about a sailor who shoots an albatross and then is forced to wear its corpse as an indication that he alone, not the crew, offended against the bird.

 The prison-island of Alcatraz in San Francisco Bay is named for pelicans that roosted there. In Dutch, stormvogel ; in German Sturmvogel "storm-bird."
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to albatross 

 Alcatraz 

 prison-island in San Francisco Bay; see albatross .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 handicap 

 1650s, from hand in cap, a game whereby two bettors would engage a neutral umpire to determine the odds in an unequal contest. The bettors would put their hands holding forfeit money into a hat or cap. The umpire would announce the odds and the bettors would withdraw their hands 

 balk 

 also baulk, Middle English balke, from Old English balca "ridge, bank," from or influenced by Old Norse balkr "ridge of land," especially between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (source also of Old Saxon balko, Danish bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High Germ

 check 

 c. 1300, in chess, "a call noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in immediate peril," from Old French eschequier "a check at chess" (also "chess board, chess set"), from eschec "the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate," from Vulgar Lati

 tribe 

 mid-13c., "one of the twelve divisions of the ancient Hebrews," from Old French tribu or directly from Latin tribus "one of the three political/ethnic divisions of the original Roman state" (Tites, Ramnes, and Luceres, corresponding, perhaps, to the Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans

 pragmatic 

 1610s, "meddlesome, impertinently busy," short for earlier pragmatical, or else from French pragmatique (15c.), from Latin pragmaticus "skilled in business or law," from Greek pragmatikos "fit for business, active, business-like; systematic," from pragma (genitive pragmatos) "a d

 atheist 

 1570s, "godless person, one who denies the existence of a supreme, intelligent being to whom moral obligation is due," from French athéiste (16c.), from Greek atheos "without god, denying the gods; abandoned of the gods; godless, ungodly," from a- "without" (see a- (3)) + theos "

 fanny 

 "buttocks," 1920, American English, from earlier British meaning "vulva" (1879), perhaps from the name of John Cleland's heroine in the scandalous novel "Fanny Hill or Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure" (1748). The fem. proper name is a diminutive of Frances. The genital sense is st

 salmon 

 early 13c., samoun, the North Atlantic salmon, from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem (nominative salmo) "a salmon," probably originally "leaper," from salire "to leap" (see salient (adj.)), though some dismiss this as folk etymolo

 hegemony 

 1560s, "preponderance, dominance, leadership," originally of predominance of one city state or another in Greek history; from Greek hēgemonia "leadership, a leading the way, a going first;" also "the authority or sovereignty of one city-state over a number of others," as Athens i

 errand 

 Old English ærende "message, mission; answer, news, tidings," from Proto-Germanic *airundija- "message, errand" (source also of Old Saxon arundi, Old Norse erendi, Danish ærinde, Swedish ärende, Old Frisian erende, Old High German arunti "message"), which is of uncertain origin. 

 Share albatross 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/albatross Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/albatross">Etymology of albatross by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of albatross. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/albatross Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of albatross," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/albatross. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of albatross." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/albatross. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of albatross." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/albatross (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near albatross 
 alastor 
 alate 
 alb 
 albacore 
 Albania 
 albatross 
 albedo 
 albeit 
 Albert 
 Alberta 
 albescent 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix