URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/anode
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:33:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Anode - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Anode - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of anode 

 anode (n.) 

 1834, coined from Greek anodos "way upward," from ano "upward," from ana "up" (see ana- ) + hodos "a way," a word of uncertain origin (see Exodus ). Proposed by the Rev. William Whewell, English polymath, and published by English chemist and physicist Michael Faraday. So called from the path the electrical current was thought to take. Compare cathode . Related: Anodic , anodal .
 also from 1834 

 Entries linking to anode 

 cathode (n.) 

 "negative pole of an electric current," 1834, from Latinized form of Greek kathodos "a going down, a way down," from kata "down" (see cata- ) + hodos "a way, path, track, road," a word of uncertain origin (see Exodus ). Proposed by the Rev. William Whewell, English polymath, and published by English chemist and physicist Michael Faraday. So called from the path the electric current was supposed to take. Related: Cathodic ; cathodal . Cathode ray is attested by 1880, but the phenomenon was known from 1859; cathode ray tube is from 1905.

 Exodus 

 late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus , from Greek exodos "a military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death," literally "a going out," from ex "out" (see ex- ) + hodos "a way, path, road; a ride, journey, march," figuratively "way out, means," a word of uncertain origin.

 The book is so called because it tells of the departure of the Israelites from Egypt under the leadership of Moses. General sense (with lower-case -e- ) "departure from a place," especially "the migration of large bodies of people or animals from one country or region to another," is from 1620s.

 Beekes derives the Greek word from PIE *sod- "course" and says it is traditionally connected with Slavic words for "course" (such as Russian xod "course, progress," "which might have been borrowed from Iranian") and adds that it is perhaps also related to Sanskrit a-sad- "to tread on, go on," Avestan apa-had- "to go away; become weak," "but the relation between them is unclear, as is the connection to the PIE root *sed- "sit" (proposed in Watkins, etc.)."

 anion 
 anodize 
 electrode 
 ana- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 anion 

 "a negatively charged ion, which moves toward the anode (q.v.) during electrolysis," 1834, proposed by the Rev. William Whewell, English polymath, and published by English physicist Michael Faraday, from Greek anion "(thing) going up," neuter past participle of anienai "go up," f

 terminal 

 mid-15c., "relating to or marking boundaries," from Latin terminalis "pertaining to a boundary or end, final," from terminus "end, boundary line" (see terminus). The meaning "fatal" (terminal illness) is recorded from 1891. The sense of "situated at the extreme end" (of something

 pole 

 "stake, staff," late Old English pal "stake, pole, post," a general Germanic borrowing (Old Frisian and Old Saxon pal "stake," Middle Dutch pael, Dutch paal, Old High German pfal, Old Norse pall) from Latin palus "a stake," from PIE *pakslo-, suffixed form of root *pag- "to faste

 plate 

 mid-13c., "flat sheet of gold or silver," also "flat, round coin," from Old French plate "thin piece of metal" (late 12c.), from Medieval Latin plata "plate, piece of metal," perhaps via Vulgar Latin *plattus, formed on model of Greek platys "flat, broad" (from PIE root *plat- "t

 tube 

 1610s, from French tube (15c.), from Latin tubus "tube, pipe," a word of unknown origin. The London subway was christened the Twopenny Tube by 1900 (H.D. Browne, in the "Londoner" of June 30); tube for "cylindrical railway tunnel" is attested from 1847. The meaning "TV as a mediu

 moral 

 mid-14c., "associated with or characterized by right behavior," also "associated with or concerning conduct or moral principles" (good or bad), from Old French moral (14c.) and directly from Latin moralis "proper behavior of a person in society," literally "pertaining to manners,

 blatant 

 coined 1596 by Edmund Spenser in "The Faerie Queen," in blatant beast, a thousand-tongued monster representing slander; perhaps primarily an alliterative word, but perhaps suggested by Latin blatire "to babble." It entered general use by 1650s as "noisy in an offensive and vulgar

 face 

 c. 1300, "the human face, a face; facial appearance or expression; likeness, image," from Old French face "face, countenance, look, appearance" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *facia (source also of Italian faccia), from Latin facies "appearance, form, figure," and secondarily "visage,

 decide 

 late 14c., "to settle a dispute, determine a controversy," from Old French decider, from Latin decidere "to decide, determine," literally "to cut off," from de "off" (see de-) + caedere "to cut" (from PIE root *kae-id- "to strike"). For Latin vowel change, see acquisition. Sense 

 sycophant 

 1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), "informer, talebearer, slanderer" (a sense now obsolete), from French sycophante and directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantēs "false accuser, slanderer," literally "one who shows the fig," from sykon "fig" (see fig (n.1)) + phainein

 Share anode 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/anode Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/anode">Etymology of anode by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of anode. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/anode Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of anode," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anode. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of anode." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anode. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of anode." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/anode (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near anode 
 annulment 
 annulus 
 annunciate 
 annunciation 
 annus mirabilis 
 anode 
 anodize 
 anodyne 
 anoint 
 anointed 
 anole 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix