URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Margaret
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:52:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Margaret - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Margaret - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Margaret 

 Margaret 

 fem. proper name (c. 1300), from Old French Margaret (French Marguerite ), from Late Latin Margarita , female name, literally "pearl," from Greek margaritēs (lithos) "pearl," which is of unknown origin.

 OED writes, "probably adopted from some Oriental language" [OED]. Beekes writes, "An oriental loanword, mostly assumed to be from Iranian" and cites Middle Persian marvarit "pearl." He adds, "The older view" derives it from Sanskrit manjari "pearl; flowering bead," "but the late and rare occurrence of both the Skt. and Greek form is no support for a direct identification." He also reports a suggested origin in Iranian *mrga-ahri-ita- "born from the shell of a bird" = "oyster."

 Arabic marjan probably is from Greek, via Syraic marganitha . In Germanic languages the word was widely perverted by folk-etymology, for example Old English meregrot, which has been altered as if it meant literally "sea-pebble." The word was used figuratively in Middle English for "that which is precious or excellent, a priceless quality or attribute." Derk margaryte was "a corrupted conscience."

 Entries linking to Margaret 

 daisy (n.) 

 common wildflower of Europe, growing in pastures and on mountainsides and cultivated in gardens, c. 1300, daiseie , from Old English dægesege , from dæges eage "day's eye;" see day (n.) + eye (n.). So called because the petals open at dawn and close at dusk. In Medieval Latin it was solis oculus "sun's eye." The use of dais eye for "the sun" is attested from early 15c.

 Applied to similar plants in America, Australia, New Zealand. As a female proper name said to have been originally a pet form of Margaret (q.v.). Slang sense of "anything pretty, charming, or excellent" is by 1757.

 Daisy-cutter first attested 1791, originally "a trotting horse," especially one that trots with low steps; later of cricket (1889) and baseball hits that skim along the ground. Daisy-chain is used in various figurative senses from 1856; the "group sex" sense is attested by 1941. Daisy-wheel for a removable printing unit in the form of a flat wheel is attested by 1974.

 To push up daisies "be dead and buried" is from World War I:

 "Pushing up the daisies now," said a soldier of his dead comrade. [The American Florist, vol. xlviii, March 31, 1917]

 But association of the dead and the daisies is in "Ingoldsby" (1842):

 Be kind to those dear little folks

     When our toes are turn'd up to the daisies!

 Gretchen 

 fem. proper name, German diminutive of Greta, a German and Swedish pet form of Margaret . Sometimes used as a typical German female name, also sometimes in reference to the name of the simple girl seduced by Faust.

 Madge 
 mag 
 Maggie 
 margaric 
 margarin 
 Margarita 
 margarite 
 Margery 
 marguerite 
 Meg 
 midget 
 Peggy 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 margarin 

 1836, from French margarine, a chemical term given to a fatty substance obtained from animal and vegetable oil, coined by French chemist Michel Eugène Chevreul (1786-1889) in 1813 from (acide) margarique "margaric (acid);" literally "pearly," from Greek margaritēs "pearl" (see Ma

 isotope 

 Introduced by British chemist Frederick Soddy (1877-1956) on suggestion of his friend, the Scottish writer and doctor Margaret...

 nanny 

 reference to overintrusive government policies is attested by 1987, the term is associated with British political leader Margaret...

 Harriet 

 Surely it is more lady-like to be called Catharine, Margaret, Eliza, or Ellen....

 Oscar 

 The common explanation of the name is that it sprang from a 1931 remark by Margaret Herrick, secretary at Academy of Motion...

 London 

 etymology is rejected in an emphatic footnote in Jackson 1953 (p. 308), and we have as yet nothing to put in its place" [Margaret...

 magpie 

 The first element is Mag, nickname for Margaret, long used in proverbial and slang English for qualities associated generally...The name Margaret, and its reduced forms Mag, Madge, diminutive Maggie, also has long been familiarly applied to birds....

 interest 

 mid-15c., "legal claim or right; a concern; a benefit, advantage, a being concerned or affected (advantageously)," from Old French interest "damage, loss, harm" (Modern French intérêt), from noun use of Latin interest "it is of importance, it makes a difference," third person sin

 carnival 

 1540s, "time of merrymaking before Lent," from French carnaval, from Italian carnevale "Shrove Tuesday," from older Italian forms such as Milanese *carnelevale, Old Pisan carnelevare "to remove meat," literally "raising flesh," from Latin caro "flesh" (originally "a piece of fles

 conception 

 early 14c., "act of conceiving in the womb," from Old French concepcion (Modern French conception) "conception, grasp, comprehension," from Latin conceptionem (nominative conceptio) "a comprehending, conception," noun of action from past-participle stem of concipere "to take in a

 Share Margaret 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Margaret Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Margaret">Etymology of Margaret by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Margaret. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Margaret Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Margaret," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Margaret. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Margaret." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Margaret. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Margaret." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Margaret (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Margaret 
 Marcomanni 
 Marcus 
 Mardi Gras 
 mare 
 Mareotic 
 Margaret 
 margaric 
 margarin 
 margarine 
 Margarita 
 margarite 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix