URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Susan
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:33:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Susan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Susan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Susan 

 Susan 

 fem. proper name, from French Susanne , from Late Latin Susanna (see Susanna ). A top-10 name for girls born in the U.S. 1945-1968 (peaking at #2 from 1957-60).

 Entries linking to Susan 

 Susanna 

 also Susannah , fem. proper name, from Latin Susanna , from Greek Sousanna , from Hebrew Shoshannah , literally "a lily." The name of one of the women that attended Jesus in his journeys. Greek also borrowed the Semitic word in its literal sense as souson "lily."

 Sue 

 fem. proper name, a shortened or familiar form of Susan .

 sue 
 Sukey 
 Suzie 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 black eye 

 The black-eyed Susan as a flower name (various species) is by 1881, for their appearance....All in the Downs the fleet was moored,   The streamers waving in the wind, When black-eyed Susan came aboard...

 solace 

 "comfort in grief; that which brings consolation," c. 1300, solas, from Old French solaz "pleasure, entertainment, enjoyment; solace, comfort," from Latin solacium "a soothing, assuaging; comfort, consolation," from solatus, past participle of solari "to console, soothe," from a 

 gravity 

 c. 1500, "weight, dignity, seriousness, solemnity of deportment or character, importance," from Old French gravité "seriousness, thoughtfulness" (13c.) and directly from Latin gravitatem (nominative gravitas) "weight, heaviness, pressure," from gravis "heavy" (from PIE root *gwer

 mirror 

 mid-13c., mirour, "polished surface (of metal, coated glass, etc.) used to reflect images of objects," especially the face of a person, from Old French mireoir "a reflecting glass, looking glass; observation, model, example," earlier miradoir (11c.), from mirer "look at" (oneself

 squirrel 

 "agile, active arboreal rodent with pointed ears and a long, bushy tail," early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French esquirel, Old French escurueil "squirrel; squirrel fur" (Modern French écureuil), from Vulgar Latin *scuriolus, diminutive of *scurius "squirrel," vari

 fox 

 Old English fox "a fox," from Proto-Germanic *fuhsaz "fox" (cognates Old Saxon vohs, Middle Dutch and Dutch vos, Old High German fuhs, German Fuchs, Old Norse foa, Gothic fauho), from Proto-Germanic *fuh-, from PIE *puk- "tail" (source also of Sanskrit puccha- "tail"). The bushy 

 mundane 

 mid-15c., mondeine, "of this world, worldly, terrestrial," from Old French mondain "of this world, worldly, earthly, secular;" also "pure, clean; noble, generous" (12c.) and directly from Late Latin mundanus "belonging to the world" (as distinct from the Church), in classical Lat

 glory 

 c. 1200, gloire "the splendor of God or Christ; praise offered to God, worship," from Old French glorie "glory (of God); worldly honor, renown; splendor, magnificence, pomp" (11c., Modern French gloire), from Latin gloria "fame, renown, great praise or honor," a word of uncertain

 prejudice 

 c. 1300, "despite, contempt," from Old French prejudice "a prejudice, prejudgment; damage" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin prejudicium "injustice," from Latin praeiudicium "prior judgment, judicial examination before trial; damage, harm," from prae- "before" (see pre-) + 

 retribution 

 late 14c., retribucioun, "repayment," from Old French retribution, retribucion, and directly from Latin retributionem (nominative retributio) "recompense, repayment," noun of action from past-participle stem of retribuere "hand back, repay," from re- "back" (see re-) + tribuere "

 Share Susan 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Susan Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Susan">Etymology of Susan by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Susan. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Susan Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Susan," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Susan. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Susan." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Susan. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Susan." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Susan (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Susan 
 survivalist 
 survive 
 surviver 
 survivor 
 sus- 
 Susan 
 Susanna 
 susceptibility 
 susceptible 
 susception 
 susceptive 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix