URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pilot
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:49:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pilot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pilot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pilot 

 pilot (n.) 

 1510s, "one who steers a ship," especially one who has charge of the helm when the ship is passing in or out of harbor, from French pillote (16c.), from Italian piloto , supposed to be an alteration of Old Italian pedoto , which usually is said to be from Medieval Greek *pedotes "rudder, helmsman," from Greek pedon "steering oar," related to pous (genitive podos ) "foot," from PIE root *ped- "foot." The change of -d- to -l- in Latin-derived languages ("Sabine -l-") parallels that in odor/olfactory ; see lachrymose .

 The transferred or figurative sense "a guide, a director of the course of others" is by 1590s. The literal sense was extended by 1848 to "one who controls a balloon," and by 1907 to "one who flies an airplane."

 As an adjective, 1788 as "pertaining to a pilot;" from 1928 as "serving as a prototype," thus the noun pilot meaning "pilot episode" (etc.), attested from 1962. A pilot light (by 1890) is a very small light kept burning beside a large burner to automatically light the main burner when the flow is turned on.
 also from 1510s 

 pilot (v.) 

 1640s, figurative, "to guide, to lead, direct the course of, especially through an intricate or perilous passage;" 1690s in the literal sense "to conduct (a vessel) as a pilot," from pilot (n.) or from French piloter . Related: Piloted ; piloting .
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to pilot 

 lachrymose (adj.) 

 also lacrymose , 1660s, "tear-like," from Latin lacrimosus "tearful, sorrowful, weeping," also "causing tears, lamentable," from lacrima , lacryma "a tear," a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma "a tear," from dakryein "to shed tears, weep, lament with tears," from dakry "a tear" (reconstructed in Watkins to be from PIE *dakru- "tear;" see tear (n.1)).

 The meaning "given to tears, tearful" is attested by 1727; the meaning "of a mournful character" is by 1822. Related: Lachrymosely .

 The -d- to -l- alteration in Latin is the so-called "Sabine -L-"; compare Latin olere "smell," from root of odor , and Ulixes , the Latin form of Greek Odysseus .

 The Medieval Latin practice of writing -ch- for -c- before Latin -r- also altered anchor , pulchritude , sepulchre . The -y- is pedantic, from the former belief that the word was pure Greek. Earlier in the same sense was lachrymental (1620s). Middle English had lacrymable "tearful" (mid-15c.).

 piloted (adj.) 

 "directed by a pilot," 1945, past-participle adjective from pilot (v.).

 autopilot 
 copilot 
 pilot-fish 
 pilot-house 
 pilotless 
 sky-pilot 
 *ped- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 navigate 

 1580s, "move from place to place in a ship, sail" (intrans.), a back-formation from navigation, or else from Latin navigatus, past-participle of navigare "to sail, sail over, go by sea, steer a ship," from navis "ship" (from PIE root *nau- "boat") + root of agere "to set in motio

 fly 

 Old English fleoge "a fly, winged insect," from Proto-Germanic *fleugon "flying insect" (source also of Old Saxon fleiga, Old Norse fluga, Middle Dutch vlieghe, Dutch vlieg, Old High German flioga, German Fliege "fly"); literally "the flying (insect)" (compare Old English fleogen

 buffer 

 "something that absorbs a blow, apparatus for deadening the concussion between a moving body and that against which it strikes," 1835, agent noun from obsolete verb buff "make a dull sound when struck" (mid-16c.), from Old French bufe "a blow, slap, punch" (see buffet (n.2)). The

 govern 

 gubernare "to direct, rule, guide, govern" (source also of Spanish gobernar, Italian governare), originally "to steer, to pilot...," a nautical borrowing from Greek kybernan "to steer or pilot a ship, direct as a pilot," figuratively "to guide, govern...

 cybernetics 

 with -ics + Latinized form of Greek kybernetes "steersman" (metaphorically "guide, governor"), from kybernan "to steer or pilot...a ship, direct as a pilot," figuratively "to guide, govern," which is of uncertain origin....

 government 

 helm of; govern, rule, command, direct," from Latin gubernare "to direct, rule, guide, govern," originally "to steer, to pilot...

 lode 

 Middle English also had lodesman (c. 1300) "leader, guide; pilot, steersman."...

 wing 

 late 12c., wenge, "forelimb fitted for flight of a bird or bat," also the part of some insects resembling a wing in form or function, from Old Norse vængr "wing of a bird, aisle, etc." (cognate with Danish and Swedish vinge "wing"), of unknown origin, perhaps from a Proto-Germani

 bog 

 "wet, soft, spongy ground with soil chiefly composed of decaying vegetable matter," c. 1500, from Gaelic and Irish bogach "bog," from adjective bog "soft, moist," from Proto-Celtic *buggo- "flexible" (from PIE root *bheug- "to bend"). A bog is characterized by vegetation, decaye

 captain 

 late 14c., capitayn, "a leader, chief, one who stands at the head of others," from Old French capitaine "captain, leader," from Late Latin capitaneus "chief," noun use of adjective capitaneus "prominent, chief," from Latin caput (genitive capitis) "head" (from PIE root *kaput- "h

 Share pilot 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pilot Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pilot">Etymology of pilot by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pilot. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pilot Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pilot," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pilot. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pilot." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pilot. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pilot." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pilot (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pilot 
 pillow 
 pillowy 
 Pilobolus 
 pilon 
 pilose 
 pilot 
 piloted 
 pilot-fish 
 pilot-house 
 pilotless 
 pilsner 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix