URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercury
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:24:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mercury - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mercury - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Mercury 

 Mercury 

 "the Roman god Mercury," herald and ambassador of his father, Jupiter, mid-12c., Mercurie , from Latin Mercurius "Mercury," originally a god of tradesmen and thieves, from merx "merchandise" (see market (n.)); or perhaps [Klein, Tucker] from Etruscan and influenced by merx . De Vaan thinks it possible the whole stem * merk- was borrowed and the god-name with it.

 Mercury later was identified with Greek Hermes and still later with Germanic Woden. From his role as a messenger and conveyor of information, since mid-17c. Mercury has been a common name for a newspaper. 

 The planet closest to the sun was so called in classical Latin (c. 1300 in English). A hypothetical inhabitant of the planet was a Mercurean (1855) or a Mercurian (1755). For the metallic element, see mercury .

 In U.S. numismatics, the Mercury-head dime (so called by 1941) was in circulation from 1916; properly it is the female head of Liberty, in her characteristic cap, here winged to symbolize freedom of thought. But the resemblance to Mercury was noted in coin circles at once, and the coin design sometimes was popularly mistaken as the head of Mercury, Roman god of making money and thieving, in his winged hat. It was so-called in 1933 in newspaper articles calling attention to the fasces on the reverse. The coin is more correctly the Winged Liberty-head dime (simple Liberty-head dime being a designation of the previous design). The design was replaced in 1946, which made it necessary for it to have an agreed-upon specifying name.

 There's the four-year-old who counted out 20 cents with the remark: "A boy dime and a girl dime." 

 Translated, this means a Roosevelt dime and one classified by coin books as the "new Mercury head" dime. 

 [Dothan Eagle, June 25, 1951] 
 also from mid-12c. 

 mercury (n.) 

 silver-white fluid metallic element, late 14c., from Medieval Latin mercurius , from Latin Mercurius (see Mercury ). Prepared in ancient times from cinnabar, it was one of the seven metals ( bodies terrestrial ) known to the ancients, which were coupled in astrology and alchemy with the seven known heavenly bodies. This one probably was associated with the planet for its mobility. The others were Sun/gold, Moon/silver, Mars/iron, Saturn/lead, Jupiter/tin, Venus/copper.

 The Greek name for it was hydrargyros "liquid silver," which gives the element its symbol, Hg . Compare quicksilver , which is its popular name. It has a freezing point of -39° C. The use of the word in reference to temperature or state of the atmosphere (by 1756) is from its use in thermometers and barometers.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to Mercury 

 market (n.) 

 early 12c., "a meeting at a fixed time for buying and selling livestock and provisions, an occasion on which goods are publicly exposed for sale and buyers assemble to purchase," from Old North French market "marketplace, trade, commerce" (Old French marchiet , Modern French marché ), from Latin mercatus "trading, buying and selling; trade; market" (source of Italian mercato , Spanish mercado , Dutch markt , German Markt ), from past participle of mercari "to trade, deal in, buy," from merx (genitive mercis ) "wares, merchandise." This is from an Italic root *merk- , possibly from Etruscan, referring to various aspects of economics.

 The god 
 Mercuriu s was probably the god of exchange. According to [Walde-Hoffmann], the god's name was borrowed from Etruscan; in principle, the same is possible for the stem 
 *merk- altogether. [de Vaan]

 Meaning "public building or space where markets are held" is attested from late 13c. Meaning "a city, country or region considered as a place where things are bought or sold" is from 1610s. Sense of "sale as controlled by supply and demand" is from 1680s. Market-garden "plot of land on which vegetables are grown for market" is by 1789. Market-basket "large basket used to carry marketing" is by 1798. Market price "price a commodity will bring when sold in open market" is from mid-15c.; market value "value established or shown by sales" (1690s) is first attested in the writings of John Locke. Market economy is from 1948; market research is from 1921.

 quicksilver (n.) 

 common popular designation of metallic mercury, Middle English quik-silver , from late Old English cwicseolfor , literally "living silver," so called for its mobility, translating Latin argentum vivum (source also of Italian argento vivo ), "living silver;" so called from its liquid mobility. See quick (adj.) + silver (n.). Similar formation in Dutch kwikzilver , Old High German quecsilbar , German quecksilber , French vif-argent , Italian argenta viva .

 intramercurial 
 mercurial 
 mercuric 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 intramercurial 

 "being within the orbit of the planet Mercury," 1859, especially in reference to a supposed planet orbiting there (sought in vain in the eclipse of 1860), from intra- "within, inside" + Mercury (Latin Mercurius) + -al (1). The idea originated in France in the 1840s with Urbain Le

 mercurial 

 late 14c., "pertaining to or under the influence of the planet Mercury," from Latin Mercurialis, from Mercurius (see Mercury). Meaning "pertaining to the god Mercury, having the form or qualities attributed to Mercury" (in reference to his role as god of trade or as herald and gu

 hydrargyrum 

 "mercury, quicksilver," 1560s, from Latin hydrargyrus, from Greek hydrargyros "quicksilver" (as prepared artificially from cinnabar ore; native quicksilver was argyros khytos "fused silver"), from hydr-, stem of hydor "water" (from suffixed form of PIE root *wed- (1) "water; wet"

 amalgam 

 c. 1400, "a blend of mercury with another metal; soft mass formed by chemical manipulation," from Old French amalgame or...directly from Medieval Latin amalgama, "alloy of mercury (especially with gold or silver)," c. 1300, an alchemists' word,...

 caduceus 

 Later especially it was the wand carried by Mercury, messenger of the gods, usually represented with two serpents twined...The caduceus is a symbol of peace and prosperity, and in modern times figures as a symbol of commerce, Mercury being the...

 amalgamate 

 1650s, "mix (a metal) with mercury," a back-formation from amalgamation, or else from the obsolete adjective amalgamate (...

 thermometer 

 The typical modern version, with mercury in glass, was invented by Fahrenheit in 1714....

 cinnabar 

 mid-15c., "red or crystalline form of mercuric sulphide," also applied to other ores of mercury, originally with reference to its use as a pigment; from Old French cinabre (13c.), from Late Latin cinnabaris, from Greek kinnabari, a foreign word, probably of Oriental origin (compa

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 temperature 

 mid-15c., "fact of being tempered, proper proportion;" 1530s, "character or nature of a substance," from Latin temperatura "a tempering, moderation," from temperatus, past participle of temperare "to mix in due proportion, modify, blend; restrain oneself" (see temper (v.)). Sense

 Share Mercury 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mercury Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mercury">Etymology of Mercury by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Mercury. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mercury Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Mercury," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mercury. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Mercury." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mercury. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Mercury." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mercury (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Mercury 
 Mercia 
 merciful 
 merciless 
 mercurial 
 mercuric 
 Mercury 
 mercy 
 merde 
 merdivorous 
 mere 
 merely 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix