URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ore
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:06:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ore 

 ore (n.) 

 "a metalliferous mineral or rock," especially one worth mining, 12c., a merger of Old English ora "ore, unworked metal" (related to eorþe "earth;" see earth (n.); and cognate with Low German ur "iron-containing ore," Dutch oer , Old Norse aurr "gravel"); and Old English ar "brass, copper, bronze," from Proto-Germanic *ajiz- (source also of Old Norse eir "brass, copper," German ehern "brazen," Gothic aiz "bronze"), from PIE root *aus- (2) "gold" (see aureate ). The two words were not fully assimilated till 17c.; what emerged has the regular modern form of ar but the meaning of ora .
 also from 12c. 

 Entries linking to ore 

 aureate (adj.) 

 early 15c., "resembling gold, gold-colored," also figuratively, "splendid, brilliant," from Latin aureatus "decorated with gold," from aureus "golden," from aurum "gold," from PIE root *aus- (2) "gold" (source also of Sanskrit ayah "metal," Avestan ayo , Latin aes "brass," Old English ar "brass, copper, bronze," Gothic aiz "bronze," Old Lithuanian ausas "gold"), which is probably related to root *aus- (1) "to shine."

 Especially of highly ornamented literary or rhetorical styles. Related: Aureation .

 earth (n.) 

 Middle English erthe , from Old English eorþe "ground, soil, dirt, dry land; country, district," also used (along with middangeard ) for "the (material) world, the abode of man" (as opposed to the heavens or the underworld), from Proto-Germanic *ertho (source also of Old Frisian erthe "earth," Old Saxon ertha , Old Norse jörð , Middle Dutch eerde , Dutch aarde , Old High German erda , German Erde , Gothic airþa ), perhaps from an extended form of PIE root *er- (2) "earth, ground."

 The earth considered as a planet was so called from c. 1400. Use in old chemistry is from 1728. Earth-mover "large digging machine" is from 1940.

 copper 
 era 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 copper 

 malleable metallic element, noted for its peculiar red color, tenacity, malleability, and electric conductivity, late Old English coper, from Proto-Germanic *kupar (source also of Middle Dutch koper, Old Norse koparr, Old High German kupfar), from Late Latin cuprum, contraction o

 era 

 1716, earlier aera (1610s), from Late Latin aera, era "an era or epoch from which time is reckoned" (7c.), probably identical with Latin aera "counters used for calculation," plural of aes (genitive aeris) "brass, copper, money" (see ore, also compare copper). The Latin word's us

 mine 

 earth for the purpose of obtaining metals and minerals," c. 1300, from Old French mine "vein, lode; tunnel, shaft; mineral ore...; mine" (for coal, tin, etc,) and from Medieval Latin mina, minera "ore," a word of uncertain origin, probably from a Celtic...source (compare Welsh mwyn, Irish mein "ore, mine"), from Old Celtic *meini-....

 smelt 

 "fuse or melt," especially ore, by heat, in a furnace, to separate the metal in it, late 14c....(implied in smelter "one who smelts ore"), from Dutch or Middle Low German smelten "to fuse, smelt, liquefy," from Proto-Germanic...

 nickel 

 in 1754 by Swedish mineralogist Axel von Cronstedt (1722-1765) from shortening of Swedish kopparnickel "copper-colored ore...According to OED, the ore was so called by miners because it looked like copper but yielded none....

 hydrargyrum 

 quicksilver," 1560s, from Latin hydrargyrus, from Greek hydrargyros "quicksilver" (as prepared artificially from cinnabar ore...

 manipulation 

 by 1730, a method of digging ore, from French manipulation, from manipule "handful" (a pharmacists' measure), from Latin...

 mineral 

 late 14c., "substance obtained by mining," from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin minerale "something mined," noun use of neuter of mineralis "pertaining to mines," from minera "a mine" (see mine (n.1)). Meaning "material substance that is neither animal nor veg

 concentrate 

 1630s, "to bring or come to a common center," from concenter (1590s), from Italian concentrare, from assimilated form of Latin com "with, together" (see con-) + centrum "center" (see center (n.)). Meaning "condense" is from 1680s; that of "intensify the action of" is from 1758. S

 banter 

 "attack with good-humored jokes and jests," 1670s, origin uncertain; said by Swift to be a word from London street slang. Related: Bantered; bantering. The noun, "good-humored ridicule," is from 1680s. The third refinement observable in the letter I send you, consists in the cho

 Share ore 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ore Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ore">Etymology of ore by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ore. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ore Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ore," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ore. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ore." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ore. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ore." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ore (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ore 
 ordinate 
 ordination 
 ordnance 
 Ordovician 
 ordure 
 ore 
 ore rotundo 
 oread 
 oregano 
 Oregon 
 Oreo 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close