URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cable
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:16:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cable - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cable - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cable 

 cable (n.) 

 c. 1200, "large, strong rope or chain used on a ship," from Old North French cable , from Medieval Latin capulum "lasso, rope, halter for cattle," from Latin capere "to take, seize," from PIE root *kap- "to grasp."

 Technically, in nautical use, a rope 10 or more inches around, to hold the ship when at anchor; in non-nautical use, a rope of wire (not hemp or fiber). It was given a new range of senses in 19c. in telegraphy (1850s), traction-railroads (1880s), etc. The meaning "message received by telegraphic cable" is from 1883, short for cable message (1870), cablegram (1868), cable dispatch (1864). Cable television is attested by 1963; shortened form cable in this sense is from 1970.

 Speed, speed the Cable; let it run,

   A loving girdle round the earth,

 Till all the nations 'neath the sun

   Shall be as brothers at one hearth;

 [T. Buchanan Read, "The Cable," 1858]
 also from c. 1200 

 cable (v.) 

 c. 1500, "to tie up with cables," from cable (n.). As "to transmit by telegraph cable," 1868. Related: Cabled ; cabling .

 We have done our part lately to bring into use the verb cabled, as applied to a message over the Atlantic cable. It is proper to say "it has been cabled," instead of "it has been telegraphed over the Atlantic cable." [The Mechanics Magazine, London, Sept. 11, 1868]

 But other British sources list it as an Americanism.
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to cable 

 cable-car (n.) 

 "car on a cable railroad," 1879, from cable (n.) + car . A streetcar moved by an endless cable which is cased in a small tunnel under the railway and kept in motion by a remote stationary engine.

 cablese (n.) 

 "shorthand used by journalists in cablegrams," 1916, from cable in the telegraphic sense + -ese as a language-name suffix. "Since cablegrams had to be paid for by the word and even press rates were expensive the practice was to affix Latin prefixes and suffixes to make one word do the work of several" [Daniel Schorr], such as exLondon and Londonward to mean "from London," "to London" (non-Latin affixes also were used). Hence the tale, famous in the lore of the United Press International, of the distinguished but harried foreign correspondent who reached his breaking point and wired headquarters UPSTICK JOB ASSWARD. Its economy and expressive power fascinated Hemingway in his newspapering days.

 *kap- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to grasp."

 It might form all or part of: accept ; anticipate ; anticipation ; behave ; behoof ; behoove ; cable ; cacciatore ; caitiff ; capable ; capacious ; capacity ; capias ; capiche ; capstan ; caption ; captious ; captivate ; captive ; captor ; capture ; case (n.2) "receptacle;" catch ; catchpoll ; cater ; chase (n.1) "a hunt;" chase (v.) "to run after, hunt;" chasse ; chasseur ; conceive ; cop (v.) "to seize, catch;" copper (n.2) "policeman;" deceive ; emancipate ; except ; forceps ; gaffe ; haft ; have ; hawk (n.); heave ; heavy ; heft ; incapacity ; inception ; incipient ; intercept ; intussusception ; manciple ; municipal ; occupy ; participation ; perceive ; precept ; prince ; purchase ; receive ; recipe ; recover ; recuperate ; sashay ; susceptible .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit kapati "two handfuls;" Greek kaptein "to swallow, gulp down," kope "oar, handle;" Latin capax "able to hold much, broad," capistrum "halter," capere "to grasp, lay hold; be large enough for; comprehend;" Lettish kampiu "seize;" Old Irish cacht "servant-girl," literally "captive;" Welsh caeth "captive, slave;" Gothic haban "have, hold;" Old English hæft "handle," habban "to have, hold."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 line 

 a Middle English merger of Old English line "cable, rope; series, row, row of letters; rule, direction," and Old French ligne "guideline, cord, string; lineage, descent" (12c.), both from Latin linea "linen thread, string, plumb-line," also "a mark, bound, limit, goal; line of de

 telegraph 

 1794, "semaphor apparatus" (hence the Telegraph Hill in many cities), literally "that which writes at a distance," from French télégraphe, from télé- "far" (from Greek tele-; see tele-) + -graphe (see -graphy). The signaling device had been invented in France in 1791 by the broth

 wire 

 Old English wir "metal drawn out into a fine thread," from Proto-Germanic *wira- (source also of Old Norse viravirka "filigree work," Swedish vira "to twist," Old High German wiara "fine gold work"), from PIE root *wei- "to turn, twist, plait." A wire as marking the finish line o

 bitter end 

 by 1759 in lexicons of nautical language, "the part of a cable which is round about the bitts" (the two great timbers used...Bitter end of the Cable, the End which is wound about the Bitts....["The News-Readers Pocket-Book: Or, a Military Dictionary," London, 1759] When a cable is played out to the bitter end,...

 holystone 

 Six days shalt thou labor as hard as thou art able And on the seventh holystone the decks and scrape the cable ["The...

 rope 

 Technically, only cordage above one inch in circumference and below 10 (bigger-around than that is a cable)....

 navel 

 The cords of all link back, strandentwining cable of all flesh....

 fasten 

 Old English fæstnian "make fast, make firm, fix, secure," also "ratify, betroth, confirm," from Proto-Germanic *fastinon "to make firm or fast" (source also of Old Frisian festnia "to make firm, bind fast," Old Saxon fastnon, Old High German fastnion, German festnen, Old Norse fa

 video 

 1935, as visual equivalent of audio, from Latin video "I see," first person singular present indicative of videre "to see" (see vision). As a noun, "that which is displayed on a (television) screen," 1937. Engineers, however, remember the sad fate of television's first debut and

 pore 

 early 13c., pouren, "gaze intently, look with close and steady attention or examination," a word of unknown origin, with no obvious corresponding word in Old French. Perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *purian, suggested by spyrian "to investigate, examine" (cognate with Old N

 Share cable 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cable Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cable">Etymology of cable by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cable. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cable Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cable," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cable. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cable." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cable. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cable." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cable (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cable 
 cabernet 
 cabin 
 cabinet 
 cabinet-maker 
 cabinetry 
 cable 
 cable-car 
 cablese 
 cabochon 
 caboodle 
 caboose 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix