URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/phase
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:11:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Phase - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Phase - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of phase 

 phase (n.) 

 1705, "phase of the moon, particular recurrent appearance presented by the moon (or Mercury or Venus) at a particular time," back-formed as a singular from Modern Latin phases , plural of phasis , from Greek phasis "appearance" (of a star), "phase" (of the moon), from stem of phainein "to show, to make appear" (from PIE root *bha- (1) "to shine").

 Latin singular phasis was used in English from 1660 for each of the aspects of the moon. General (non-lunar) sense of "aspect, appearance, stage of development at a particular time" is attested by 1841. Meaning "temporary difficult period" (especially in reference to adolescents) is attested from 1913.
 also from 1705 

 phase (v.) 

 "to synchronize, adjust the phase of so as to synchronize," 1895, from phase (n.) in the physics sense of "particular stage or point in a recurring sequence of movement or changes" (1861). Earlier as a bad spelling of faze . Meaning "to carry out gradually" is from 1949, hence phase in "introduce gradually" (1954), phase out "take out gradually in planned stages" (1954). Related: Phased ; phasing .
 also from 1895 

 Entries linking to phase 

 faze (v.) 

 1830, American English, said to be a variant of Kentish dialect feeze "to frighten, alarm, discomfit" (mid-15c.), from Old English fesian , fysian "drive away, send forth, put to flight," from Proto-Germanic *fausjan (source also of Swedish fösa "drive away," Norwegian föysa ). Related: Fazed ; fazing . Bartlett (1848) has it as to be in a feeze "in a state of excitement." There also is a nautical verb feaze "to unravel" (a rope), from 1560s.

 anaphase (n.) 

 name of a stage of cell division, 1887, coined in German (1884), from Greek ana "back" (see ana- ) + phase (n.).

 interphase 
 multiphase 
 phase-out 
 phasic 
 prophase 
 telophase 
 *bha- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stage 

 mid-13c., "horizontal division of a structure, floor or story of a building;" early 14c., "raised platform used for public display" (also of the platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage "building, dwelling place; stage for performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey

 form 

 c. 1200, forme, fourme, "semblance, image, likeness," from Old French forme, fourme, "physical form, appearance; pleasing looks; shape, image; way, manner" (12c.), from Latin forma "form, contour, figure, shape; appearance, looks; a fine form, beauty; an outline, a model, pattern

 Hellenic 

 In modern use in the arts, Hellenic is used of Greek work from the close of the primitive phase to the time of Alexander...

 rite 

 Rite of passage (1909), marking the end of one phase and the start of another in an individual life, is translated from French...

 spasm 

 The figurative sense of "a sudden convulsion, abnormally energetic action or phase" (of emotion, politics, etc.) is attested...

 neopaganism 

 [The 'positive' philosopher of the present day] offers in the stead of Christianity a specious phase of neo-paganism, by...

 rapid 

 Rapid-transit first attested 1852, in reference to street railways; rapid eye movement, associated with a certain phase of...

 arrange 

 late 14c., arengen, "draw up a line of battle," from Old French arengier "put in a row, put in battle order" (12c., Modern French arranger), from a- "to" (see ad-) + rangier "set in a row" (Modern French ranger), from rang "rank," from Frankish *hring or a similar Germanic source

 generation 

 early 14c., "body of individuals born about the same period" (historically 30 years but in other uses as few as 17), on the notion of "descendants at the same stage in the line of descent," from Old French generacion "race, people, species; progeny, offspring; act of procreating"

 culmination 

 1630s, in astronomy/astrology, "position of a heavenly body when it is on the meridian," from French culmination, noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin culminare "to top, to crown," from Latin culmen (genitive culminis) "top, peak, summit, roof, gable," also used

 Share phase 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/phase Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/phase">Etymology of phase by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of phase. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/phase Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of phase," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/phase. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of phase." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/phase. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of phase." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/phase (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near phase 
 pharmacy 
 Pharos 
 pharyngeal 
 pharyngitis 
 pharynx 
 phase 
 phase-out 
 phasic 
 phat 
 phatic 
 pheasant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix