URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mask
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mask - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mask - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mask 

 mask (n.) 

 1530s, "a cover for the face (with openings for the eyes and mouth), a false face," from French masque "covering to hide or guard the face" (16c.), from Italian maschera , from Medieval Latin masca "mask, specter, nightmare," a word of uncertain origin.

 It is perhaps from Arabic maskharah "buffoon, mockery," from sakhira "be mocked, ridiculed." Or it may come via Provençal mascarar , Catalan mascarar , Old French mascurer "to black (the face)," which is perhaps from a Germanic source akin to English mesh (q.v.). But it may be a Provençal word originally: Compare Occitan mascara "to blacken, darken," derived from mask- "black," which is held to be from a pre-Indo-European language, and Old Occitan masco "witch," surviving in dialects; in Beziers it means "dark cloud before the rain comes." [See Walther von Wartburg, "Französisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch: Eine Darstellung galloromanischen sprachschatzes" ].

 Figurative meaning "anything used or practiced for disguise or concealment" is by 1570s.
 also from 1530s 

 mask (v.) 

 1560s, "to take part in a masquerade" (a sense now obsolete); 1580s as "to wear a mask," also "disguise (feelings, etc.) under an assumed outward show;" from mask (n.) and French masquer . Military sense of "conceal" (a battery, etc.) from the view of the enemy" is from 1706. Related: Masked ; masking . Masking tape recorded from 1927; so called because it is used to block out certain surfaces before painting.
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to mask 

 mesh (n.) 

 late 14c., mesche , "open space in a net or netting," probably from late Old English max "net," earlier mæscre , from Proto-Germanic *mask- (source also of Old Norse möskvi , Danish maske , Swedish maska , Old Saxon masca , Middle Dutch maessce , Dutch maas "mesh," Old High German masca , German Masche "mesh"), from PIE *mezg- "to knit, plait, twist" (source also of Lithuanian mezgu, megzti "to knit," mazgas "knot"). In machinery, "the engagement of the teeth in gearing" (by 1875). Mesh-work in netting is attested by 1785.

 gas-mask (n.) 

 1915, from (poison) gas (n.1) + mask (n.).

 mascara 
 mascot 
 masque 
 masquerade 
 unmask 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mascot 

 "a talisman, charm, thing supposed to bring good luck to its possessor," also "person whose presence is supposed to be a cause of good fortune," 1881, from provincial French mascotte "sorcerer's charm, 'faerie friend,' good luck piece" (19c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from or

 masquerade 

 1590s, "assembly of persons wearing masks and usually other disguises," from French mascarade or Spanish mascarada "masked party or dance," from Italian mascarata "a ball at which masks are worn," variant of mascherata "masquerade," from maschera (see mask (n.)). Extended sense o

 dissemble 

 early 15c., dissemblen, "assume a false seeming; conceal real facts, motives, intentions, etc.; mask the truth about oneself," from Old French dessembler, from Latin dissimulare "make unlike, conceal, disguise," from dis- "completely" (see dis-) + simulare "to make like, imitate,

 mummer 

 in a mumming, actor in a dumb show," early 15c., probably a fusion of Old French momeur "mummer" (from Old French momer "mask...oneself," from momon "mask") and Middle English mommen "to mutter, be silent," which is the source of mum (interjection)...

 larva 

 spirit" (earlier as larve, c. 1600), from Latin larva (plural larvae), earlier larua "ghost, evil spirit, demon," also "mask...use (1768) which began with Linnaeus, who applied the word to immature forms of animals that do not resemble, and thus "mask...

 person 

 ) and directly from Latin persona "human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character," originally "a mask...OED offers the general 19c. explanation of persona as "related to" Latin personare "to sound through" (i.e. the mask as something...Klein and Barnhart say it is possibly borrowed from Etruscan phersu "mask." De Vaan has no entry for it....

 boycott 

 Boycott (1832-1897), land agent of Lough-Mask in County Mayo, who refused to lower rents for his tenant farmers....

 disguise 

 c. 1300, "conceal the personal identity of by changes of guise or usual appearance, with intent to deceive," from Old French desguiser "disguise, change one's appearance" (11c., Modern French déguiser), from des- "away, off" (see dis-) + guise "style, appearance," which is from G

 camouflage 

 1917, noun, verb, and adjective, from French camoufler, in Parisian slang, "to disguise," from Italian camuffare "to disguise," which is of uncertain origin, perhaps a contraction of capo muffare "to muffle the head." The word was probably altered in French by influence of French

 hide 

 Old English hydan (transitive and intransitive) "to hide, conceal; preserve; hide oneself; bury a corpse," from West Germanic *hudjan (source also of Middle Dutch, Middle Low German huden), from suffixed form of PIE *keudh- (source also of Greek keuthein "to hide, conceal"), from

 Share mask 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mask Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mask">Etymology of mask by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mask. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mask Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mask," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mask. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mask." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mask. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mask." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mask (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mask 
 maser 
 mash 
 masher 
 mashie 
 masjid 
 mask 
 masochism 
 masochist 
 masochistic 
 mason 
 Mason-Dixon Line 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix