URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cephalic
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:00:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cephalic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cephalic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cephalic 

 cephalic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to the head," early 15c., from Latin cephalicus , from Greek kephalikos "pertaining to the head," from kephalē "head" (see cephalo- ).
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to cephalic 

 cephalo- 

 before vowels, cephal- , word-forming element meaning "head, skull, brain," Modern Latin combining form of Greek kephalē "head, uppermost or top part, source," from PIE *ghebh-el- (source also of Tocharian spal "head;" Old High German gebal "skull;" also, via the notion of "front," Gothic gibla , Old Norse gafl "side of a facade").

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 adequate 

 1610s, "equal to what is needed or desired, sufficient," from Latin adaequatus "equalized," past participle of adaequare "to make equal to, to level with," from ad "to" (see ad-) + aequare "make level," from aequus "equal, even" (see equal (adj.)). The sense is of being "equal to

 adaptation 

 c. 1600, "action of adapting (something to something else)," from French adaptation, from Late Latin adaptationem (nominative adaptatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of adaptare "to adjust," from ad "to" (see ad-) + aptare "to join," from aptus "fitted" (see apt). Th

 plunge 

 late 14c., plungen, "to put, throw, or thrust violently into; immerse, submerge," also intransitive, from Old French plongier "plunge, sink into; plunge into, dive in" (mid-12c., Modern French plonger), from Vulgar Latin *plumbicare "to heave the lead," from Latin plumbum "lead" 

 baffle 

 1540s, "to disgrace," of uncertain origin. Perhaps a Scottish respelling of bauchle "to disgrace publicly" (especially a perjured knight), which is probably related to French bafouer "to abuse, hoodwink" (16c.), possibly from baf, a natural sound of disgust, like bah (compare Ger

 Geronimo 

 cry made in jumping, 1944 among U.S. airborne soldiers, apparently from the story of the Apache leader Geronimo making a daring leap to escape U.S. cavalry pursuers at Medicine Bluffs, Oklahoma (and supposedly shouting his name in defiance as he did). Adopted as battle cry by par

 Prussia 

 region in northeastern Germany, late 14c., Prusse (late 13c. as a surname), from Medieval Latin Borussi, Prusi, Latinized forms of the native name of the Lithuanian people who lived in the bend of the Baltic before being conquered 12c. and exterminated by (mostly) German crusader

 giraffe 

 long-necked ruminant animal of Africa, 1590s, giraffa, from Italian giraffa, from Arabic zarafa, probably from an African language. Earlier Middle English spellings varied wildly, depending on the foreign source, and included jarraf, ziraph, and gerfauntz, some apparently directl

 gravity 

 c. 1500, "weight, dignity, seriousness, solemnity of deportment or character, importance," from Old French gravité "seriousness, thoughtfulness" (13c.) and directly from Latin gravitatem (nominative gravitas) "weight, heaviness, pressure," from gravis "heavy" (from PIE root *gwer

 genius 

 late 14c., "tutelary or moral spirit" who guides and governs an individual through life, from Latin genius "guardian deity or spirit which watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation; wit, talent;" also "prophetic skill; the male spirit of a gens," originally "genera

 vaccination 

 1800, used by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) for the technique he publicized of preventing smallpox by injecting people with the similar but much milder cowpox virus (variolae vaccinae), from vaccine (adj.) "pertaining to cows, from cows" (1798), from Latin vaccinus 

 Share cephalic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cephalic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cephalic">Etymology of cephalic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cephalic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cephalic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cephalic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cephalic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cephalic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cephalic. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cephalic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cephalic (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cephalic 
 centurial 
 centurion 
 century 
 CEO 
 cephalalgia 
 cephalic 
 -cephalic 
 cephalization 
 cephalo- 
 cephalopod 
 cephalothorax 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix