URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/halo
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Halo - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Halo - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of halo 

 halo (n.) 

 1560s, "ring of light around the sun or moon," from Latin halo (nominative halos ), from Greek halos "disk of the sun or moon; ring of light around the sun or moon" (also "disk of a shield"); ""threshing floor; garden," of unknown origin. The sense "threshing floor" (on which oxen trod out a circular path) probably is the original in Greek. The development to "disk" and then to "halo" would be via roundness. Sense of "light around the head of a holy person or deity" first recorded 1640s. As a verb from 1791 (implied in Haloed ).
 also from 1560s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ring 

 [circular band] Old English hring "circlet of metal, especially one of a precious metal for wearing on the finger ornamentally, also a part of a mail coat; anything circular," from Proto-Germanic *hringaz "something curved, circle" (source also of Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hr

 doughnut 

 "small, spongy cake made of dough and fried in lard," 1809, American English, from dough + nut (n.), probably on the notion of being a small round lump (the holes came later; they are first mentioned c. 1861). First recorded by Washington Irving, who described them as "balls of s

 aura 

 1870 in spiritualism, "subtle emanation around living beings;" earlier "characteristic impression" made by a personality (1859), earlier still "an aroma or subtle emanation" (1732). Also used in some mystical sense in Swedenborgian writings (by 1847). All from Latin aura "breeze,

 nimbus 

 In art, the meaning "halo around the head of a representation of a divine or sacred person" is by 1727....

 saint 

 dangerous because it encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a halo...

 grin 

 Old English grennian "show the teeth" (in pain or anger), common Germanic (cognates: Old Norse grenja "to howl," grina "to grin;" Dutch grienen "to whine;" German greinen "to cry"), from PIE root *ghrei- "be open." Sense of "bare the teeth in a broad smile" is late 15c., perhaps 

 glory 

 c. 1200, gloire "the splendor of God or Christ; praise offered to God, worship," from Old French glorie "glory (of God); worldly honor, renown; splendor, magnificence, pomp" (11c., Modern French gloire), from Latin gloria "fame, renown, great praise or honor," a word of uncertain

 light 

 "brightness, radiant energy, that which makes things visible," Old English leht (Anglian), leoht (West Saxon), "light, daylight; spiritual illumination," from Proto-Germanic *leukhtam (source also of Old Saxon lioht, Old Frisian liacht, Middle Dutch lucht, Dutch licht, Old High G

 anchor 

 "device for securing ships to the ground under the water by means of cables," Old English ancor, borrowed 9c. from Latin ancora "an anchor," which is from or cognate with Greek ankyra "an anchor, a hook," from PIE root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (see angle (n.)). A very early borrowin

 duplicity 

 "deceptiveness, character or practice of speaking differently of the same thing or acting differently at different times or to different persons," early 15c., from Old French duplicite (13c.), from Late Latin duplicitatem (nominative duplicitas) "doubleness," in Medieval Latin "a

 Share halo 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/halo Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/halo">Etymology of halo by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of halo. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/halo Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of halo," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/halo. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of halo." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/halo. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of halo." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/halo (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near halo 
 hallucinogen 
 hallucinogenic 
 hallux 
 hallway 
 halo- 
 halo 
 halogen 
 halt 
 halter 
 halting 
 halve 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix