URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/semantic
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:15:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Semantic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Semantic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of semantic 

 semantic (adj.) 

 "relating to significance or meaning," 1894, from French sémantique , applied by Michel Bréal (1883) to the psychology of language, from Greek s ē mantikos "significant," from s ē mainein "to show by sign, signify, point out, indicate by a sign," from s ē ma "sign, mark, token; omen, portent; constellation; grave" (Doric sama ), from PIE root *dheie- "to see, look" (source also of Sanskrit dhyati "he meditates;" see zen ).

 The word has tended to become loose in application. Semanticize "invest (something) with meaning; analyze semantically" is by 1942.
 also from 1894 

 Entries linking to semantic 

 Zen (n.) 

 school of Mahayana Buddhism, by 1727, from Japanese, from Chinese ch'an , ultimately from Sanskrit dhyana "thought, meditation," from PIE root *dheie- "to see, look" (source also of Greek sēma "sign, mark, token;" see semantic ). As an adjective from 1881.

 polysemy (n.) 

 "fact of having multiple meanings," 1900, from French polysémie (1897), from Medieval Latin polysemus , from Greek polysemos "of many senses or meanings," from polys "many" (from PIE root *pele- (1) "to fill") + sēma "sign" (see semantic ). Related: Polysemic .

 semantics 
 semaphore 
 sematic 
 seme 
 semiology 
 semiotic 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 semiotic 

 1620s, "of symptoms, relating to signs of diseases," from Latinized form of Greek sēmeiōtikos "significant, portending, worth marking," also "observant of signs," adjective form of sēmeiosis "indication," from sēmeioun "to signal, to interpret a sign," from sēmeion "a sign, mark,

 travel 

 The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty...

 renal 

 "The semantic shift from 'loins' to 'kidneys' is quite conceivable" [de Vaan]....

 sternum 

 from root *stere- "to spread," on the notion of the chest as broad and flat, as opposed to the neck, "even if the exact semantic...

 mandible 

 But de Vaan suggests a semantic development from a PIE root meaning "to stir, whirl," source also of Sanskrit manthanti "...

 gladiator 

 The close connection with Celtic words for 'sword', together with the imperfect match of initial consonants, and the semantic...

 than 

 Germanic comparative forms introducing the second member, i.e. bigger than (compare Dutch dan, German denn), which suggests a semantic...

 capacity 

 early 15c., capacite, "ability to contain; size, extent;" also "ability" in a legal, moral, or intellectual sense, from Old French capacité "ability to hold" (15c.), from Latin capacitatem (nominative capacitas) "breadth, capacity, capability of holding much," noun of state from 

 scale 

 [one of the skin plates on fish or snakes] c. 1300, from Old French escale "cup, scale, shell pod, husk" (12c., Modern French écale), from Frankish *skala or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *skæla "to split, divide" (source also of Dutch schaal "a scale, husk," Ol

 trim 

 mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman "strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite; set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong," from trum "strong, stable," from Proto-Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of root *deru- "be firm, solid

 Share semantic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/semantic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/semantic">Etymology of semantic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of semantic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/semantic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of semantic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/semantic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of semantic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/semantic. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of semantic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/semantic (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near semantic 
 Sellotape 
 sellout 
 seltzer 
 selvage 
 *sem- 
 semantic 
 semantics 
 semaphore 
 sematic 
 semblable 
 semblance 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix