URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/borzoi
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:46:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Borzoi - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Borzoi - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of borzoi 

 borzoi (n.) 

 Russian wolfhound, 1887, from Russian borzoy , literally "swift, quick" (compare Czech brzy , Serbo-Croatian brzo "quickly," Lithuanian bruzdėti "to hurry").
 also from 1887 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 state 

 [mode or form of existence] c. 1200, stat, "circumstances, position in society, temporary attributes of a person or thing, conditions," from Old French estat "position, condition; status, stature, station," and directly from Latin status "a station, position, place; way of standi

 hypochondria 

 "unfounded belief that one is sick," by 1816; a narrowing from the earlier sense "depression or melancholy without real cause" (1660s); from Middle English medical term ipocondrie "lateral regions of the upper abdomen" (late 14c.). This is from Late Latin hypochondria, from Greek

 intimate 

 1630s, "closely acquainted, very familiar," also "inmost, intrinsic," from Late Latin intimatus, past participle of intimare "make known, announce, impress," from Latin intimus "inmost, innermost, deepest" (adj.), also used figuratively, of affections, feelings, and as a noun, "c

 labyrinth 

 c. 1400, laberynthe (late 14c. in Latinate form laborintus) "labyrinth, maze, great building with many corridors and turns," figuratively "bewildering arguments," from Latin labyrinthus, from Greek labyrinthos "maze, large building with intricate passages," especially the structu

 succession 

 early 14c., successioun, "fact or right of succeeding someone by inheritance," from Old French succession "inheritance; a following on" (13c.) and directly from Latin successionem (nominative successio) "a following after, a coming into another's place, result," noun of action fr

 godspeed 

 also God speed, by late 14c., "(I wish that) God (may) grant you success," from God + speed (v.) in its old sense of "prosper, grow rich, succeed." Specifically as a salutation by mid-15c. Also in Middle English as an adverb, "quickly, speedily" (early 14c.); the then-identically

 theology 

 mid-14c., "the science of religion, study of God and his relationship to humanity," from Old French theologie "philosophical study of Christian doctrine; Scripture" (14c.), from Latin theologia, from Greek theologia "an account of the gods," from theologos "one discoursing on the

 OK 

 "all right, correct," 1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c. 1838-9 for abbreviations of common phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings, such as K.G. for "no go," as if spelled know go; N.C. for enough said (" 'nuff ced"); K.Y. for no use ("know yuse")

 factor 

 early 15c., "commercial agent, deputy, one who buys or sells for another," from French facteur "agent, representative" (Old French factor, faitor "doer, author, creator"), from Latin factor "doer, maker, performer," in Medieval Latin, "agent," agent noun from past participle stem

 flamboyant 

 1832, originally in reference to a 15c.-16c. architectural style with wavy, flame-like curves, from French flamboyant "flaming, wavy," present participle of flamboyer "to flame," from Old French flamboiier "to flame, flare, blaze, glow, shine" (12c.), from flambe "a flame, flame 

 Share borzoi 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/borzoi Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/borzoi">Etymology of borzoi by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of borzoi. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/borzoi Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of borzoi," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borzoi. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of borzoi." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borzoi. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of borzoi." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/borzoi (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near borzoi 
 borough 
 borrow 
 borscht 
 bort 
 Borussia 
 borzoi 
 bose 
 bosh 
 Bosnia 
 bosom 
 boson 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix