URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ice
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:30:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ice - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ice - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ice 

 ice (n.) 

 Old English is "ice, piece of ice" (also the name of the Anglo-Saxon rune for -i- ), from Proto-Germanic *is- "ice" (source also of Old Norse iss , Old Frisian is , Dutch ijs , German Eis ), a word of uncertain origin; possible relatives are Avestan aexa- "frost, ice," isu- "frosty, icy;" Afghan asai "frost." The slang meaning "diamonds" is attested from 1906.

 The modern spelling begins to appear 15c. and makes the word appear French. On ice "kept out of the way until wanted" is from 1890. Thin ice in the figurative sense is from 1884.

 To break the ice "to make the first opening to any attempt" is from 1580s, metaphoric of making passages for boats by breaking up river ice though in modern use it usually has implications of "cold reserve." Ice-fishing is from 1869; ice-scraper is from 1789 in cookery.

 ice (v.) 

 c. 1400, ysen , "cover with ice," from ice (n.). Related: Iced ; icing .
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to ice 

 icing (n.) 

 1769 in the confectionery sense, "coating of concreted sugar," verbal noun of ice (v.). Earlier in this sense was simple ice (1723); frosting came later. Meaning "process of becoming covered with ice" is from 1881.

 C 

 third letter of the Latin alphabet. Alphabetic writing came to Rome via the southern Etruscan "Caeretan" script, in which gamma was written as a crescent. Early Romans made little use of Greek kappa and used gamma for both the "g" and "k" sounds, the latter more frequently, so that the "k" sound came to be seen as the proper one for gamma . Classical Latin -c- , with only the value "k," passed to Celtic and, via missionary Irish monks, to the Anglo-Saxons. Also see cee .

 In some Old English words, before some vowels and in certain positions, -c- had a "ts" sound that was respelled ch- in Middle English by French scribes ( chest , cheese , church ; see ch ). In Old English -k- was known but little used.

 Meanwhile, in Old French, many "k" sounds drifted to "ts" and by 13c., "s," but still were written -c- . Thus the 1066 invasion brought to the English language a flood of French and Latin words in which -c- represented "s" (as in cease , ceiling , circle ) and a more vigorous use of -k- to distinguish that sound. By 15c. even native English words with -s- were being respelled with -c- for "s" ( ice , mice , lice ).

 Before c. 1800, English words now spelled in -c often ended in -ck and this is kept in picnicked, trafficking, panicky , shellacked , etc. to preserve the "k" sound of -c- before a suffix beginning in -i- , -y- , or -e- .

 The final k, after c, in words derived from the learned languages, though carefully retained by Johnson and other writers, has been omitted, in conformity to modern custom and the originals. For it seems to me to be rather incongruous to write musick from musica , especially as the k has been exploded by general consent from the derivatives musician and musical . [John Ash, advertisement to "New and Complete Dictionary of the English Language," 1775]

 In some English words from Italian, the -c- has a "ch" sound (via a sound evolution somewhat like the Old French one). In German, -c- in loanwords was regularized to -k- or -z- (depending on pronunciation) in the international spelling reform of 1901, which was based on the Duden guide of 1880.

 As a symbol in the Roman numeral system, "one hundred;" the symbol originally was a Greek theta, but was later reduced in form and understood to stand for centum . In music, it is the name of the keynote of the natural scale, though the exact pitch varied in time and place 18c. and 19c. from 240 vibrations per second to 275; it wasn't entirely regularized (at 261.63) until the adoption of the A440 standard in the 1930s. C-spring as a type of carriage spring is from 1794, so called for its shape.

 de-ice 
 ice age 
 iceberg 
 ice-bound 
 ice-box 
 ice-cap 
 Ice-Capade 
 ice-chest 
 ice-cold 
 ice-cream 
 ice-cube 
 ice-house 
 iceman 
 ice-pick 
 ice-skate 
 ice-water 
 icicle 
 icy 
 See All Related Words (22) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 iceberg 

 1774, "glacier humped like a hill;" 1820 as "detached piece of a glacier or ice pack at sea," partial loan-translation of Dutch ijsberg, literally "ice mountain," from ijs "ice" (see ice (n.)) + berg "mountain" (from PIE root *bhergh- (2) "high," with derivatives referring to hil

 ice-cube 

 "ice cut in small blocks for cooling drinks, etc.," 1902, from ice (n.) + cube (n.). One of the newest plans for the economical use of artificial ice has recently been patented by Van der Weyde, of Holland. The invention is based on the fact that two smooth surfaces of freshly c

 icicle 

 "pendent mass of ice tapering downward to a point, formed by the freezing of drops of water flowing down from the place of attachment," early 14c., isykle, from is "ice" (see ice (n.)) + Middle English ikel, a word that by itself meant "icicle," from Old English gicel "icicle, ic

 Neapolitan 

 As a type of ice cream, from 1871; originally meaning both "ice cream of three layers and flavors" and "ice cream made with...

 float 

 ade upon the top of which is floated a layer of grape juice, ginger ale, or in some cases a disher of fruit sherbet or ice...In the latter case it would be known as a "sherbet float" or an "ice-cream float."...By a "float ice cream soda" is meant a soda with the ice cream floating on top, thus making a most inviting appearance and...that mixes his ice cream "out of sight."...

 rink 

 By 1787 (Burns) as "a sheet of ice measured off for curling;" extended to smooth wooden floors for roller-skating by 1875..., to ice surfaces measured for ice hockey by 1896....A modern Latinate word for an ice-skating rink is glaciarium (1876)....

 debacle 

 disaster," 1848, from French débâcle "downfall, collapse, disaster" (17c.), a figurative use, literally "breaking up (of ice...on a river) in consequence of a rise in the water," extended to the violent flood that follows when the river ice melts...The literal sense is attested in English from 1802, in geology, to explain the landscapes left by the ice ages....

 rime 

 "hoarfrost, white frost," Old English hrim, from Proto-Germanic *khrima- (source also of Old Norse hrim, Dutch rijm, German Reif). Old French rime is of Germanic origin. Rare in Middle English and usually there as rime-frost; after c. 1500 it seems to have survived mainly in Scot

 water 

 Old English wæter, from Proto-Germanic *watr- (source also of Old Saxon watar, Old Frisian wetir, Dutch water, Old High German wazzar, German Wasser, Old Norse vatn, Gothic wato "water"), from PIE *wod-or, suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet." To keep (one's) head above w

 glacier 

 1744, from French glacier (16c.), from Savoy dialect glacière "moving mass of ice," from Old French glace "ice," from Vulgar Latin *glacia (source also of Old Provençal glassa, Italian ghiaccia), from Latin glacies "ice," probably from a suffixed form of PIE root *gel- "cold; to 

 Share ice 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ice Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ice">Etymology of ice by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ice. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ice Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ice," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ice. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ice." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ice. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ice." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ice (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ice 
 ibogaine 
 -ic 
 -ical 
 Icarus 
 ICBM 
 ice 
 ice age 
 iceberg 
 ice-bound 
 ice-box 
 ice-cap 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix