URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/narghile
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:25:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Narghile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Narghile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of narghile 

 narghile (n.) 

 "oriental water pipe for smoking," by 1820, from French narghileh , from Persian nargileh , from nargil "cocoa-nut," of which the bowl was originally made. The Persian word is probably from Sanskrit narikerah , which may be from a Dravidian source.
 also from 1820 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pipe 

 Old English pipe "simple tubular musical wind instrument," also "tube for conveying water," from Vulgar Latin *pipa "a pipe, tube-shaped musical instrument" (source also of Italian pipa, French pipe, Old Frisian pipe, German Pfeife, Danish pibe, Swedish pipa, Dutch pijp), a back-

 water 

 Old English wæter, from Proto-Germanic *watr- (source also of Old Saxon watar, Old Frisian wetir, Dutch water, Old High German wazzar, German Wasser, Old Norse vatn, Gothic wato "water"), from PIE *wod-or, suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet." To keep (one's) head above w

 fluke 

 "flat end of an arm of an anchor," 1560s, perhaps from fluke (n.3) "flatfish," on resemblance of shape, or from Low German flügel "wing." Transferred meaning "whale's tail" (in plural, flukes) is by 1725, so called from resemblance...."lucky stroke, chance hit," 1857, also flook,

 fast 

 Old English fæst "firmly fixed, steadfast, constant; secure; enclosed, watertight; strong, fortified," probably from Proto-Germanic *fastu- "firm, fast" (source also of Old Frisian fest, Old Norse fastr, Dutch vast, German fest), from PIE root *past- "firm, solid" (source of Sans

 reason 

 c. 1200, resoun, "the intellectual faculty that adopts actions to ends," also "statement in an argument, statement of explanation or justification," from Anglo-French resoun, Old French raison "course; matter; subject; language, speech; thought, opinion," from Latin rationem (nom

 decimate 

 c. 1600, "to select by lot and put to death every tenth man," from Latin decimatus, past participle of decimare "the removal or destruction of one-tenth," from decem "ten" (from PIE root *dekm- "ten"). The killing of one in ten, chosen by lots, from a rebellious city or a mutinou

 idiosyncrasy 

 c. 1600, from French idiosyncrasie, from Latinized form of Greek idiosynkrasia "a peculiar temperament," from idios "one's own" (see idiom) + synkrasis "temperament, mixture of personal characteristics," from syn "together" (see syn-) + krasis "mixture," from PIE root *kere- "to 

 master 

 late Old English mægester "a man having control or authority over a place; a teacher or tutor of children," from Latin magister (n.) "chief, head, director, teacher" (source of Old French maistre, French maître, Spanish and Italian maestro, Portuguese mestre, Dutch meester, Germa

 harmony 

 late 14c., "combination of tones pleasing to the ear," from Old French harmonie, armonie "harmony," also the name of a musical instrument (12c.), from Latin harmonia, from Greek harmonia "agreement, concord of sounds," also as a proper name, the personification of music, literall

 haunt 

 early 13c., "to practice habitually, busy oneself with, take part in," from Old French hanter "to frequent, visit regularly; have to do with, be familiar with; indulge in, cultivate" (12c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse heimta "bring home," from Proto-Germanic *hai

 Share narghile 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/narghile Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/narghile">Etymology of narghile by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of narghile. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/narghile Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of narghile," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/narghile. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of narghile." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/narghile. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of narghile." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/narghile (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near narghile 
 narcosis 
 narcotic 
 nard 
 nare 
 nares 
 narghile 
 nark 
 narrable 
 Narragansett 
 narrate 
 narration 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix