URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/poly-
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:57:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Poly- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Poly- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of poly- 

 poly- 

 word-forming element meaning "many, much, multi-, one or more," from Greek polys "much" (plural polloi ), from PIE root *pele- (1) "to fill," with derivatives referring to multitudinousness or abundance. Equivalent to Latin multi- , it is properly used in compounds only with words of Greek origin. In chemical names, usually indicating a compound with a large number of atoms or molecules of the same kind (such as polymer ).

 Entries linking to poly- 

 polymer (n.) 

 a substance built from a large number of simple molecules of the same kind, 1855, probably from German Polymere (Berzelius, 1830), from Greek polymeres "having many parts," from polys "many" (from PIE root *pele- (1) "to fill") + meros "part" (from PIE root *(s)mer- (2) "to get a share of something").

 monopolylogue (n.) 

 "entertainment in which one actor performs as many characters," by 1824; see mono- "one, single" + poly- "many" + -logue .

 plus 
 polyaesthesia 
 polyamorous 
 polyandria 
 polyandrous 
 polycentric 
 polychrome 
 polyclinic 
 polydactylism 
 polyethnic 
 polyethylene 
 polygamy 
 polygenesis 
 polygenetic 
 polygenic 
 polygenous 
 polygeny 
 polygyny 
 See All Related Words (33) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 plus 

 1570s, the oral rendering of the arithmetical sign +, also "more by a certain amount" (correlative to minus), from Latin plus "more, in greater number, more often" (comparative of multus "much"), altered (by influence of minus) from *pleos, from PIE root *pele- (1) "to fill" (see

 polyandria 

 1751 in botany, in reference to a class of flowers having 20 or more stamens; 1809 of human relationships (implied in polyandrian), from poly- "many" andr-, stem of aner "man, husband" (from PIE root *ner- (2) "man"), which is used in botany to mean "stamen, having stamens," + -i

 polyandrous 

 1764, in botany, "having numerous stamens," from poly- "much, many" + stem of aner "man, husband" (from PIE root *ner- (2) "man"), which is used in botany to mean "stamen, having stamens." From 1854 of humans, "having more than one husband at once." Greek polyandros meant "numero

 polygeny 

 distinct species" (opposed to monogeny or monogenism), from Late Greek polygenēs "of many kinds," from polys "many" (see poly...

 spruce 

 "type of evergreen tree, spruce-fir," 1660s, from spruse (adj.) "made of spruce wood" (early 15c.), originally that imported from Prussia. It is literally "from Prussia," from Middle English Spruce, Sprws (late 14c.), unexplained alterations of Pruce "Prussia," which is from an O

 merry 

 Middle English mirie, from Old English myrge "pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet, exciting feelings of enjoyment and gladness" (said of grass, trees, the world, music, song); also as an adverb, "pleasantly, melodiously," from Proto-Germanic *murgijaz, which probably originally 

 pragmatic 

 1610s, "meddlesome, impertinently busy," short for earlier pragmatical, or else from French pragmatique (15c.), from Latin pragmaticus "skilled in business or law," from Greek pragmatikos "fit for business, active, business-like; systematic," from pragma (genitive pragmatos) "a d

 obey 

 c. 1300, obeien, "carry out the commands of (someone); submit to (a command, rule, etc.); be ruled by," from Old French obeir "obey, be obedient, do one's duty" (12c.), from Latin obedire, oboedire "obey, be subject, serve; pay attention to, give ear," literally "listen to," from

 premise 

 late 14c., in logic, "a previous proposition from which another follows, a judgment causing another judgment," from Old French premisse (14c.), from Medieval Latin praemissa (propositio or sententia) "(the proposition) set before," noun use of fem. past participle of Latin praemi

 authority 

 c. 1200, autorite, auctorite "authoritative passage or statement, book or quotation that settles an argument, passage from Scripture," from Old French autorité, auctorité "authority, prestige, right, permission, dignity, gravity; the Scriptures" (12c.; Modern French autorité), fr

 Share poly- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/poly- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/poly-">Etymology of poly- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of poly-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/poly- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of poly-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poly-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of poly-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poly-. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of poly-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/poly- (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near poly- 
 polo 
 polonaise 
 polonium 
 poltergeist 
 poltroon 
 poly- 
 polyaesthesia 
 polyamorous 
 polyandria 
 polyandrous 
 polyandry 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close