URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rest
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:29:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rest 

 rest (n.1) 

 [sleep, repose, slumber] Old English ræste, reste "rest; a bed or couch; intermission of labor; mental peace, state of quiet or repose," from Proto-Germanic *rasto- (source also of Old Saxon resta "resting place, burial-place," Dutch rust , Old High German rasta , German Rast "rest, peace, repose"), a word of uncertain origin.

 The original prehistoric signification of the Germanic noun was perhaps a measure of distance; compare Old High German rasta , which in addition to "rest" meant "league of miles," Old Norse rost "league, distance after which one rests," Gothic rasta "mile, stage of a journey." If so, perhaps a word from the nomadic period. But if the original sense was "repose," the sense was extended secondarily to "distance between two resting places."

 Sense of "absence or cessation of motion" is from late 15c. The meaning "that on which anything leans for support, thing upon which something rests" is attested from 1580s, with specific senses developing later. In music, "an interval of silence," also the mark or sign denoting this, 1570s.

 At rest "dead" is from mid-14c., on the notion of "last rest, the big sleep, the grave." The roadside rest stop for drivers on busy highways is by 1970. The colloquial expression give (something) a rest "stop talking about it" is by 1927, American English.

 [R]est and 
 repose apply especially to the suspended activity of the body ; 
 ease and 
 quiet to freedom from occupation or demands for activity, especially of the body ; 
 tranquility and 
 peace to the freedom of the mind from harassing cares or demands. [Century Dictionary]

 rest (n.2) 

 "remainder, that which is left after a separation," early 15c., from French reste "remnant," from rester "to remain" (see rest (v.2)). Meaning "others, those not included in a proposition" is from 1530s.
 also from early 15c. 

 rest (v.1) 

 [to repose; to cease from action] Middle English resten , from Old English ræstan , restan "take repose by lying down; lie in death or in the grave; cease from motion, work, or performance; be still or motionless; be undisturbed, be free from what disquiets; stand or lie as upon a support or basis," from Proto-Germanic *rastejanan (source also of Old Saxon restian , Old Frisian resta , Middle Dutch rasten , Dutch rusten , Old High German reston , German rasten , Swedish rasta , Danish raste "to rest"), a word of doubtful etymology (compare rest (n.1)).

 Transitive senses "give repose to; lay or place, as on a support or basis" are from early 13c. Meaning "cease from, have intermission" is late 14c., also "rely on for support." In law, "voluntarily end the presentation of evidence to allow presentation of counter-evidence by the opposing party," by 1905. Related: Rested ; resting .

 To rest up "recover one's strength" is by 1895, American English. To rest in "remain confident or hopeful in" is by late 14c., biblical. Resting place "place safe from toil or danger" is from mid-14c.

 Rest signifies primarily to cease from action or work, but naturally by extension to be refreshed by doing so, and further to be refreshed by sleeping. 
 Repose does not necessarily imply previous work, but does imply quietness, and generally a reclining position, while we may 
 rest in a standing position. [Century Dictionary]

 rest (v.2) 

 [be left, remain] mid-15c., "remain, continue in existence," from Old French rester "to remain, stay" (12c.), from Latin restare "stand back, be left," from re- "back" (see re- ) + stare "to stand" (from PIE root *sta- "to stand, make or be firm").

 It has been largely confused and partly merged with rest (v.1), which, however, is Germanic.

 The meaning "be in a certain state or position" (of affairs, etc.) is from late 15c. The older sense of "to continue to be" is rare but in phrases such as rest assured . To rest with "be in the power of, depend upon" is by 1819.

 The transitive sense of "to keep, cause to continue to remain" was common in 16c.-17c., "used with a predicate adjective following and qualifying the object" [Century Dictionary]. Hence the phrase rest you merry (1540s, Shakespeare also has rest you fair ), earlier rest þe murie (mid-13c.), as a greeting, "rest well, be happy," from the old adverbial use of merry . The Christmas carol lyric God rest ye merry, gentlemen, often is mispunctuated.
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to rest 

 merry (adj.) 

 Middle English mirie , from Old English myrge "pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet, exciting feelings of enjoyment and gladness" (said of grass, trees, the world, music, song); also as an adverb, "pleasantly, melodiously," from Proto-Germanic *murgijaz , which probably originally meant "short-lasting" (compare Old High German murg "short," Gothic gamaurgjan "to shorten"), from PIE root *mregh-u- "short." The only exact cognate for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc "joyful."

 The connection to pleasure likely was via the notion of "making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly" (compare German Kurzweil "pastime," literally "a short time;" Old Norse skemta "to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself," from skamt , neuter of skammr "short"). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan "be merry, rejoice." For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).

 Not originally applied to humorous moods or speech or conduct, yet the word had a much wider senses in Middle English than modern: "pleasant-sounding" (of animal voices), "fine" (of weather), "handsome" (of dress), "pleasant-tasting" (of herbs). The evolution of the modern senses is probably via the meaning "pleased by a certain event or situation or state of things" (c. 1200).

 Of persons, "cheerful by disposition or nature; playfully cheerful, enlivened with gladness or good spirits," by mid-14c.

 Merry-bout "an incident of sexual intercourse" was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot "illegitimate" (adj.), also "bastard" (n.) are in Grose (1785). Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is c. 1400, meri ingland , originally in a broader sense of "bountiful, prosperous." Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday before Shrove Tuesday ( Mardi Gras ).

 rested (adj.) 

 "refreshed by sleep," c. 1400, past-participle adjective from rest (v.).

 arm-rest 
 bed-rest 
 foot-rest 
 head-rest 
 leg-rest 
 rest-cure 
 restful 
 restive 
 restless 
 restroom 
 unrest 
 unrested 
 re- 
 *sta- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rest-cure 

 "treatment of nervous exhaustion by prolonged complete rest, isolation in bed, etc.," 1877, from rest (n.1) "repose" + cure (n.1) "means of healing." To [Dr. S. Weir Mitchel] also belongs the honor of having devised the method known as the "rest cure," which has proven so benefi

 restive 

 early 15c., restif, restyffe, of animals, "not moving forward," from Old French restif "motionless, brought to a standstill" (Modern French rétif), from rester "to remain" (see rest (v.2)). Rare or archaic in the original sense; the prevailing meaning "refusing to stand still" es

 restless 

 late 14c., restles, "finding no rest or sleep, unable to rest; uneasy in mind or spirit," from rest (n.1) + -less. A general Germanic compound (Frisian restleas, Dutch rusteloos, German rastlos, Danish rastlös). The meaning "stirring constantly, desirous of action" is attested fr

 acquiesce 

 1610s, "remain at rest" (a sense now obsolete); 1650s as "agree tacitly, concur," from French acquiescer "to yield or agree...to; be at rest," (14c.), from Latin acquiescere/adquiescere "become quiet, remain at rest, rest, repose," thus "be satisfied...with, be content," from ad "to" (see ad-) + quiescere "become quiet," from quies (genitive quietis) "rest, quiet" (from...PIE root *kweie- "to rest, be quiet")....

 requiem 

 "mass for repose of the soul of the dead," c. 1300, from Latin requiem, accusative singular of requiescere "rest (after labor...), be idle, repose," from re-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see re-), + quiescere "to repose, rest, sleep," from quies..."quiet" (from suffixed form of PIE root *kweie- "to rest, be quiet")....["Rest eternal grant them, O Lord ...."]. By 1610s as "any dirge or solemn chant for repose of the dead."...

 quiet 

 late 14c., "peaceable, being in a state of rest, restful, tranquil, not moving or agitated," from Old French quiet and directly...from Latin quietus "calm, at rest, free from exertion," from quies (genitive quietis) "rest" (from PIE root *kweie- "to...rest, be quiet")....

 while 

 Saxon hwil, Old Frisian hwile, Old High German hwila, German Weile, Gothic hveila "space of time, while"), originally "rest..." (compare Old Norse hvila "bed," hvild "rest"), from PIE *kwi-lo-, suffixed form of root *kweie- "to rest, be quiet."...Notion of "period of rest" became in Germanic "period of time."...

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 marine 

 mid-15c., "found in or pertaining to the sea," from Old French marin "of the sea, maritime," and directly from Latin marinus "of the sea," from mare "sea, the sea, seawater," from PIE root *mori- "body of water." The Old English word was sælic....late 14c., "seacoast;" see marine

 remain 

 early 15c., remainen, "be left after the removal or loss of a part, number, or quality; survive," from Anglo-French remayn-, Old French remain- (as in il remaint "it remains"), stressed stem of remanoir "to stay, dwell, remain; be left; hold out," from Latin remanere "to remain, 

 Share rest 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rest Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rest">Etymology of rest by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rest. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rest Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rest," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rest. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rest." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rest. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rest." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rest (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rest 
 response 
 responsibility 
 responsible 
 responsive 
 ressentiment 
 rest 
 restart 
 restate 
 restatement 
 restaurant 
 restaurateur 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix