URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cherub
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cherub - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cherub - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cherub 

 cherub (n.) 

 late 14c. as an order of angels, from Late Latin cherub , from Greek kheroub , from Hebrew kerubh (plural kerubhim ) "winged angel," which according to Klein is perhaps related to Akkadian karubu "to bless," karibu "one who blesses," an epithet of the bull-colossus. Old English had cerubin , from the Greek plural. But there are other theories:

 The cherubim, a common feature of ancient Near Eastern mythology, are not to be confused with the round-cheeked darlings of Renaissance iconography. The root of the terms either means "hybrid" or, by an inversion of consonants, "mount," "steed," and they are winged beasts, probably of awesome aspect, on which the sky god of the old Canaanite myths and of the poetry of Psalms goes riding through the air. [Robert Alter, "The Five Books of Moses," 2004, commentary on Genesis iii.24]

 The meaning "beautiful child" is from 1705. The plural in this sense is cherubs .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to cherub 

 cherubic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or resembling a cherub," 1620s, from cherub + -ic . Earlier was cherubical (c. 1600).

 griffin (n.) 

 c. 1200 (as a surname), from Old French grifon "a bird of prey," also "fabulous bird of Greek mythology" (with head and wings of an eagle, body and hind quarters of a lion, believed to inhabit Scythia and guard its gold), named for its hooked beak, from Late Latin gryphus , misspelling of grypus , variant of gryps (genitive grypos ) "griffin," from Greek gryps (genitive grypos ) "a griffin or dragon," literally "curved, hook-nosed" (opposed to simos ).

 Klein suggests a Semitic source, "through the medium of the Hittites," and cites Hebrew kerubh "a winged angel," Akkadian karibu , epithet of the bull-colossus (see cherub ). The same or an identical word was used in mid-19c. Louisiana to mean "mulatto" (especially one one-quarter or two-fifths white) and in British India from 1793 to mean "newly arrived European," probably via notion of "strange hybrid animal."

 seraph (n.) 

 in reference to the winged, human-like celestial creatures that hovered above God's throne in Isaiah's dream, 1667, a word first used by Milton (probably on analogy of cherub /cherubim ), a back-formed singular from Seraphim (attested from Old English). An earlier singular in English was seraphin (1570s).

 This is from Late Latin seraphim , from Greek seraphim , from Hebrew seraphim (only in Isaiah vi), plural of *saraph (which does not occur in the Bible), probably literally "the burning one," from saraph "it burned."

 Seraphs were traditionally regarded as burning or flaming angels, though the word seems to have some etymological sense of "flying," perhaps from confusion with the root of Arabic sharafa "be lofty." Some scholars identify it with a word found in other passages interpreted as "fiery flying serpent." The Late Latin word also was taken by early Christians as the name of a class of angels.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 baby 

 late 14c., babi, "infant of either sex," diminutive of babe (q.v.) with -y (3). The meaning "childish adult person" is from c. 1600. The sense of "youngest of a group" is by 1897. As a term of endearment for one's lover it is attested perhaps as early as 1839, certainly by 1901 (

 infant 

 late 14c., infant, infaunt, "a child," also especially "child during earliest period of life, a newborn" (sometimes meaning a fetus), from Latin infantem (nominative infans) "young child, babe in arms," noun use of adjective meaning "not able to speak," from in- "not, opposite of

 glean 

 early 14c., "to gather by acquisition, scrape together," especially grains left in the field after harvesting, but the earliest use in English is figurative, from Old French glener "to glean" (14c., Modern French glaner) "to glean," from Late Latin glennare "make a collection," o

 angel 

 "one of a class of spiritual beings, attendants and messengers of God," a c. 1300 fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele. Both are from Late Latin angelus, from Greek angelos, literally "messenger, envoy, one that announces," in the New Testament "divin

 angle 

 "to fish with a hook," mid-15c., from Old English angel (n.) "angle, hook, fish-hook," related to anga "hook," from Proto-Germanic *angul-, from PIE *ankulo-, suffixed form of root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (see angle (n.)). Compare Old English angul, Old Norse öngull, Old High Germa

 babe 

 late 14c., "infant, young child of either sex," short for baban (early 13c.), which probably is imitative of baby talk (see babble (v.)). In many languages the word means "old woman" (compare Russian babushka "grandmother," from baba "peasant woman"), and it is also sometimes a c

 factor 

 early 15c., "commercial agent, deputy, one who buys or sells for another," from French facteur "agent, representative" (Old French factor, faitor "doer, author, creator"), from Latin factor "doer, maker, performer," in Medieval Latin, "agent," agent noun from past participle stem

 chess 

 very ancient game of skill with 32 pieces, played by two on a checkered board of 64 squares, 13c., from Old French esches "chessmen," plural of eschec "game of chess, chessboard; checkmate" (see check (n.1)), so called from the key move of the game. Modern French distinguishes éc

 survey 

 c. 1400, surveien, "consider, contemplate," from Anglo-French surveier, Old French sorveoir "look (down) at, look upon, notice; guard, watch," from Medieval Latin supervidere "oversee, inspect," from Latin super "over" (see super-) + videre "to see" (from PIE root *weid- "to see"

 Albuquerque 

 city in New Mexico, founded 1706 and named for Spanish administrator and viceroy of Mexico Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, Duque de Alburquerque (1617-1676); the name subsequently was altered by association with Portuguese hero Alfonso d'Albuquerque (1453-1515), the "Portuguese 

 Share cherub 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cherub Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cherub">Etymology of cherub by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cherub. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cherub Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cherub," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cherub. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cherub." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cherub. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cherub." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cherub (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cherub 
 cheroot 
 cherry 
 cherry-pick 
 Chersonese 
 chert 
 cherub 
 cherubic 
 chervil 
 Cheryl 
 Chesapeake 
 Cheshire 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close