URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/castle
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:31:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Castle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Castle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of castle 

 castle (n.) 

 late Old English castel "village" (this sense from a biblical usage in Vulgar Latin); later "large building or series of connected buildings fortified for defense, fortress, stronghold" (late Old English), in this sense from Old North French castel (Old French chastel , 12c.; Modern French château ), from Latin castellum "a castle, fort, citadel, stronghold; fortified village," diminutive of castrum "fort," from Proto-Italic *kastro- "part, share;" cognate with Old Irish cather , Welsh caer "town" (probably related to castrare via notion of "cut off," from PIE root *kes- "to cut"). In early bibles, castle was used to translate Greek kome "village."

 Latin castrum in its plural castra was used for "military encampment, military post" and thus it came into Old English as ceaster and formed the -caster and -chester in place names. Spanish alcazar "castle" is from Arabic al-qasr , from Latin castrum .

 Castles in Spain "visionary project, vague imagination of possible wealth" translates 14c. French chastel en Espaigne (the imaginary castles sometimes stood in Brie, Asia, or Albania) and probably reflects the hopes of landless knights to establish themselves abroad. The statement that an (English) man's home is his castle is from 16c.

 THAT the house of every man is to him as his castle and fortress, as well for his defence against injuries and violence, as for his repose .... [Edward Coke, "Semaynes Case," 1604] 
 also from 12c. 

 castle (v.) 

 chess move involving the king and the rook, recorded under this name from 1650s, from castle (n.), as an old alternative name for the rook. Earlier, the verb meant "fortify (a place) with castles" (c. 1500); "provide (a ship) with fortified towers" (c. 1400); "decorate (a dish) with paper towers, etc." (late 14c.). Related: Castled ; castling .
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to castle 

 castellan (n.) 

 also castellain , "a governor of a castle," late 14c., from Old North French castelain, Old French chastelain "owner and lord of a castle, nobleman; keeper of a castle" (Modern French châtelaine), from chastel "castle," from Latin castellum "castle" (see castle (n.)). Related: Castellany "jurisdiction of a castellan."

 castellated (adj.) 

 "furnished with turrets and battlements," 1670s, from Medieval Latin castellatus "built like a castle," past participle of castellare "to fortify as a castle, build as a castle, furnish with turrets and battlements," from Latin castellum "castle, fort, citadel, stronghold" (see castle (n.)). Related: Castellation .

 Castile 
 chateau 
 chatelaine 
 Chester 
 forecastle 
 Luxor 
 sand-castle 
 top-castle 
 *kes- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 chatelaine 

 1845, "mistress of a castle or household," from French châtelaine "a female castellan; wife of a castellan; mistress of a castle or country house;" fem. of châtelain, from Old French chastelain "owner and lord of a castle, nobleman; keeper of a castle" (Modern French châtelaine),

 forecastle 

 c. 1400 (mid-14c. as Anglo-French forechasteil), "short raised deck in the fore part of the ship used in warfare," from Middle English fore- "before" + Anglo-French castel "fortified tower" (see castle (n.)). In broader reference to the part of a vessel forward of the fore riggin

 rook 

 [European crow], Middle English roke, from Old English hroc, from Proto-Germanic *khrokaz (source also of Old Norse hrokr, Middle Dutch roec, Dutch roek, Middle Swedish roka, Old High German hruoh "crow"), probably imitative of its raucous voice. Compare crow (n.), also Gaelic ro

 dungeon 

 c. 1300, "great tower of a castle," from Old French donjon "great tower of a castle" (12c.), from Gallo-Roman *dominionem..., from Late Latin dominium, from Latin dominus "master" (of the castle), from domus "house" (from PIE root *dem- "house,...Sense of "castle keep" led to that of "strong (underground) cell" in English early 14c....

 moat 

 c. 1300, mote "a mound, a hill" (a sense now obsolete); late 14c., "ditch or deep trench dug round the rampart of a castle...or other fortified place," from Old French mote "mound, hillock, embankment; castle built on a hill" (12c.; Modern French...The sense shifted in Norman French from the castle mound to the ditch dug around it....

 borough 

 dwellings within a fortified enclosure," from Proto-Germanic *burgs "hill fort, fortress" (source also of Old Frisian burich "castle..., city," Old Norse borg "wall, castle," Old High German burg, buruc "fortified place, citadel," German Burg "castle," Gothic...In German and Old Norse, chiefly as "fortress, castle;" in Gothic, "town, civic community."...

 bailiff 

 judicial officer of the English crown, king's officer in a county, hundred, or other local district;" also "keeper of a royal castle...baillif (12c., nominative baillis) "administrative official, deputy," from Vulgar Latin *baiulivus "official in charge of a castle...

 munition 

 1530s, "fortification, action of fortifying or defending" (a sense now obsolete),  also "materials used in war," from French municion "fortification, defense, defensive wall" (14c.), from Latin munitionem (nominative munitio) "a defending, fortification, protecting," noun of

 move 

 late 13c., meven, in various senses (see below), from Anglo-French mover, Old French movoir "to move, get moving, set out; set in motion; introduce" (Modern French mouvoir), from Latin movere "move, set in motion; remove; disturb" (past participle motus, frequentative motare), fr

 mansion 

 mid-14c., "chief residence of a lord," from Old French mansion "stay, permanent abode, house, habitation, home; mansion; state, situation" (13c.), from Latin mansionem (nominative mansio) "a staying, a remaining, night quarters, station," noun of action from past participle stem 

 Share castle 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/castle Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/castle">Etymology of castle by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of castle. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/castle Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of castle," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/castle. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of castle." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/castle. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of castle." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/castle (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near castle 
 castigate 
 castigation 
 Castile 
 casting 
 cast-iron 
 castle 
 cast-off 
 castor 
 castrate 
 castrati 
 castration 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix