URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nomad
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:38:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nomad - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nomad - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nomad 

 nomad (n.) 

 "a wanderer, one of a tribe of people who have no fixed abode," 1550s (in plural, nomades ), from French nomade (16c.), from Latin Nomas (genitive Nomadis ) "wandering groups in Arabia," from Greek nomas (genitive nomados , plural nomades ) "roaming, roving, wandering" (from place to place to find pasturage for their flocks or herds), related to nomos "pasture, pasturage, grazing," literally "land allotted" (from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take").
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to nomad 

 nomadic (adj.) 

 "wandering, roving, leading the life of a nomad," 1800, from nomad + -ic .

 Numidia 

 ancient kingdom in North Africa, later a Roman province roughly corresponding to modern Algeria, Latin, named for its inhabitants, the Numidians , whose name is related to nomad (n.). Related: Numidian .

 Betwix Egipte and þe land þat es called Numid er xii day iourneez in desertes. Þe folk þat wones in þat cuntree er called Numidianes, and þai are cristned. Bot þai er blakk of colour. [John Mandeville's "Travels," c. 1425]

 *nem- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "assign, allot; take."

 It might form all or part of: agronomy ; anomie ; anomy ; antinomian ; antinomy ; astronomer ; astronomy ; autonomous ; autonomy ; benumb ; Deuteronomy ; economy ; enumerate ; enumeration ; gastronomy ; heteronomy ; innumerable ; metronome ; namaste ; nemesis ; nimble ; nim ; nomad ; nomothetic ; numb ; numeracy ; numeral ; numerator ; numerical ; numerology ; numerous ; numismatic ; supernumerary ; taxonomy .

 It might also be the source of: Greek nemein "to deal out," nemesis "just indignation;" Latin numerus "number;" Lithuanian nuoma "rent, interest;" Middle Irish nos "custom, usage;" German nehmen "to take."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cassock 

 casaque "long coat" (16c.), corresponding to Spanish casaca, Italian casacca, probably ultimately from Turkish quzzak "nomad...

 Scythian 

 one of an ancient nomadic race living on the steppes of southern Russia, 1540s, from Latin Scythia, from Greek Skythia, name anciently given to the region along the north coast of the Black Sea and extending in definitely north, from Skythes "a Scythian," said to be from an Indo-

 Bedouin 

 "an Arab of the desert, one of the tribes of nomadic Arabs," c. 1400, from Old French bedüin (12c., Modern French bédouin), from colloquial Arabic badawin "desert-dwellers," plural of badawi, from badw "desert, camp." The Arabic plural suffix was mistaken for part of the word. A 

 Saracen 

 Middle English Saracene, Sarcene, Sarazyn, Sarasine, "a Turk; an Arab; a Muslim," from Old English (in translations from Latin), from Old French Saracin, Sarrasine or Medieval Latin Saracenus, from Greek sarakenos. This usually is said to be from Arabic sharquiyin, accusative plu

 Hun 

 person from a tribe from central Asia that overran Europe in the 4c. and 5c., Old English Hunas (plural), from Medieval Latin Hunni, apparently ultimately from Turkic Hun-yü, the name of a tribe (they were known in China as Han or Hiong-nu). Figurative sense of "reckless destroye

 equity 

 early 14c., equite, "quality of being equal or fair, impartiality;" late 14c., "that which is equally right or just to all concerned," from Old French equite (13c.), from Latin aequitatem (nominative aequitas) "the uniform relation of one thing to others, equality, conformity, sy

 raven 

 Late Old English ræfen, refen, earlier hræfn (Mercian), hrefn, hræfn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *khrabanaz (source also of Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban, German Rabe "raven," Old English hroc "rook"), from a PIE root imitati

 zeal 

 "passionate ardor in pursuit of an objective or course of action," late 14c., from Old French zel (Modern French zèle) and directly from Late Latin zelus "zeal, emulation" (source also of Italian zelo, Spanish celo), a Church word, from Greek zēlos "ardor, eager rivalry, emulatio

 blog 

 "online journal," 1998, short for weblog (which is attested from 1993 but in the sense "file containing a detailed record of each request received by a web server"), from (World Wide) Web (n.) + log (n.2). Joe Bloggs (c. 1969) was British slang for "any hypothetical person" (comp

 energy 

 1590s, "force of expression," from French énergie (16c.), from Late Latin energia, from Greek energeia "activity, action, operation," from energos "active, working," from en "at" (see en- (2)) + -ergos "that works," from ergon "work, that which is wrought; business; action" (from

 Share nomad 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nomad Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nomad">Etymology of nomad by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nomad. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nomad Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nomad," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nomad. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nomad." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nomad. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nomad." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nomad (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nomad 
 noli me tangere 
 noll 
 nolle prosequi 
 nolo contendere 
 nom 
 nomad 
 nomadic 
 no-man's-land 
 Nome 
 *no-men- 
 nomenclature 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix