URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/vernal
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:32:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Vernal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Vernal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of vernal 

 vernal (adj.) 

 "of, pertaining to, or occurring in springtime," 1530s, from Late Latin vernalis "of the spring," from vernus "of spring," from Latin ver "the spring, spring-time."

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *wesr- "the spring" (source also of Old Norse var "spring," Greek ear , Armenian gar-un , Sanskrit vasantah , Persian bahar , Old Church Slavonic vesna "spring," Lithuanian vasara "summer").

 Also "of or belonging to youth" as the springtime of life (by 1790).
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to vernal 

 primavera (n.) 

 "spring, spring time," Italian, from Latin prima vera , plural of primus ver literally "first spring;" see prime (adj.) + vernal . Related: Primaveral .

 ver (n.) 

 "springtime," late 14c., now obsolete, from Old French ver (fem. vere ) or directly from Latin ver "the spring, spring-time" (see vernal ).

 Verna 
 vernant 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 young 

 Old English geong "youthful, young; recent, new, fresh," from Proto-Germanic *junga- (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian jung, Old Norse ungr, Middle Dutch jonc, Dutch jong, Old High German and German jung, Gothic juggs), from PIE *yuwn-ko-, suffixed form of root *yeu- "vit

 sidereal 

 The sidereal day begins and ends with the passage of the vernal equinox over the meridian and is about four minutes shorter...

 spring 

 As the word for the vernal season it replaced Old English lencten (see Lent)....

 ear 

 "organ of hearing," Old English eare "ear," from Proto-Germanic *auzon (source also of Old Norse eyra, Danish øre, Old Frisian are, Old Saxon ore, Middle Dutch ore, Dutch oor, Old High German ora, German Ohr, Gothic auso), from PIE *ous- "ear" (source also of Greek ous, Latin aur

 body 

 Middle English bodi, from Old English bodig "trunk of a man or beast; the whole physical structure of a human or animal; material frame, material existence of a human; main or principal part of anything," related to Old High German botah, but otherwise of unknown origin. Not else

 keel 

 "lowest and principal timber of a ship or boat," mid-14c., probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse kjölr "keel," Danish kjøl, Swedish köl), which according to Watkins is from Proto-Germanic *gwele- (3) "to swallow" (see gullet). OED and Middle English Compendium sa

 physiology 

 1560s, "study and description of natural objects, natural philosophy" (a sense now obsolete), from French physiologie (16c.) or directly from Latin physiologia "natural science, study of nature," from Greek physiologia "natural science, inquiry into nature," from physios "nature"

 gasoline 

 "light, volatile liquid obtained from distillation of petroleum," 1864, a variant of gasolene (from 1863 in Britain), which apparently was a trade name at first, from gas (n.1) in its then-popular loose sense of "compound of gases used for illuminating and heating purposes;" the 

 quit 

 c. 1200, "excused, exempt, free, clear" (of debt, obligation, penalty, etc.), from Old French quite, quitte "free, clear, entire, at liberty; discharged; unmarried," and directly from Medieval Latin quitus, quittus, from Latin quietus "free" (in Medieval Latin "free from war, deb

 romanticism 

 1803, "a romantic idea," from romantic + -ism. In literature, 1823, in a French context, in reference to a movement toward medieval forms (especially in reaction to classical ones), an association now more often confined to Romanesque. The movement began in German and spread to E

 Share vernal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/vernal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/vernal">Etymology of vernal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of vernal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/vernal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of vernal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vernal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of vernal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vernal. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of vernal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/vernal (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near vernal 
 verminous 
 Vermont 
 vermouth 
 Verna 
 vernacular 
 vernal 
 vernant 
 vernicle 
 vernier 
 Verona 
 Veronica 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix