URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandal
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:53:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sandal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sandal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sandal 

 sandal (n.) 

 type of shoe consisting of a sole fastened to the foot by thongs, the common footwear of ancient Greece and Rome, late 14c., from Old French sandale and directly from Medieval Latin sandalum , from Latin sandalium "a slipper, sandal," from Greek sandalion , diminutive of sandalon "a sandal," also "a flatfish," a word of unknown origin, probably foreign, perhaps from Persian. Related: Sandals .
 also from late 14c. 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 flip-flop 

 also flip flop, "plastic thong beach sandal," by 1970, imitative of the sound of walking in them....

 sole 

 the palm of the hand," Century Dictionary), early 14c., from Old French sole, from Vulgar Latin *sola, from Latin solea "sandal...

 hose 

 late 13c., "covering of woven cloth or leather for the lower part of the leg, with or without feet," from late Old English hosa "covering for the leg," from Proto-Germanic *huson- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse hosa "covering for the leg between the knee and ankle," Middle 

 shoe 

 Middle English sho, "low-cut covering for the human foot," from Old English scoh, from Proto-Germanic *skokhaz (source also of Old Norse skor, Danish and Swedish sko, Old Frisian skoch, Old Saxon skoh, Middle Dutch scoe, Dutch schoen, Old High German scuoh, German Schuh, Gothic s

 espadrille 

 shoe with soles of hemp-rope (originally worn in the Pyrenees), 1892, from French espadrille (17c.), from Provençal espardillo, from Latin spartum "Spanish broom, Spanish grass," a plant of Iberia and North Africa that produced a fiber used to make mats, nets, ropes, etc., from G

 shambles 

 "meat or fish market," early 15c., from schamil "table, stall for vending" (c. 1300), from Old English scamol, scomul "stool, footstool" (also figurative); "bench or stall in a market on which goods are exposed for sale, table for vending." Compare Old Saxon skamel "stool," Middl

 deadline 

 "time limit," 1920, American English newspaper jargon, from dead (adj.) + line (n.). Perhaps influenced by earlier use (1864) to mean the "do-not-cross" line in Civil War prisons, which figured in the trial of Henry Wirz, commander of the notorious Confederate prison at Andersonv

 trousers 

 "garment for men, covering the lower body and each leg separately," 1610s, earlier trouzes (1580s), extended from trouse (1570s), with plural ending typical of things in pairs, from Gaelic or Middle Irish triubhas "close-fitting shorts," of uncertain origin. Early recorded use of

 pessimism 

 1794 "worst condition possible, point of greatest deterioration" (a sense now rare or obsolete), borrowed (by Coleridge) from French pessimisme, formed (on model of French optimisme) from Latin pessimus "worst," perhaps originally "bottom-most," from PIE *ped-samo-, suffixed (sup

 reckon 

 c. 1200, recenen, rekenen, "enumerate, count up; name one by one; relate, recount; make calculations," from Old English gerecenian "to explain, relate, recount; arrange in order," from Proto-Germanic *(ga)rakinaz "ready, straightforward" (source also of Old Frisian rekenia, Middl

 Share sandal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandal">Etymology of sandal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sandal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sandal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sandal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandal. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sandal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sandal (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sandal 
 sanctity 
 sanctuary 
 sanctum 
 Sanctus 
 sand 
 sandal 
 sandalwood 
 sandbag 
 sand-bank 
 sandbar 
 sand-blast 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix