URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hay
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:59:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hay - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hay - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hay 

 hay (n.) 

 "grass mown," Old English heg (Anglian), hieg , hig (West Saxon) "grass cut or mown for fodder," from Proto-Germanic *haujam , literally "that which is cut," or "that which can be mowed" (from PIE *kau- "to hew, strike;" source also of Old English heawan "to cut;" see hew ).

 Germanic cognates include Old Norse hey , Old Frisian ha , Middle Dutch hoy , German Heu , Gothic hawi "hay."

 Slang phrase hit the hay (pre-1880) was originally "to sleep in a barn;" hay in the general figurative sense of "bedding" is from 1903; roll in the hay (n.) is from 1941.

 Entries linking to hay 

 hew (v.) 

 Old English heawan "to chop, hack, gash, strike with a cutting weapon or tool" (class VII strong verb; past tense heow , past participle heawen ), earlier geheawan , from Proto-Germanic *hawwanan (source also of Old Norse hoggva , Old Frisian hawa , Old Saxon hauwan , Middle Dutch hauwen , Dutch houwen , Old High German houwan , German hauen "to cut, strike, hew"), from PIE *kau- "to hew, strike," a root more widely developed in Slavic (source also of Old Church Slavonic kovo , Lithuanian kauti "to strike, beat, fight;" Polish ku ć "to forge," Russian kovat' "to strike, hammer, forge;" Latin cudere "to strike, beat;" Middle Irish cuad "beat, fight").

 Weak past participle hewede appeared 14c., but hasn't yet entirely displaced hewn . Seemingly contradictory sense of "hold fast, stick to" (in phrase hew to ), 1891, developed from earlier figurative phrase hew to the line "stick to a course," literally "cut evenly with an axe or saw." Related: Hewed ; hewing .

 hay fever (n.) 

 also hay-fever , 1825, from hay + fever . Also called summer catarrh (1828); not much noted before the 1820s, when it was sometimes derided as a "fashion" in disease.

 People are apt to sneeze, in hot weather for example; and people do not die of sneezing now-a-days, as they did in days that no one knows any thing about. We cannot give six draughts a-day, at one and nine pence each, for sneezing: call it the hay-fever. What a wonderful man! what a clever man! he understands the hay-fever: call him in! Thus is the hay-fever among the last in the list of fashionables. ["On Fashions in Physic," London Magazine, October 1825]

 hayloft 
 haymaker 
 hayrick 
 hay-ride 
 hayseed 
 haystack 
 haywire 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hayseed 

 also hay-seed, 1570s, "grass seed shaken out of hay," from hay + seed (n.). In U.S. slang sense of "comical rustic" it dates from 1875. To have hayseed in (one's) hair was a common mid-19c. way in U.S. to indicate a country person. The opinion of the court was delivered by Justi

 haywire 

 "soft wire for binding bales of hay," by 1891, from hay + wire (n.). Adjective meaning "poorly equipped, makeshift" is 1905, American English, from the sense of something held together only with haywire, particularly said to be from use of the stuff in New England lumber camps fo

 meadow 

 Old English mædwe "low, level tract of land under grass; pasture," originally "land covered in grass which is mown for hay...

 forage 

 cattle, fodder," from Old French forrage "fodder; foraging; pillaging, looting" (12c., Modern French fourrage), from fuerre "hay...

 tycoon 

 important person" is attested from 1861, in reference to U.S. president Abraham Lincoln (in the diary of his secretary, John Hay...

 whisk 

 late 14c., "quick stroke, sweeping movement," probably from Old Norse visk "wisp of hay, something to sweep with," from Proto-Germanic...

 manger 

 "box or trough in a stable or cow-shed from which horses and cattle eat food other than hay" (which generally is placed in...

 convert 

 c. 1300, "a change or turn from one religion to another," especially to Christianity, from Old French convertir "to turn around, turn towards; change, transform; convert, win over," from Vulgar Latin *convertire, from Latin convertere "turn around, transform," from assimilated fo

 set 

 Middle English setten, from Old English settan (transitive) "cause to sit; make or cause to rest as on a seat; cause to be put, placed, or seated;" also "put in a definite place," also "arrange, fix adjust; fix or appoint (a time) for some affair or transaction," and "cause (thou

 clock 

 "machine to measure and indicate time mechanically" (since late 1940s also electronically), late 14c., clokke, originally "clock with bells," probably from Middle Dutch clocke (Dutch klok) "a clock," from Old North French cloque (Old French cloke, Modern French cloche "a bell"), 

 Share hay 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hay Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hay">Etymology of hay by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hay. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hay Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hay," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hay. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hay." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hay. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hay." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hay (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hay 
 hawkish 
 hawkshaw 
 hawse 
 hawser 
 hawthorn 
 hay 
 hay fever 
 hayloft 
 haymaker 
 hayrick 
 hay-ride 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix