URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/acid
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:16:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Acid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Acid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of acid 

 acid (adj.) 

 1620s, "of the taste of vinegar," from French acide (16c.) or directly from Latin acidus "sour, sharp, tart" (also figurative, "disagreeable," etc.), adjective of state from acere "to be sour, be sharp" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce").

 Figurative use in English ("sour, sharp, biting") is from 1775; the word was applied to intense colors by 1916; an acid dye (1888) involves an acid bath. Acid rain "highly acidity in rain caused by atmospheric pollution" is recorded by 1859 in reference to England. Acid drop as a kind of hard sugar candy flavored with tartaric acid is by 1835, with drop (n.) in the "lozenge" sense.

 Acid test is American English, 1881, in literal use a quick way to distinguish gold from similar metals by application of nitric acid. Fowler wrote (1920) that it was then in vogue in the figurative sense and "became familiar through a conspicuous use of it during the war by President Wilson."
 also from 1620s 

 acid (n.) 

 1690s, from acid (adj.); originally loosely applied to any substance having a sour taste like vinegar, in modern chemistry it was gradually given more precise definitions from early 18c. and is given to many compounds which do not have such a taste.

 The slang meaning "LSD-25" first recorded 1966 (see LSD ).

 When I was on acid I would see things that looked like beams of light, and I would hear things that sounded an awful lot like car horns. [Mitch Hedberg, 1968-2005, U.S. stand-up comic]

 Acid rock (type performed or received by people using LSD) is also from 1966; acid house dance music style is 1988, probably from acid in the hallucinogenic sense + house "dance club DJ music style."
 also from 1690s 

 Entries linking to acid 

 drop (n.) 

 Middle English drope , from Old English dropa "a small, spherical mass of liquid," from Proto-Germanic *drupon (source also of Old Saxon dropo , Old Norse dropi , Dutch drop , Old High German tropfo , German Tropfen (n.)); see drop (v.).

 Sense of "minute quantity of anything, least possible amount" is from c. 1200. Meaning "an act of dropping" is from 1630s; of immaterial things (prices, temperatures, etc.) from mid-19c. Meaning "lozenge, hard candy" is 1723, from resemblance in shape. Meaning "secret place where things can be left illicitly and picked up later" is from 1931. Theatrical meaning "painted curtain dropped between scenes to conceal the stage from the audience" is by 1779.

 Drop in the bucket (late 14c.) is from Isaiah xl.15 [KJV]. At the drop of a hat "suddenly" is from 1854. To get the drop on "be prepared before one's antagonist" originally was Old West gunslinger slang (1869).

 house (n.) 

 Old English hus "dwelling, shelter, building designed to be used as a residence," from Proto-Germanic *hūsan (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian hus , Dutch huis , German Haus ), of unknown origin, perhaps connected to the root of hide (v.) [OED]. In Gothic only in gudhus "temple," literally "god-house;" the usual word for "house" in Gothic being according to OED razn .

 Meaning "family, including ancestors and descendants, especially if noble" is from c. 1000. Zodiac sense is first attested late 14c. The legislative sense (1540s) is transferred from the building in which the body meets. Meaning "audience in a theater" is from 1660s (transferred from the theater itself, playhouse ). Meaning "place of business" is 1580s. The specialized college and university sense (1530s) also applies to both buildings and students collectively, a double sense found earlier in reference to religious orders (late 14c.). As a dance club DJ music style, probably from the Warehouse , a Chicago nightclub where the style is said to have originated.

 To play house is from 1871; as suggestive of "have sex, shack up," 1968. House arrest is attested by 1794. House-painter is from 1680s. House-raising (n.) is from 1704. On the house "free" is from 1889. House and home have been alliteratively paired since c. 1200.

 And the Prophet Isaiah the sonne of Amos came to him, and saide vnto him, Thus saith the Lord, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not liue. [II Kings xx.1, version of 1611]

 LSD 
 acidic 
 acidify 
 acidity 
 acidophilus 
 acidulous 
 antacid 
 oxide 
 *ak- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dose 

 early 15c., "the giving of medicine (in a specified amount or at a stated time)," from Old French dose (15c.) or directly from Medieval Latin dosis, from Greek dosis "a portion prescribed," literally "a giving," used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medici

 dot 

 "point or minute spot on a surface," Old English dott, once, "speck, head of a boil," perhaps related to Norwegian dot "lump, small knot," Dutch dot "knot, small bunch, wisp," Old High German tutta "nipple;" a word of uncertain etymology. Known from a single source c. 1000; the w

 pane 

 mid-13c., "garment, cloak, mantle; a part of a garment;" later "side of a building, section of a wall," from Old French pan "section, piece, panel" (11c.) and directly from Latin pannum (nominative pannus) "piece of cloth, garment," possibly from PIE root *pan- "fabric" (source a

 niacin 

 "pellagra-preventing vitamin in enriched bread," 1942, coined from first syllables of  nicotinic acid (see nicotine)...It was suggested by the American Medical Association as a more commercially viable name than nicotinic acid....

 malic 

 "pertaining to apples, obtained from the juice of apples," 1790 (in malic acid, in a translation of Fourcroy), from French...The acid, discovered 1785 by Swedish/German chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele, was obtained from unripe apples and other fruits...

 barbiturate 

 barbiturate is from 1918), with chemical ending -ate (3) + barbituric (1865), from German barbitur in Barbitursäure "barbituric acid...The second element is because it was obtained from uric acid. Related: Barbitol....

 Promethean 

 introduction of modern matches (see lucifer), promethean was the name given (1830) to small glass tubes full of sulphuric acid...Prometheans are small glass bulbs, filled with concentrated sulphuric acid, and hermetically sealed, and surrounded with...Upon pinching the end containing the glass bulb, between the jaws of a pair of pliers, the bulb breaks, and the sulphuric acid...

 compound 

 late 14c., compounen, "to put together, to mix, to combine; to join, couple together," from Old French compondre, componre "arrange, direct," and directly from Latin componere "to put together," from com "with, together" (see com-) + ponere "to place" (see position (n.)). The une

 vitriol 

 late 14c., "sulphate of iron," from Old French vitriol (13c.), from Medieval Latin vitriolum "vitriol," noun use of neuter of vitriolus, variant of Late Latin vitreolus "of glass," from Latin vitreus "of glass, glassy," from vitrum "glass" (see vitreous). So called from its glass

 sulfurous 

 1520s, "containing, impregnated with, or resembling sulfur; of the nature of brimstone," from Latin sulphurosus "full of sulfur," or a native formation from sulfur + -ous. The spelling sulphurous is standard in Britain. Hence figurative use with suggestions of hellfire (c. 1600).

 Share acid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/acid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/acid">Etymology of acid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of acid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/acid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of acid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/acid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of acid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/acid. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of acid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/acid (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near acid 
 Achilles tendon 
 achromatic 
 achtung 
 achy 
 acicular 
 acid 
 acidic 
 acidify 
 acidity 
 acidophilus 
 acidulate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix