URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/print
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:59:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Print - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Print - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of print 

 print (n.) 

 c. 1300, prente , "impression, mark made by impression upon a surface" (as by a stamp or seal), from Old French preinte "impression," noun use of fem. past participle of preindre "to press, crush," altered from prembre , from Latin premere "to press, hold fast, cover, crowd, compress" (from PIE root *per- (4) "to strike"). The Old French word also was borrowed into Middle Dutch ( prente , Dutch prent ) and other Germanic languages.

 Sense of "a printed publication" (later especially a newspaper) is from 1560s. The meaning "printed lettering" is from 1620s; print-hand "print-like handwriting" is from 1650s. The sense of "picture or design from a block or plate" is attested from 1660s. Meaning "piece of printed cloth or fabric" is from 1756. The photographic sense is by 1853.

 In Middle English, stigmata were called precious prentes of crist ; to perceiven the print of sight was "to feel (someone's) gaze." Out of print "no longer to be had from the publisher" is from 1670s (to be in print "in printed form" is recorded from late 15c.). Print journalism attested from 1962, as distinguished from the television variety.
 also from c. 1300 

 print (v.) 

 mid-14c., prenten "to make an impression, press upon or into" (as with a seal, stamp, etc.), from print (n.). Meaning "to set a mark on any surface" (including by writing) is attested from late 14c. Meaning "to run off on a press, make a copy or copies of by impression" is recorded from 1510s (Caxton, 1474, used enprynte in this sense).

 In reference to textiles, 1580s. The photography sense of "produce a positive image from a negative" is recorded from 1851 (the noun in this sense is from 1853). Meaning "to write in imitation of typography" is from 1801.

 He always prints, I know, 'cos he learnt writin' from the large bills in the bookin' offices. [Dickens, "Pickwick Papers," 1837]

 The meaning "to record (someone's) fingerprints" is from 1952. Related: Printed ; printing .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to print 

 blueprint (n.) 

 also blue-print , 1882, from blue (adj.1) + print (n.). The process uses blue on white, or white on blue. The figurative sense of "detailed plan" is attested from 1926. As a verb by 1939.

 fingerprint (n.) 

 also finger-print , 1834, from finger (n.) + print (n.). Attempts to classify fingerprint types as a means of identification began in the 1820s; the current arch-loop-whorl system was introduced by Francis Galton in 1892. Admissibility as evidence as valid proof of guilt in murder trials in U.S. was upheld in 1912. From 1900 as a verb. Related: Fingerprinted ; fingerprinting .

 footprint 
 misprint 
 newsprint 
 preprint 
 printable 
 printer 
 printing 
 print-out 
 reprint 
 script 
 thumb-print 
 *per- 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 printer 

 "person who prints books, etc.; one who understands and carries on the business of typographical printing," c. 1500, agent noun from print (v.). Earlier as "a signet or seal" (early 15c.). As a mechanical device that prints, presses, or stamps by impression, from 1859, originally

 script 

 late 14c., "something written, a written document," earlier scrite (c. 1300), from Anglo-French scrit, Old French escrit "piece of writing, written paper; credit note, IOU; deed, bond" (Modern French écrit) and directly from Latin scriptum "a writing, book; law; line, mark," noun

 mark 

 "trace, impression," Old English mearc (West Saxon), merc (Mercian) "boundary, limit; sign, landmark," from Proto-Germanic *markō (source also of Old Norse merki "boundary, sign," mörk "forest," which often marked a frontier; Old Frisian merke, Gothic marka "boundary, frontier," 

 imprimatur 

 "licence to print, granted by a licenser of the press," 1640, Modern Latin, literally "let it be printed," the formula of...a book licenser, third person singular present subjunctive passive of Latin imprimere "to print, engrave, stamp; press upon...Originally of state licence to print books, later only of Roman Catholic Church....

 stationery 

 The spelling distinction from stationary is purely etymological, though convenient in print....

 Jiminy 

 It was in popular use in print from c. 1901 and taken into the Pinocchio fairy tale by Disney (1940) to answer to Italian...

 empathize 

 Earlier appearances of the word in print seem to be an error for emphasize: Obstetric Therapeutics.—Prof....

 cloth 

 "woven fabric, pliable stuff made of intertexture of threads or fibers," Old English claþ "a cloth, sail, cloth covering, woven or felted material to wrap around one," hence, also, "garment," from Proto-Germanic *kalithaz (source also of Old Frisian klath "cloth," Middle Dutch cl

 impress 

 late 14c., "have a strong effect on the mind or heart, to stamp deeply in the mind," from Latin impressus, past participle of imprimere "press into or upon, stamp," also figurative, from assimilated form of in- "into, in, on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + premere "to press, ho

 photo 

 1860, a colloquial shortening of photograph. The verb is by 1865, from the noun. Photo-finish, of a race that ends with two or more competitors crossing the finishing line at nearly the same time (so a photograph taken at the finish line at the moment of crossing is the only way 

 Share print 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/print Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/print">Etymology of print by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of print. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/print Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of print," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/print. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of print." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/print. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of print." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/print (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near print 
 principally 
 principia 
 principle 
 principled 
 pringle 
 print 
 printable 
 printer 
 printing 
 print-out 
 prion 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix