URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hamlet
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:10:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hamlet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hamlet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hamlet 

 hamlet (n.) 

 "small village without a church, little cluster of houses in the country," early 14c., hamelet , from Old French hamelet "small village," diminutive of hamel "village," itself a diminutive of ham "village," from Frankish *haim or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *haimaz "home" (from PIE root *tkei- "to settle, dwell, be home"); for ending, see -let . Especially a village without a church.
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to hamlet 

 home (n.) 

 Middle English hom , from Old English ham , home "dwelling place, house, abode, fixed residence; estate; village; region, country," from Proto-Germanic *haimaz "home," which is reconstructed to be from a suffixed form of PIE root *tkei- "to settle, dwell, be home."

 Figuratively as the seat or location (of faith, love, etc.) from late Old English. As an adverb in Old English; as an adjective from 1550s. Early plural sometimes was hamen , homen .

 Germanic cognates include Old Frisian hem "home, village," Old Norse heimr "residence; village; world," heima "home," Danish hjem , Middle Dutch heem , German Heim "home," Gothic haims "village." The old Germanic sense of "village" is preserved in English place names in -ham , German -heim , etc., and in hamlet .

 'Home' in the full range and feeling of [Modern English] home is a conception that belongs distinctively to the word home and some of its Gmc. cognates and is not covered by any single word in most of the IE languages. [Buck]

 At home "in one's house" is from Old English; by late 14c. as "in a congenial environment," hence "at one's ease" (1510s). The slang phrase make (oneself) at home "become comfortable in a place one does not live" dates from 1892.

 Home guard "local volunteer defense force" is by 1836. To keep the home fires burning is a song title from 1914; home-fire as symbolic of family life is by 1892 (compare hearth ).

 Home movie "film of one's own domestic circle and activities" is from 1919. Home computer , in reference to one designed for recreational or educational use at home, is attested from 1967. To be nothing to write home about "unremarkable" is from 1907. In Middle English the long home was "the grave."

 Home economics as a school course is attested by 1899; the phrase itself by 1879 as "household management," which is the simple sense of economy , the phrase is thus etymologically redundant.

 Home as the goal in a sport or game is by 1778. Home base in baseball is attested by 1856; home plate by 1867. Home team in sports is by 1869; home field "grounds belonging to the local team" is by 1802 (the 1800 citation in OED 2nd ed. print is a date typo, as it refers to baseball in Spokane Falls). Home-field advantage is attested by 1914 in reference to U.S. football teams winning more often at home.

 -let 

 diminutive noun-forming element, Middle English, from Old French -elet , which often is a double-diminutive. It consists of Old French diminutive -et , -ette (see -et ) added to nouns in -el , which in many cases represents Latin diminutive -ellus ; see -el (2)). "The formation did not become common until the 18th c." [OED].

 *tkei- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to settle, dwell, be home."

 It might form all or part of: Amphictyonic ; hamlet ; hangar ; haunt ; home ; site ; situate ; situation ; situs .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit kseti "abides, dwells;" Armenian shen "inhabited;" Greek kome , Lithuanian kaimas "village;" Old Church Slavonic semija "domestic servants;" Old English ham "dwelling place, house, abode," German heim "home," Gothic haims "village."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 village 

 late 14c., "inhabited place larger than a hamlet but smaller than a town," from Old French vilage "houses and other buildings in a group" (usually smaller than a town), from Latin villaticum "farmstead" (with outbuildings), noun use of neuter singular of villaticus "having to do 

 out-herod 

 "exceed in any excess of evil," from Shakespeare's it out-Herods Herod in Hamlet's instruction to the players in "Hamlet"...["Hamlet"]...

 beetle 

 "project, overhang," apparently a Shakespearean back-formation (in "Hamlet," 1602) from beetle-browed, from Middle English...

 heavy 

 A "heavy business man," he who performs such parts as Ferardo in the Wife, the Ghost in Hamlet, and Malec, Edmund, Banquo...

 bourn 

 ["Hamlet" III.i.79]...

 germane 

 Main modern sense of "closely connected, relevant" (c. 1600) derives from use in "Hamlet" Act V, Scene ii: "The phrase would...

 tavern 

 building," Old Welsh treb "house, dwelling," Welsh tref "a dwelling," Irish treb "residence," Old English ðorp "village, hamlet...

 community 

 late 14c., "a number of people associated together by the fact of residence in the same locality," also "the common people" (not the rulers or the clergy), from Old French comunité "community, commonness, everybody" (Modern French communauté), from Latin communitatem (nominative 

 settlement 

 1620s, "act of clarifying, fixing, or steadying;" 1640s, "the placing of persons or things in a fixed or permanent position;" from settle (v.) + -ment. The meaning "a colony," especially a new one, "community of subjects of a state settled in a new country; tract of country newly

 ham 

 "thigh of a hog used for food" (especially salted and cured or smoke-dried), 1630s, extended from earlier sense of "part of the human leg behind the knee; hock of a quadruped," from Old English hamm "hollow or bend of the knee," from Proto-Germanic *hamma- (source also of Old Nor

 Share hamlet 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hamlet Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hamlet">Etymology of hamlet by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hamlet. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hamlet Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hamlet," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hamlet. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hamlet." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hamlet. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hamlet." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hamlet (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hamlet 
 Hamburg 
 hamburger 
 Hamiltonian 
 Hamite 
 Hamitic 
 hamlet 
 hammer 
 hammered 
 hammerhead 
 hammock 
 Hammond 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix