URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/plenty
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:57:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Plenty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Plenty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of plenty 

 plenty (n.) 

 mid-13c., "abundance; as much as one could desire; an ample supply," from Old French plentee , earlier plentet "abundance, profusion" (12c., Modern French dialectal plenté ), from Latin plenitatem (nominative plenitas ) "fullness," from plenus "full, filled, greatly crowded; stout, pregnant; abundant, abounding; complete," from PIE root *pele- (1) "to fill."

 From early 14c. as "a large amount, a great deal." The meaning "condition of general abundance" is from late 14c. The colloquial adverb meaning "very much" is first attested 1842. Middle English had parallel formation plenteth , from the older Old French form of the word.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to plenty 

 aplenty (adj.) 

 also a-plenty , "in abundance," by 1829, colloquial when used after the noun, from a- (1) + plenty (n.).

 Two square feet, or four at most, in one corner of the frame, will give you mustard and cress a plenty for salads, if you take care to make repeated sowings in proper time. [William Cobbett, "The English Gardener," 1829]

 But perhaps older, depending how some uses of aplenty or a plenty are read.

 plenteous (adj.) 

 c. 1300, plenteivous , "fertile, fruitful, prolific," from Old French plentivos , plentiveus "fertile, rich" (early 13c.), from plentif "abundant," from plentee "abundance" (see plenty ). From late 14c. as "abundant, plentiful, copious." Modern form by late 14c. Related: Plenteously ; plenteousness .

 plenteous, -iful . As with other pairs in 
 -eous & 
 -iful (e.g. from 
 bounty, beauty, duty, pity ), the meaning of the two is the same, but the 
 -eous word is the less common & therefore better suited to the needs of poetry & exalted prose ; for these it should be reserved. [Fowler, 1926]

 plentiful 
 *pele- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 enough 

 c. 1300, from Old English genog "sufficient in quantity or number," from Proto-Germanic compound *ganog "sufficient" (source also of Old Saxon ginog, Old Frisian enoch, Dutch genoeg, Old High German ginuog, German genug, Old Norse gnogr, Gothic ganohs). First element is Old Engli

 batch 

 late 15c., probably from a survival of an unrecorded Old English *bæcce "something baked" (compare Old English gebæc) from bacan "bake" (see bake (v.)). The generalized sense of "an aggregation of similar articles" is from 1590s. Batch is to bake as watch (n.) is to wake and matc

 deal 

 "a part or portion," Middle English del, from from Old English dæl "a part of a whole, a share;" with qualification (great, etc.), "an extent, degree, quantity, amount," from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (source also of Old Norse deild, Old Frisian del "part; juridical district," Dutch

 copy 

 document), from Old French copier (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin copiare "to transcribe," originally "to write in plenty...," from Latin copia "plenty" (see copy (n.))....

 copious 

 "abundant, plentiful," mid-14c., from Latin copiosus "plentiful," from copia "an abundance, ample supply, profusion, plenty...

 abound 

 "be in great plenty," early 14c., from Old French abonder "to abound, be abundant, come together in great numbers" (12c.)...Related: Abounded; abounding; abounder "one who has plenty or is wealthy" (1755)....

 Oscan 

 "Oscans," literally "worshippers of Ops," a harvest goddess, the name related to Latin ops (genitive opis) "abundance, plenty...

 mass 

 late 14c., "irregular shaped lump; body of unshaped, coherent matter," from Old French masse "lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot, bar" (11c.), and directly from Latin massa "kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like dough," probably from Greek maza "barley c

 pile 

 early 15c., "heap or stack of something," usually consisting of an indefinite number of separate objects arranged in a more or less regular conical or pyramidal form, from Old French pile "a heap, a stack," and directly from Latin pila "a pillar," also "stone barrier, pier" (see 

 deluge 

 late 14c., "an overflowing of water, a great flood, Noah's Flood in Genesis," from Old French deluge (12c.), earlier deluve, from Latin diluvium "flood, inundation," from diluere "wash away," from dis- "away" (see dis-) + -luere, combining form of lavere "to wash" (from PIE root 

 Share plenty 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/plenty Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/plenty">Etymology of plenty by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of plenty. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/plenty Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of plenty," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/plenty. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of plenty." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/plenty. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of plenty." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/plenty (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near plenty 
 plenipotentiary 
 plenitude 
 plenteous 
 plentiful 
 plentitude 
 plenty 
 plenum 
 pleo- 
 pleomorphic 
 pleonasm 
 pleonastic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix