URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philadelphia
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:17:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Philadelphia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Philadelphia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Philadelphia 

 Philadelphia 

 city in Pennsylvania between the Delaware and Schuylkill rivers, from Greek, taken by William Penn to mean "brotherly love," from philos "loving" (see philo- ) + adelphos "brother" (see Adelphi ). Related: Philadelphian .

 Also the name recalls that of the ancient city in Lydia, mentioned in the New Testament, which was so called in honor of Attalos II Philadelphos , 2c B.C.E. king of Pergamon, who founded it. His title is said to have meant "loving the brethren" or to be a reference to his affection for his brother Eumenes, whom he succeeded.

 Philadelphia lawyer "clever, shrewd attorney" is attested from 1788 in London, said originally to have been applied to Andrew Hamilton, who obtained the famous acquittal of J.P. Zenger in New York on libel charges in 1735.

 [C]ricket and coaching were after all popular in their day in places besides Philadelphia. It was merely that Philadelphia kept on with them longer than most places. This is a perennial Philadelphia trick, and gives to Philadelphia a sort of perpetual feeling of loss. Philadelphians are always just now getting rid of things that are picturesque, like those gas lamps on the streets, only because everybody else got rid of them long ago. [Nathaniel Burt, "The Perennial Philadelphians," 1963]

 Entries linking to Philadelphia 

 Adelphi 

 district of London, so called because it was laid out c. 1768 and built by four brothers of a family named Adam; from Greek adelphos "brother," literally "from the same womb, co-uterine," from copulative prefix a- "together with" (see a- (3)) + delphys "womb," which is perhaps related to dolphin (q.v.). The district was the site of the popular Adelphi theater c. 1882-1900, which for a time gave its name to a style of performance.

 Philly 

 familiar or colloquial shortening of Philadelphia , attested by 1890, but from 1858 as the popular name of a ferry boat of that name that crossed the Delaware River from the city to Camden, and a city baseball team has been called the Phillies since 1883.

 philo- 

 before vowels phil- , word-forming element meaning "loving, fond of, tending to," from Greek philos (adj.) "dear, loved, beloved," as a noun, "friend," from philein "to love, regard with affection," a word of unknown origin. Productive of a great many compounds in ancient Greek (such as philokybos "a lover of dice-play"). Opposed to miso- . Compare -phile .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scrod 

 A Boston brahmin is on a business trip to Philadelphia....[an old joke in Philadelphia, this version of it from "Vex, Hex, Smash, Smooch," Constance Hale, 2012]...

 congressman 

 first appears in a piece of abuse (written by a Loyalist): Ye coxcomb Congressmen, declaimers keen, Brisk puppets of the Philadelphia...

 ethnology 

 ["Atlantic Journal and Friend of Knowledge," Philadelphia, summer 1832]...

 Skee-Ball 

 1909, proprietary name (Skee-Ball Alley Company, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.), the first element said to represent the old alternative...

 Bryn Mawr 

 town and railroad stop on the Main Line outside Philadelphia, named 1869 by the Pennsylvania Railroad's executives, Welsh...

 hoagie 

 American English (originally Philadelphia) word for "hero sandwich, large sandwich made from a long, split roll;" originally...

 slump 

 [Eliza Leslie, "Miss Leslie's Behaviour Book," Philadelphia, 1839] Used figuratively of failure or falling through; the...

 Pennsylvania 

 American colony, later U.S. state, 1681, literally "Penn's Woods," a hybrid formed from the surname Penn (Welsh, literally "head") + Latin sylvania (see sylvan). Not named for William Penn, the proprietor, but, on suggestion of Charles II, for Penn's late father, Admiral William 

 salad 

 late 14c., salade, "raw herbs cut up and variously dressed," from Old French salade (14c.) and Medieval Latin salata, both from Vulgar Latin *salata, literally "salted," short for herba salata "salted vegetables" (vegetables seasoned with brine, a popular Roman dish), from fem. p

 year 

 Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) "year," from Proto-Germanic *jēr "year" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr, Gothic jer "year"), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- "year, season" (source al

 Share Philadelphia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philadelphia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philadelphia">Etymology of Philadelphia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Philadelphia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philadelphia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Philadelphia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philadelphia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Philadelphia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philadelphia. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Philadelphia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philadelphia (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Philadelphia 
 phew 
 phi 
 Phi Beta Kappa 
 phial 
 Phidian 
 Philadelphia 
 philander 
 philanderer 
 philanthrope 
 philanthropic 
 philanthropist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix