URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/spinach
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:30:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Spinach - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Spinach - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of spinach 

 spinach (n.) 

 garden vegetable with thick, succulent leaves, late 14c., spinache , spinage , etc. (late 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French spinache , Old French espinache (14c., Modern French épinard , from a form with a different suffix), from Old Provençal espinarc , which perhaps is via Catalan espinac , from Andalusian Arabic isbinakh , from Arabic isbanakh , from Persian aspanakh "spinach."

 But OED is not convinced the Middle Eastern words are native, and based on the plethora of Romanic forms pronounces the Romanic words "of doubtful origin." Compare Medieval Latin spinagium . Old folk etymology connected the word with Latin spina (see spine ), supposedly for the prickly fruit, or with Medieval Latin Hispanicum olus .

 For pronunciation, see cabbage . In 1930s colloquial American English, it had a sense of "nonsense, rubbish," based on a famous New Yorker cartoon of Dec. 8, 1928. Related: Spinachy ; spinaceous . Popeye, the spinach-eating superman, debuted in 1929.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to spinach 

 cabbage (n.) 

 type of cultivated culinary vegetable that grows a rounded head of thick leaves, mid-15c., caboge , from Old North French caboche "head" (in dialect, "cabbage"), from Old French caboce "head," a diminutive from Latin caput "head" (from PIE root *kaput- "head"). Earlier in Middle English as caboche (late 14c.).

 The decline of "ch" to "j" in the unaccented final syllable parallels the common pronunciation of spinach , sandwich , Greenwich , etc. The comparison of a head of cabbage to the head of a person (disparagingly of the latter) is at least as old as Old French cabus "(head of) cabbage; nitwit, blockhead," from Italian capocchia , diminutive of capo .

 The plant was introduced to Canada 1541 by Jacques Cartier on his third voyage. The earliest record of it in the modern U.S. is 1660s. The cabbage-butterfly (1816) is so called because its caterpillars feed on cabbages and other cruciferous plants.

 spine (n.) 

 c. 1400, "backbone, spinal column," from Old French espine "thorn, prickle; backbone, spine" (12c., Modern French épine ), from Latin spina "backbone," originally "thorn, prickle" (figuratively, in plural, "difficulties, perplexities"), from PIE *spein- , for which de Vaan compares Latvian spina "rod," Russian spina "back, spine," Old High German spinela "hairpin," Middle High German spenel "needle," and perhaps Latin spica "ear of grain" (see spike (n.2)). The "thorn-like part" sense is attested in English from early 15c. The meaning "back of a book" is by 1920, in advertisements for book-cover protectors.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 genre 

 1770, "particular style of art," a French word in English (nativized from c. 1840), from French genre "kind, sort, style" (see gender (n.)). Used especially in French for "independent style." In painting, as an adjective, "depicting scenes of ordinary life" (a domestic interior o

 green 

 Old English grene, Northumbrian groene "green, of the color of living plants," in reference to plants, "growing, living, vigorous," also figurative, of a plant, "freshly cut," of wood, "unseasoned" earlier groeni, from Proto-Germanic *grōni- (source also of Old Saxon grani, Old F

 greens 

 c. 1400, "vegetables;" 1690s, "freshly cut branches used for decoration," from green (n.). Meaning "ecology political party" first recorded 1978, from German die Grünen (West Germany), an outgrowth of Grüne Aktion Zukunft "Green Campaign for the Future," a mainly anti-nuclear pow

 vegetable 

 early 15c., "capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous;" also "neither animal nor mineral, of the plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant," from Old French vegetable "living, fit to live," and directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis "growing, flourishing," from Late Lati

 plant 

 Old English plante "young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, a shoot or strip recently sprouted from seed," from Latin planta "sprout, shoot, cutting" (source of Spanish planta, French plante), which is perhaps from an unattested verb *plantare "to drive in with the feet, push in

 Yankee 

 1683, a name applied disparagingly by Dutch settlers in New Amsterdam (New York) to English colonists in neighboring Connecticut. It may be from Dutch Janke, literally "Little John," diminutive of common personal name Jan; or it may be from Jan Kes familiar form of "John Corneliu

 dissertation 

 1610s, "discussion, debate" (a sense now obsolete), from Late Latin dissertationem (nominative dissertatio) "discourse," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin dissertare "debate, argue, examine, harangue," frequentative of disserere "discuss, examine," from dis- "apar

 folk 

 Old English folc "common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army," from Proto-Germanic *fulka- (source also of Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk, Old High German folc, German Volk "people"). Perhaps originally "host of warri

 preposition 

 late 14c., preposicioun, in grammar, "indeclinable part of speech regularly placed before and governing a noun in an oblique case and showing its relation to a verb, adjective, or other noun," from Latin praepositionem (nominative praepositio) "a putting before, a prefixing," nou

 bender 

 late 15c., "instrument for bending," agent noun from bend (v.). Slang meaning "drinking bout" is American English, attested from 1846, perhaps from the Scottish sense of "a hard drinker" (1728). Perhaps from the verb in the figurative sense of "strain, brace, wind up." Other slan

 Share spinach 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/spinach Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/spinach">Etymology of spinach by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of spinach. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/spinach Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of spinach," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spinach. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of spinach." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spinach. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of spinach." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/spinach (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near spinach 
 spillikin 
 spillover 
 spillway 
 spilth 
 spin 
 spinach 
 spinal 
 spindle 
 spindly 
 spindrift 
 spine 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix