URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/conserve
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:02:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Conserve - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Conserve - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of conserve 

 conserve (v.) 

 "to keep safe, preserve from loss or decay," late 14c., from Old French conserver (9c.), from Latin conservare "to keep, preserve, keep intact, guard," from assimilated form of com- , here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com- ), + servare "keep watch, maintain" (from PIE root *ser- (1) "to protect"). Related: Conserved ; conserving .

 As a noun (often conserves ) from late 14c. as "that which preserves;" early 15c. as "a confection, something preserved with sugar, etc."
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to conserve 

 com- 

 word-forming element usually meaning "with, together," from Latin com , archaic form of classical Latin cum "together, together with, in combination," from PIE *kom- "beside, near, by, with" (compare Old English ge- , German ge- ). The prefix in Latin sometimes was used as an intensive.

 Before vowels and aspirates, it is reduced to co- ; before -g- , it is assimilated to cog- or con- ; before -l- , assimilated to col- ; before -r- , assimilated to cor- ; before -c-, -d-, -j-, -n-, -q-, -s-, -t- , and -v-, it is assimilated to con- , which was so frequent that it often was used as the normal form.

 *ser- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to protect." It might form all or part of: conservation ; conservative ; conserve ; observance ; observatory ; observe ; preserve ; reservation ; reserve ; reservoir .

 It might also be the source of: Avestan haurvaiti "to guard;" Latin servare "to guard, keep, watch;" Old Church Slavonic xraniti "to guard, protect;" Old High German gi-sarwi "armor, equipment," Old English searu "art, skill; wile, deceit."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 preserve 

 late 14c., preserven, "keep safe or free from harm," also "act so as to insure that something does not occur," from Anglo-French preservare, Old French preserver, Medieval Latin preservare "keep, preserve," all from Late Latin praeservare "guard beforehand," from Latin prae "befo

 husband 

 Old English husbonda "male head of a household, master of a house, householder," probably from Old Norse husbondi "master of the house," literally "house-dweller," from hus "house" (see house (n.)) + bondi "householder, dweller, freeholder, peasant," from buandi, present particip

 maintain 

 c. 1300, maintenen, "to support, uphold, aid;" also "hold fast, keep in possession, preserve from capture or loss," from Anglo-French meintenir (Old French maintenir, 12c.) "keep (a wife), sustain; persevere in, practice continually," from Latin manu tenere "hold in the hand," fr

 marmalade 

 1530s, "preserve or confection of pulpy consistence made from quince," from French marmelade, from Portuguese marmelada "quince jelly, marmalade," from marmelo "quince," by dissimilation from Latin melimelum "sweet apple," originally "fruit of an apple tree grafted onto quince," 

 jelly 

 late 14c., gelee, gelle, gelly, "semisolid substance from animal or vegetable material, spiced and used in cooking; chopped meat or fish served in such a jelly," from Old French gelee "a jelly," also "a frost," noun use of fem. past participle of geler "to congeal, to freeze," fr

 embalm 

 late 14c., embaumen "to apply balm or ointment; to embalm a corpse," from Old French embaumer, earlier embausmer, "preserve (a corpse) with spices," from assimilated form of en- "in" (see en- (1)) + baume "balm" (see balm) + verbal suffix -er. Balm in Middle English also had a sp

 hold 

 Middle English holden, earlier halden, from Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), "to contain; to grasp; to retain (liquid, etc.); to observe, fulfill (a custom, etc.); to have as one's own; to have in mind (of opinions, etc.); to possess, control, rule; to detain, 

 jam 

 "to press tightly" (trans.), 1719; "to become wedged" (intrans.), 1706, of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of Middle English cham "to bite upon something; gnash the teeth" (late 14c.; see champ (v.)). Of a malfunction in the moving parts of machinery by 1851. Sense of "cause in

 sweat 

 Middle English sweten, from Old English swætan "perspire, excrete moisture from the skin," also "toil, labor, work hard," from Proto-Germanic *swaitjan "to sweat," from the source of sweat (n.). Compare Frisian swette, Dutch zweeten, Danish svede, German schwitzen. The meaning "b

 Share conserve 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/conserve Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/conserve">Etymology of conserve by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of conserve. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/conserve Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of conserve," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/conserve. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of conserve." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/conserve. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of conserve." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/conserve (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near conserve 
 conservatism 
 conservative 
 conservator 
 conservatorship 
 conservatory 
 conserve 
 consider 
 considerable 
 considerate 
 consideration 
 consign 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix