URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/trachoma
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:08:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Trachoma - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Trachoma - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of trachoma 

 trachoma (n.) 

 disease of the eyes characterized by granulation on the eyelid, 1690s, from Modern Latin trachoma , from Greek trakhoma "roughness," from trakhys "rough" (see tracheo- + -oma ). Related: Trachomatous .
 also from 1690s 

 Entries linking to trachoma 

 -oma 

 word-forming element, from Greek -oma , with -o- , lengthened stem vowel + -ma , suffix forming neuter nouns and nouns that indicate result of verbal action (equivalent of Latin -men ); especially taken in medical use as "morbid growth, tumor," based on sarcoma , carcinoma .

 tracheo- 

 before vowels trach- , word-forming element used from early 19c. in anatomy, biology, etc., "of or pertaining to the trachea, having the form of a trachea, of the trachea and," from Latinized form of Greek trakheia , as used in anatomy in reference to the windpipe (see trachea ). Greek trakheia is from trakhys "rough, uneven, stony," figuratively "severe, harsh," also used of rough voices, anger, etc., which according to Watkins is connected to the root of dark and dreg , but Beekes discounts this and says it is related to thrassein "to trouble, disturb."

 English also uses trachy- in a few words to indicate "rough."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hoedown 

 "noisy dance," 1841, Southern U.S., apparently originally the name of a specific dance, perhaps from perceived similarity of dance motions to those of farm chores, hence from hoe (n.). The step of every negro dance that was ever known, was called into requisition and admirably e

 speed 

 Middle English spede, from Old English sped "success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck, good fortune; opportunity, advancement," from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (source also of Old Saxon spod "success," Dutch spoed "haste, speed," Old High German spuot "success,"

 ambition 

 mid-14c., ambicioun, "eager or inordinate desire for honor or preferment," from Old French ambicion (13c.), or directly from Latin ambitionem (nominative ambitio) "a going around," especially to solicit votes, hence "a striving for favor, courting, flattery; a desire for honor, t

 sanction 

 1560s, "a law or decree," from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) "act of decreeing or ordaining," also "a decree, an ordinance, a law," noun of action from past-participle stem of sancire "to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred" (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecc

 algebra 

 "formal mathematics; the analysis of equations; the art of reasoning about quantitative relations by the aid of a compact and highly systematized notation," 1550s, from Medieval Latin algebra, from Arabic "al-mukhtasar fi hisab al-jabr wa al-muqabala" ("the compendium on calculat

 romanticism 

 1803, "a romantic idea," from romantic + -ism. In literature, 1823, in a French context, in reference to a movement toward medieval forms (especially in reaction to classical ones), an association now more often confined to Romanesque. The movement began in German and spread to E

 poignant 

 late 14c., poinaunt, "painful to physical or mental feeling" (of sauce, spice, wine as well as things that affect the feelings), from Old French poignant "sharp, pointed" (13c.), present participle of poindre "to prick, sting," from Latin pungere "to prick, pierce, sting," figura

 patriotism 

 "love of one's country; the passion which moves a person to serve his country, either in defending it or in protecting its rights and maintaining its laws and institutions," 1726, from patriot + -ism. The patriotic quip My country, right or wrong traces to a toast given by U.S. W

 groom 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), grome "male child, boy;" c. 1300, "a youth, young man," also "male servant, attendant, minor officer in a royal or noble household ranking higher than a page; a knight's squire." A word of unknown origin with no certain cognates in other Germanic 

 Semite 

 1847, "a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean" (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French Sémite (1845), from Modern Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem, Greek Sēm "Shem," one of the three sons of Noah (G

 Share trachoma 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/trachoma Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/trachoma">Etymology of trachoma by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of trachoma. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/trachoma Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of trachoma," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trachoma. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of trachoma." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trachoma. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of trachoma." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/trachoma (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near trachoma 
 trachelo- 
 tracheo- 
 tracheoscopy 
 tracheostomy 
 tracheotomy 
 trachoma 
 tracing 
 track 
 tracker 
 trackless 
 tract 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix