URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/node
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:24:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Node - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Node - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of node 

 node (n.) 

 early 15c., "a knot or lump," from Latin nodus "knot" (from PIE root *ned- "to bind, tie"). Originally borrowed c. 1400 in Latin form, meaning "lump in the flesh." Meaning "point of intersection" (originally in astronomy, of planetary orbits with the ecliptic) is recorded from 1660s.
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to node 

 anti-node (n.) 

 also antinode , 1872, "point of a vibrating string where the amplitude is greatest," from anti- + node . Later applied to other wave systems; at the anti-node the two waves cancel each other out.

 nodal (adj.) 

 "pertaining to a node or nodes," 1811, from node + -al (1). Nodical "of or pertaining to the nodes" is by 1839. Related: Nodality .

 *ned- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to bind, tie."

 It might form all or part of: annex ; annexation ; connect ; connection ; denouement ; net (n.) "netting, network, mesh used for capturing;" nettle ; nexus ; node ; nodule ; noose .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit nahyati "binds, ties;" Latin nodus "knot;" Old Irish nascim "I bind, oblige;" Old English net "netting, network."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 knob 

 late 14c., knobe, probably from a Scandinavian or German source (compare Middle Low German knobbe "knob," Middle Dutch cnoppe, Dutch knop, Old Frisian knopp, knapp, Old High German knopf, German Knopf "button," Old Norse knyfill "short horn"). Meaning "knoll, isolated round hill"

 client 

 late 14c., "one who lives under the patronage of another," from Anglo-French clyent (c. 1300), from Latin clientem (nominative cliens) "follower, retainer" (related to clinare "to incline, bend"), from PIE *klient-, a suffixed (active participle) form of root *klei- "to lean." Th

 guest 

 Old English gæst, giest (Anglian gest) "an accidental guest, a chance comer, a stranger," from Proto-Germanic *gastiz (source also of Old Frisian jest, Dutch gast, German Gast, Gothic gasts "guest," originally "stranger"), from PIE root *ghos-ti- "stranger, guest, host" (source a

 lymph 

 Lymph node is attested by 1874....

 pinot 

 type of grape vine used in wine-making, 1912, American English variant spelling of French pineau (attested in English from 1763), name of a family of wine grapes, from pin "pine tree" (see pine (n.)) + diminutive suffix -eau. So called from the shape of the grape clusters. Varian

 point 

 c. 1200, pointe, "minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc.," a merger of two words, both ultimately from Latin pungere "to prick, pierce," from a nasalized form of PIE root *peuk- "to prick." The Latin neuter past participle punctum was used as a noun, me

 connection 

 late 14c., conneccion, "state or fact of being connected," also connexioun (in this spelling from mid-15c.), from Old French connexion, from Latin connexionem (nominative connexio) "a binding or joining together," from *connexare, frequentative of conectere "to fasten together, t

 link 

 early 15c., "one of a series of rings or loops which form a chain; section of a cord," probably from Old Norse *hlenkr or a similar Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse hlekkr "link," in plural, "chain;" Old Swedish lænker "chain, link," Norwegian lenke "a link," Danish lænke "

 stem 

 [main body of a tree] Middle English stemme, from Old English stemn, stefn "trunk of a tree or shrub," the part which rises from the ground and supports the branches; also "either end-post of a ship;" from Proto-Germanic *stamniz (source also of Old Saxon stamm, Old Norse stafn "

 computer 

 1640s, "one who calculates, a reckoner, one whose occupation is to make arithmetical calculations," agent noun from compute (v.). Meaning "calculating machine" (of any type) is from 1897; in modern use, "programmable digital electronic device for performing mathematical or logica

 Share node 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/node Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/node">Etymology of node by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of node. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/node Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of node," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/node. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of node." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/node. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of node." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/node (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near node 
 nocturnal 
 nocturne 
 nocuous 
 nod 
 nodal 
 node 
 nodular 
 nodule 
 Noel 
 noematic 
 noesis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix