URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gibbon
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T15:31:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gibbon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gibbon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gibbon 

 gibbon (n.) 

 long-armed ape of the East Indies, 1770, from French gibbon (18c.), supposedly from a word in the French colonies of India but not found in any language there. Brought to Europe by Marquis Joseph-François Dupleix (1697-1763), French governor general in India 1742-54. The surname is Old French Giboin , from Frankish *Geba-win "gift-friend," or in some cases a diminutive of Gibb , itself a familiar form of Gilbert .
 also from 1770 

 Entries linking to gibbon 

 Gilbert 

 masc. proper name, from Old French Guillebert (from Old High German Williberht , literally "a bright will") or Old French Gilebert , from Gisilbert , literally "a bright pledge," from Old High German gisil "pledge," a Celtic loan-word (compare Old Irish giall "pledge") + beorht "bright" (from PIE root *bhereg- "to shine; bright, white."). It was the common name for a male cat (especially in short form Gib ) from c. 1400 (see Tom ). As a unit of magneto-motive force, it honors English physicist William Gilbert (1544-1603). For the Gilbert Islands , see Kiribati .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 polytheism 

 [Gibbon]...

 ring 

 [circular band] Old English hring "circlet of metal, especially one of a precious metal for wearing on the finger ornamentally, also a part of a mail coat; anything circular," from Proto-Germanic *hringaz "something curved, circle" (source also of Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hr

 cringe 

 1570s, "to bend or crouch, especially with servility or fear," variant of crenge, crenche "to bend" (c. 1200), from causative of Old English cringan "yield, give way, fall (in battle); become bent," from Proto-Germanic *krank- "bend, curl up" (source also of Old Norse kringr, Dut

 attitude 

 1660s, "posture or position of a figure in a statue or painting," via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine "disposition, posture," also "aptness, promptitude," from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo; see aptitude, which is its doublet). Originally 17c. a tech

 tolerance 

 early 15c., "endurance, fortitude" (in the face of pain, hardship, etc.), from Old French tolerance (14c.), from Latin tolerantia "a bearing, supporting, endurance," from tolerans, present participle of tolerare "to bear, endure, tolerate" (see toleration). Of individuals, with t

 aloof 

 1530s, "to windward," from a- (1) "on" + Middle English loof "windward direction," which is probably from Dutch loef (Middle Dutch lof) "the weather side of a ship" (see luff (n.)). Originally in nautical orders to keep the ship's head to the wind, and thus stay clear of a lee-sh

 interview 

 1510s, "face-to-face meeting, formal conference," from French entrevue, verbal noun from s'entrevoir "to see each other, visit each other briefly, have a glimpse of," from entre- "between" (see inter-) + Old French voir "to see" (from Latin videre, from PIE root *weid- "to see").

 precarious 

 1640s, a legal word, "held through the favor of another," from Latin precarius "depending on favor, pertaining to entreaty, obtained by asking or praying," from prex (genitive precis) "entreaty, prayer" (from PIE root *prek- "to ask, entreat"). The notion of "dependent on the wil

 defenestration 

 1620, "the action of throwing out of a window," from Latin fenestra "window." A word invented for one incident: the "Defenestration of Prague," May 21, 1618, when two Catholic deputies to the Bohemian national assembly and a secretary were tossed out the window of the castle of H

 keep 

 Middle English kēpen, from late Old English cepan (past tense cepte) "to seize, hold; seek after, desire," also "to observe or carry out in practice; look out for, regard, pay attention to," from Proto-Germanic *kopjan, which is of uncertain origin. Old English cepan was used c. 

 Share gibbon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gibbon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gibbon">Etymology of gibbon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gibbon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gibbon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gibbon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gibbon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gibbon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gibbon. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gibbon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gibbon (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gibbon 
 giaour 
 Gib 
 gibber 
 gibberish 
 gibbet 
 gibbon 
 gibbous 
 gibe 
 giblet 
 giblets 
 Gibraltar 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix