URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tar
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:56:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tar 

 tar (n.1) 

 type of thick, viscous, dark-colored liquid used as a salve (for sheep), caulking agent (for ships), and incendiary material, Middle English tēr , from Old English teoru , teru "tar, bitumen, resin, gum," literally "the pitch of (certain kinds of) trees," from Proto-Germanic *terw- (source also of Old Norse tjara , Old Frisian tera , Middle Dutch tar , Dutch teer , German Teer ).

 According to Watkins this is probably a derivation of *trewo- , from PIE *derw- , a variant of the root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with specialized senses "wood, tree" and derivatives referring to objects made of wood.

 Tar baby "a sticky problem" (American English) was popularized by a Joel Chandler Harris "Uncle Remus" story (1881), but the story and the idea are older in Black folklore (the dialect story was printed earlier as part of "Bushy and Jack" in Harper's Monthly Magazine, May, 1867, attributed to Mary Hose). It is attested by 1948 as a derogatory term for "Black person."

 To beat (or knock ) the tar out of someone is attested by 1884; the tar is perhaps euphemistic.

 tar (n.2) 

 also Jack Tar , "sailor," 1670s, probably a special use of tar (n.1), which stuff was a staple for waterproofing aboard old ships ( knights of the tarbrush being a jocular phrase for "sailors"); or possibly a shortened form of tarpaulin , which was recorded as a nickname for a sailor in 1640s, from the tarpaulin garments they wore.
 also from 1670s 

 tar (v.) 

 Middle English terren , from late Old English tirwan , "to smear with tar," from tar (n.1).

 To tar and feather (1769) was famously a mob action in America in Revolutionary times (used by both sides) and for several decades thereafter. The punishment is prescribed in an ordinance of Richard I (1189), but the exact verbal phrase is not attested until 18c. Related: Tarred ; tarring .

 Entries linking to tar 

 tarpaulin (n.) 

 "waterproof canvas," c. 1600, evidently a hybrid from tar (n.1) + palling , from pall "heavy cloth covering" (see pall (n.)); probably so called because the canvas sometimes is coated in tar to make it waterproof, but this is conjecture. Originally tarpawlin , tarpawling , etc., the spelling settled down early 18c.

 coal-tar (n.) 

 "thick, black, viscid liquid left by the distillation of gas from coal," 1785, from coal (n.) + tar (n.).

 tar-brush 
 Tarheel 
 tarmac 
 tarry 
 tar-water 
 *deru- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tar-brush 

 also tarbrush, "brush with which tar is applied," 1711, from tar (n.1) + brush (n.1). To have a touch of the tar-brush "have a dash of African ancestry visible in the skin tone" (1796, Grose) was "a term of contempt from the West Indies" [Century Dictionary]. To be tarred with th

 tarry 

 early 14c., tarien, "to delay in acting, procrastinate, retard" (transitive, a sense now obsolete), a word of uncertain origin. Some sources suggest a connection to Latin tardare "to delay." Others suggest some connection to the formally identical Middle English tarien "excite wr

 pitch 

 "thick, tenacious, resinous substance obtained from tar or turpentine, wood tar," late 12c., pich, piche, from Old English pic "pitch," from a Germanic borrowing (compare Old Saxon and Old Frisian pik, Middle Dutch pik, Dutch pek, Old High German pek, German Pech, Old Norse bik) 

 there 

 Middle Low German dar, Middle Dutch daer, Dutch daar, Old High German dar, German da, Gothic þar, Old Norse þar), from PIE *tar...- "there" (source also of Sanskrit tar-hi "then"), from root *to- (see the) + adverbial suffix -r....

 tear 

 distilled in drops," from earlier teahor, tæhher, from Proto-Germanic *tahr-, *tagr- (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian tar...

 creosote 

 substance prepared from wood-tar, 1835, from German Kreosot, coined 1832 by its discoverer, German-born natural philosopher...

 Dakota 

 Recorded by Lewis and Clark (1804) as Dar co tar; in western dialects of the Teton subgroup, Lakota, Lakhota; in Assiniboine...

 bog 

 "wet, soft, spongy ground with soil chiefly composed of decaying vegetable matter," c. 1500, from Gaelic and Irish bogach "bog," from adjective bog "soft, moist," from Proto-Celtic *buggo- "flexible" (from PIE root *bheug- "to bend"). A bog is characterized by vegetation, decaye

 surface 

 1610s, "the bounding or limiting parts of a body," from French surface "an outermost boundary, outside part" (16c.), from Old French sur- "above" (see sur-) + face (see face (n.)). The French words is patterned on Latin superficies "surface, upper side, top" (see superficial). Th

 officer 

 early 14c., "one who holds an official post, one entrusted with a responsibility or share of the management of some undertaking" (originally a high office), from Old French oficier "officer, official" (early 14c., Modern French officier), from Medieval Latin officiarius "an offic

 Share tar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tar">Etymology of tar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tar. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tar (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tar 
 taproom 
 taproot 
 taps 
 tapster 
 taquito 
 tar 
 tarantella 
 tarantula 
 tar-brush 
 tardation 
 tardigrade 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix