URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/android
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:35:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Android - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Android - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of android 

 android (n.) 

 "automaton resembling a human being in form and movement," 1837, in early use often in reference to automated chess players, from Modern Latin androides (itself attested as a Latin word in English from 1727), from Greek andro- "man" (from PIE root *ner- (2) "man") + -eides "form, shape" (see -oid ). Greek androdes meant "like a man, manly;" compare also Greek andrias "image of a man, statue." Listed as "rare" in OED 1st edition (1879), popularized from c. 1950 by science fiction writers.
 also from 1837 

 Entries linking to android 

 droid (n.) 

 popularized from 1977, short for android . It is attested in a science fiction story from 1952.

 *ner- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "man," also "vigorous, vital, strong."

 It might form all or part of: Alexander ; Andrew ; andro- ; androgynous ; android ; Andromache ; Andromeda ; andron ; anthropo- ; anthropocentric ; anthropology ; anthropomorphous ; Leander ; lycanthropy ; Lysander ; misanthrope ; pachysandra ; philander ; philanthropy ; polyandria ; polyandrous .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit nar- , Armenian ayr , Welsh ner "a man;" Greek aner (genitive andros ) "a man, a male" (as opposed to a woman, a youth, or a god).

 -oid 

 word-forming element meaning "like, like that of, thing like a ______," from Latinized form of Greek -oeidēs (three syllables), from eidos "form," related to idein "to see," eidenai "to know;" literally "to see" (from PIE *weid-es- , from root *weid- "to see"). The -o- is connective or a stem vowel from the previous element. Often implying an incomplete or imperfect resemblance to the thing indicated.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 automaton 

 1610s, "a self-acting machine;" 1670s, "a living being acting mechanically," from Latin automaton (Suetonius), from noun use of Greek automaton, neuter of automatos "self-acting," from autos "self" (see auto-) + matos "thinking, animated, willing" (from PIE *mn-to-, from root *me

 robot 

 1923, "mechanical person," also "person whose work or activities are entirely mechanical," from the English translation of the 1920 play "R.U.R." ("Rossum's Universal Robots") by Karel Capek (1890-1938), from Czech robotnik "forced worker," from robota "forced labor, compulsory s

 mechanical 

 early 15c., "of or pertaining to tools and their use," from mechanic (adj.) + -al (1). Cockeram's "English Dictionarie" (1623) still explains Mechanicall as "Of, or belonging to a Crafts-man." By 1570s as "of or pertaining to machines and their use." Of persons or human actions, 

 man 

 "a featherless plantigrade biped mammal of the genus Homo" [Century Dictionary], Old English man, mann "human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero;" also "servant, vassal, adult male considered as under the control of another person," from Proto-Germanic *mann- (source

 restroom 

 also rest room, rest-room, 1887, "room set aside for rest and quiet" (in a workplace, public building, etc.); see rest (n.1) + room (n.). As these often later had (or were required to have) accessory toilet-rooms, by 1930s the word came to be a euphemism for "lavatory, toilet." 

 perspective 

 late 14c., perspectif, "the science of optics," from Old French perspective and directly from Medieval Latin perspectiva ars "science of optics," from fem. of perspectivus "of sight, optical" from Latin perspectus "clearly perceived," past participle of perspicere "inspect, look 

 bruise 

 Old English brysan "to crush, pound, injure by a blow which discolors the skin," from Proto-Germanic *brusjan, from PIE root *bhreu- "to smash, cut, break up" (source also of Old Irish bronnaim "I wrong, I hurt;" Breton brezel "war," Vulgar Latin *brisare "to break"). It merged b

 manna 

 Old English borrowing from Late Latin manna, from Greek manna, from Hebrew mān, probably literally "substance exuded by the tamarisk tree," but used in Greek and Latin specifically with reference to the substance miraculously supplied to the Children of Israel during their wander

 reprimand 

 "severe reproof (especially one given by a magistrate or authority) for a fault," 1630s, from French réprimande (16c.), earlier reprimende "reproof," from Latin reprimenda "that is to be repressed" (as in reprimenda culpa "fault to be checked," reprimenda res "thing that ought to

 stigma 

 1590s (earlier stigme, c. 1400), "mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron," from Latin stigma (plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) "mark of a pointed instrument, puncture, tattoo-mark, brand," which is related to stizein "to mark, tattoo" (from PIE root 

 Share android 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/android Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/android">Etymology of android by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of android. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/android Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of android," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/android. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of android." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/android. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of android." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/android (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near android 
 androcracy 
 androgen 
 androgyne 
 androgynous 
 androgyny 
 android 
 Andromache 
 Andromeda 
 andron 
 androphagous 
 androphobia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix