URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nibble
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:41:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nibble - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nibble - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nibble 

 nibble (v.) 

 "to bite gently; eat by gnawing off small bits," c. 1500, not found in Middle English; perhaps from Low German nibbeln "to nibble, gnaw," related to Middle Low German nibbelen , Middle Dutch knibbelen "to gnaw," source of Dutch knibbelen "to cavil, squabble." Related: Nibbled ; nibbling .
 also from c. 1500 

 nibble (n.) 

 1650s, "act of nibbling," from nibble (v.). As "a small bite, a morsel" from 1838.
 also from 1650s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pick 

 early 13c., picken "to peck;" c. 1300, piken "to work with a pick, to dig up," probably representing a fusion of Old English *pician "to prick," (implied by picung "a piercing, pricking," an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata) with Old Norse pikka "to prick, peck," both from a Germanic 

 piece 

 c. 1200, pece, "fixed amount, measure, portion;" c. 1300, "fragment of an object, bit of a whole, slice of meat; separate fragment, section, or part," from Old French piece "piece, bit portion; item; coin" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *pettia, probably from Gaulish *pettsi (compare 

 natter 

 "to nibble away," probably of echoic origin. Related: Nattered; nattering. As a noun, 1866, from the verb....

 eat 

 Middle English eten, from Old English etan (class V strong verb; past tense æt, past participle eten) "consume food; devour, consume," from Proto-Germanic *etan (source also of Old Frisian ita, Old Saxon etan, Middle Dutch eten, Dutch eten, Old High German ezzan, German essen, Ol

 tea 

 1650s, tay, also in early spellings thea, tey, tee and at first pronounced so as to rhyme with obey; the modern pronunciation predominates from mid-18c. But earlier in English as chaa (1590s), also cha, tcha, chia, cia. The two forms of the word reflect two paths of transmission:

 bite 

 Old English bitan "to pierce or cut with the teeth" (class I strong verb; past tense bat, past participle biten), from Proto-Germanic *beitanan (source also of Old Saxon bitan, Old Norse and Old Frisian bita "cut, pierce, penetrate," Middle Dutch biten, Dutch bijten, German beiss

 invention 

 early 15c., invencioun, "finding or discovering of something," from Old French invencion (13c.) and directly from Latin inventionem (nominative inventio) "faculty of invention," noun of action from past-participle stem of invenire "to come upon, find; find out; invent, discover, 

 abyss 

 late 14c. in Latin form abyssus, "depths of the earth or sea; primordial chaos;" early 14c. as abime "depths of the earth or sea; bottomless pit, Hell" (via Old French; see abysm). Both are from Late Latin abyssus "bottomless pit," from Greek abyssos (limnē) "bottomless (pool)," 

 distress 

 late 13c., "circumstance that causes anxiety or hardship," from Old French destresse (Modern French détresse), from Vulgar Latin *districtia "restraint, affliction, narrowness, distress," from Latin districtus, past participle of distringere "draw apart, hinder," also, in Medieva

 school 

 [place of instruction] Middle English scole, from Old English scol, "institution for instruction," from Latin schola "meeting place for teachers and students, place of instruction;" also "learned conversation, debate; lecture; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect," als

 Share nibble 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nibble Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nibble">Etymology of nibble by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nibble. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nibble Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nibble," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nibble. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nibble." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nibble. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nibble." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nibble (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nibble 
 nexus 
 Nez Perce 
 niacin 
 Niagara 
 nib 
 nibble 
 Nibelungenlied 
 niblick 
 nibs 
 Nicaragua 
 nice 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix