URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Allah
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Allah - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Allah - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Allah 

 Allah 

 Arabic name for the Supreme Being, 1702, Alha , from Arabic Allah , contraction of al-Ilah , literally "the God," from al "the" + Ilah "God," which is cognate with Aramaic elah , Hebrew eloah (see Elohim ).
 also from 1702 

 Entries linking to Allah 

 Elohim 

 a name of God in the Bible, c. 1600, from Hebrew, plural (of majesty?) of Eloh "God" (cognate with Allah ), a word of unknown etymology, perhaps an augmentation of El "God," also of unknown origin. Generally taken as singular, the use of this word instead of Yahveh is taken by biblical scholars as an important clue to authorship in the Old Testament, hence Elohist (1830; Elohistic is from 1841), title of the supposed writer of passages of the Pentateuch where the word is used.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kismet 

 Allah kehrim!' (God hath willed it! God is great!) [Dr. James O....

 Hezbollah 

 Lebanon, founded c. 1982, from Persian hezbollah, Arabic hizbullah, literally "Party of God," from hezb/hizb "party" + allah...

 algebra 

 "formal mathematics; the analysis of equations; the art of reasoning about quantitative relations by the aid of a compact and highly systematized notation," 1550s, from Medieval Latin algebra, from Arabic "al-mukhtasar fi hisab al-jabr wa al-muqabala" ("the compendium on calculat

 Jupiter 

 also Juppiter, c. 1200, "supreme deity of the ancient Romans," from Latin Iupeter, Iupiter, Iuppiter, "Jove, god of the sky and chief of the gods," from PIE *dyeu-peter- "god-father" (originally vocative, "the name naturally occurring most frequently in invocations" [Tucker]), fr

 Russia 

 nation in Eastern Europe with a large possession in north Asia, 1530s, from Medieval Latin Russi "the people of Russia," from Rus, the native name of the people and the country (source of Arabic Rus, Medieval Greek Rhos), originally the name of a group of Swedish merchant/warrior

 ease 

 c. 1200, "physical comfort, undisturbed state of the body; tranquility, peace of mind," from Old French aise "comfort, pleasure, well-being; opportunity," which is of uncertain origin. According to Watkins is ultimately from Latin adiacens "lying at," present participle of adiace

 integrate 

 1630s, "to render (something) whole, bring together the parts of," from Latin integratus, past participle of integrare "make whole," from integer "whole, complete," figuratively, "untainted, upright," literally "untouched," from in- "not" (see in- (1)) + root of tangere "to touch

 prompt 

 mid-14c., prompten, "to incite to action, urge," from the adjective or from Latin promptus, past participle of promere "to bring forth," from pro "forward" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward") + emere "to take" (from PIE root *em- "to take, distribute"). The meaning "coach (someon

 compromise 

 early 15c., "a joint promise to abide by an arbiter's decision," from Old French compromis (13c.), from Late Latin compromissus, past participle of compromittere "to make a mutual promise" (to abide by the arbiter's decision), from com "with, together" (see com-) + promittere "to

 abound 

 "be in great plenty," early 14c., from Old French abonder "to abound, be abundant, come together in great numbers" (12c.), from Latin abundare "overflow, run over," from Latin ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + undare "rise in a wave," from unda "a wave" (from PIE *unda-, nasalized 

 Share Allah 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Allah Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Allah">Etymology of Allah by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Allah. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Allah Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Allah," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Allah. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Allah." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Allah. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Allah." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Allah (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Allah 
 alkalize 
 alkaloid 
 alkanet 
 alky 
 all 
 Allah 
 all-American 
 allative 
 allay 
 allegation 
 allege 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix