URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/scandal
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:05:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Scandal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Scandal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of scandal 

 scandal (n.) 

 1580s, "damage to one's reputation," from French scandale , from Late Latin scandalum "cause for offense, stumbling block, temptation," from Greek skandalon "a stumbling block, offense; a trap or snare laid for an enemy."

 The Greek noun in this form seems to be attested first in Septuagint (25 times) and the Greek New Testament (15 times) as "cause of moral stumblings," translating a Hebrew word meaning "a noose, a snare."

 The Biblical use is presumably figurative or metaphoric, and OED (1989) and others conclude that it is "certainly an old word meaning 'trap' " or a variant of one. Presumably, then, originally "trap with a springing device" (compare related skandalē "stick of a trap," the trigger which is pulled by the cord to spring it), if it is from PIE *skand- "to leap, climb" (see scale (v.1)), as is proposed in Watkins (Beekes is skeptical); also see slander (n.), which is another form of the same word.

 The word is used in "Ancrene Riwle" (c. 1200), scandle , "discredit to religion resulting from bad behavior by a religious person," from Old French escandle , eschandle (12c.); Anglo-French scandle , and Latin scandalum . But the modern word likely is a new borrowing. Cockeram (English Dictionarie, 1623) describes it as "An offence which causeth one to take offence."

 The meanings "malicious gossip" and "shameful condition, action, or event; that which causes scandal" are from 1590s; the sense of "person whose conduct is a disgrace" is by 1630s. Scandal sheet "sensational newspaper" is by 1884. Scandal-monger is from 1702.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to scandal 

 scale (v.1) 

 "to climb (a wall) by or as by a ladder; attack with scaling ladders," late 14c., scalen , from Latin scala "ladder, flight of stairs," from *scansla , from stem of scandere "to climb, rise, mount," which is reconstructed to be from PIE  *skand-  "to spring, leap, climb" (source also of Sanskrit skandati "hastens, leaps, jumps;" Greek skandalon "stumbling block;" Middle Irish sescaind "he sprang, jumped," sceinm "a bound, jump").

 Middle English scale (n.) "ladder used in sieges," is attested c. 1400, from the Latin noun. The verb in general and figurative use (of mountains, heights of pleasure, etc.) is attested by 16c. Related: Scaled ; scaling .

 slander (n.) 

 late 13c., sclaundre , "state of impaired reputation; disgrace or dishonor;" c. 1300, "a false tale or report spread maliciously; the fabrication and dissemination of false tales to discredit someone," from Anglo-French esclaundre , Old French esclandre "scandalous statement," alteration ("with interloping l " [Century Dictionary]) of escandle , escandre "scandal," from Latin scandalum "cause of offense, stumbling block, temptation" (see scandal ).

 It is attested from mid-14c. as "action or situation that brings shame or disgrace;" late 14c. as "a bad situation, evil action" and in reference to a person causing such a state of affairs.

 The injury [slander] consists in falsely and maliciously charging another with the commission of some public offense criminal in itself, and indictable, and subjecting the party to an infamous punishment, or involving moral turpitude, or the breach of some public trust, or with any matter in relation to his particular trade or vocation, and which, if true, would render him unworthy of employment ; or, lastly, with any other matter or thing by which special injury is sustained. [James Kent, "Commentaries on American Law," 1844]

 scandalize 
 scandalous 
 stumble 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scandalize 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "make a public scandal of" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French scandaliser (12c.), from Church Latin scandalizare, from late Greek skandalizein "make to stumble; tempt; give offense to (someone)," from skandalon (see scandal). The sense of "shock by doing 

 stumble 

 c. 1300, stomblen, "to trip or miss one's footing" (physically or morally), probably from Old Norse (compare dialectal Norwegian stumla, Swedish stambla "to stumble"), and probably from a variant of Proto-Germanic *stam-, source of Old English stamerian "to stammer," German stumm

 outrage 

 c. 1300, "evil deed, offense, crime; affront, indignity, act not within established or reasonable limits," of food, drink, dress, speech, etc., from Old French outrage "harm, damage; insult; criminal behavior; presumption, insolence, overweening" (12c.), earlier oltrage (11c.), f

 defamatory 

 diffamatorius "tending to defame," from diffamat-, past-participle stem of diffamare "to spread abroad by ill report, make a scandal...

 susurrus 

 equally liable; and another variety of the same tribe, more frequent among female patients, called the Susurrus criticus, or Scandal-buzz...

 launder 

 Watergate scandal, 1973. Related: Laundered; laundering....

 defamation 

 (nominative diffamatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of diffamare "to spread abroad by ill report, make a scandal...

 comment 

 late 14c., "explanation, spoken or written remark," from Old French coment "commentary" or directly from Late Latin commentum "comment, interpretation," in classical Latin "invention, fabrication, fiction," neuter past participle of comminisci "to contrive, devise," from com-, he

 gossip 

 Old English godsibb "sponsor, godparent," from God + sibb "relative" (see sibling). The sense was extended in Middle English to "a familiar acquaintance, a friend, neighbor" (c. 1300), especially to women friends invited to attend a birth, later to "anyone engaging in familiar or

 skeleton 

 "the dry bones of a body taken together," 1570s, from Modern Latin sceleton "bones, bony framework of the body," from Greek skeleton soma "dried-up body, mummy, skeleton," from neuter of skeletos "dried-up" (also, as a noun, "dried body, mummy"), from skellein "dry up, make dry, 

 Share scandal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/scandal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/scandal">Etymology of scandal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of scandal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/scandal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of scandal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scandal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of scandal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scandal. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of scandal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/scandal (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near scandal 
 scam 
 scamp 
 scamper 
 scampi 
 scan 
 scandal 
 scandalise 
 scandalize 
 scandalous 
 Scandinavia 
 Scandinavian 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix