URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/evening
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T22:54:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Evening - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Evening - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of evening 

 evening (n.) 

 from Old English æfnung "the coming of evening, sunset, time around sunset," verbal noun from æfnian "become evening, grow toward evening," from æfen "evening" (see eve ). As a synonym of even (n.) in the sense "time from sunset to bedtime," it dates from mid-15c. and now entirely replaces the older word in this sense. Another Old English noun for "evening" was cwildtid .

 Entries linking to evening 

 eve (n.) 

 c. 1200, eve "evening," especially the time between sunset and darkness, from Old English æfen , with loss of terminal -n (which, though forming part of the stem, perhaps was mistaken for an inflection), from Proto-Germanic *æbando- (source also of Old Saxon aband , Old Frisian ewnd , Dutch avond , Old High German aband , German Abend , Old Norse aptann , Danish aften ), which is of uncertain origin. Now superseded in its original sense by evening .

 Specific meaning "day before a saint's day or festival" is from late 13c. Transferred sense of "the moment right before any event, etc." is by 1780. Even (n.), evening keep the original form.

 even (n.) 

 "end of the day," Old English æfen , Mercian efen , Northumbrian efern (see eve (n.)).

 morning (n.) 

 "first part of the day" (technically from midnight to noon), late 14c., a contraction of mid-13c. morwenynge, moregeninge , from morn, morewen (see morn ) + suffix -ing , on pattern of evening . Originally the time just before sunrise.

 As an adjective from 1530s; as a greeting by 1849, short for good morning . Morning after in reference to a hangover is from 1884; in reference to a type of contraception, attested by 1967. Morning sickness as a symptom of pregnancy is from 1793 (Old English had morgenwlætung ). Morning glory , the twining plant, is from 1814, so called because the colorful trumpet-shaped flowers open only in the early morning. Morning star "Venus in the east before sunrise" is from 1530s (Old English had morgensteorra "morn-star").

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 vesper 

 late 14c., "the evening star," from Old French vespre "evening, nightfall" (12c., Modern French vêpre), from Latin vesper..."evening star, evening, west," related to Greek hesperos, and ultimately from PIE *uekero- "evening, night" (source also...Meaning "evening" is attested from c. 1600....Vespers "sixth canonical hour" is attested from 1610s, from plural of Latin vespera "evening;" the native name was evensong...

 soiree 

 "evening party," 1793, a French word in English, from French soirée, from soir "evening," Old French soir "evening, night...neuter of serus "late," from PIE *se-ro-, suffixed form of root *se- (2) "long, late" (source also of Sanskrit sayam "in the evening...

 supper 

 mid-13c., soper, "the last meal of the day," from Old French soper "evening meal," noun use of infinitive soper "to eat the...evening meal," which is of Germanic origin (see sup (v.1))....the last substantial meal of the day when dinner is taken in the middle of the day, or to a late meal following an early evening...

 gloaming 

 Old English glomung "twilight, the fall of evening," found but once (glossing Latin crepusculum), and formed (probably on...model of æfning "evening") from glom "twilight," which is related to glowan "to glow" (hence "glow of sunrise or sunset"...

 serotine 

 occurrence or development," 1590s, from French sérotine, from Latin serotinus "that which comes late; that which happens in the evening...Related: serotinous, 1880, in botany, "appearing later in the season than usual" (Blount, 1656, has it as "that is in the evening...

 serenade 

 especially "one given by a lover under the window of his lady" [OED]), from French sérénade (16c.), from Italian serenata "an evening...The sense was influenced by Italian sera "evening" (from Latin sera, fem. of serus "late")....

 west 

 Perhaps from PIE *wes-, reduced form of *wes-pero- "evening, night" (source also of Greek hesperos, Latin vesper "evening...Compare also High German dialectal abend "west," literally "evening." French ouest, Spanish oeste are from English....

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 sunset 

 "apparent descent of the sun below the horizon in evening," late 14c., from sun (n.) + set (v.). Perhaps a shortening of sun-setting, or perhaps taken from a Middle English subjunctive such as before the sun set. Old English had sunnansetlgong "sunset," while sunset meant "west."

 modify 

 late 14c., modifien, "alter, amend, adjust, change the properties, form, or function of;" also "set limits, keep within the bounds of reason; choose a middle course," from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare "to limit, measure off, restrain," from modus "measure, ma

 Share evening 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/evening Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/evening">Etymology of evening by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of evening. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/evening Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of evening," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/evening. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of evening." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/evening. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of evening." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/evening (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near evening 
 eve 
 evection 
 Evelyn 
 even 
 even-handed 
 evening 
 evenly 
 evenness 
 evensong 
 event 
 eventful 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix