URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mediterranean
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:02:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mediterranean - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Mediterranean - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Mediterranean 

 Mediterranean 

 "the sea between southern Europe and northern Africa," 1590s, earlier Mediterranie (c. 1400), from Late Latin Mediterraneum mare "Mediterranean Sea" (7c.), from Latin mediterraneus "midland, surrounded by land, in the midst of an expanse of land" (but in reference to the body of water between Europe and African the sense probably was "the sea in the middle of the earth"); from medius "middle" (from PIE root *medhyo- "middle") + terra "land, earth" (from PIE root *ters- "to dry").

 The Old English name was Wendel-sæ , so called for the Vandals , Germanic tribe that settled on the southwest coast of it after the fall of Rome. The noun meaning "a person of Mediterranean race" is by 1888.
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to Mediterranean 

 med (n.) 

 by 1851 as a shortening of medic . As a colloquial shortening of medicine , by 1942. With a capital M and short for Mediterranean , by 1948. Meds as a shortening of medications is attested in hospital jargon by 1965.

 *medhyo- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "middle." Perhaps related to PIE root *me- (2) "to measure."

 It might form all or part of: amid ; intermediate ; mean (adj.2) "occupying a middle or intermediate place;" medal ; medial ; median ; mediate ; medieval ; mediocre ; Mediterranean ; medium ; meridian ; mesic ; mesial ; meso- ; meson ; Mesopotamia ; Mesozoic ; mezzanine ; mezzo ; mezzotint ; mid (prep., adj.); middle ; Midgard ; midriff ; midst ; midwife ; milieu ; minge ; mizzen ; moiety ; mullion .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit madhyah , Avestan madiya- "middle," Greek mesos , Latin medius "in the middle, between; from the middle," Gothic midjis , Old English midd "middle," Old Church Slavonic medzu "between," Armenian mej "middle."

 *ters- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to dry."

 It might form all or part of: inter ; Mediterranean ; metatarsal ; parterre ; subterranean ; tarsal ; tarsus ; Tartuffe ; terra ; terrace ; terra-cotta ; terrain ; terran ; terraqueous ; terrarium ; terrene ; terrestrial ; terrier ; territory ; thirst ; toast ; torrent ; torrid ; turmeric ; tureen .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit tarsayati "dries up;" Avestan tarshu- "dry, solid;" Greek teresesthai "to become or be dry," tersainein "to make dry;" Latin torrere "dry up, parch," terra "earth, land;" Gothic þaursus "dry, barren," Old High German thurri , German dürr , Old English þyrre "dry;" Old English þurstig "thirsty."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Elmo 

 tips of masts and yard-arms, especially in storms, 1560s, from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of Mediterranean...Erasmus, an Italian bishop said to have been martyred in 303 who was invoked in the Mediterranean by sailors during storms...

 maquis 

 "dense scrub or brushwood in a Mediterranean land," 1858, from French maquis "undergrowth, shrub," especially in reference...to the dense scrub of certain Mediterranean coastal regions, long the haunts of outlaws and fugitives, from Corsican Italian...

 rue 

 perennial evergreen shrub, native to the Mediterranean and western Asia, used in cooking and highly esteemed in the Middle...pēganon, itself probably a Pre-Greek word, and some consider Latin ruta and Greek rhytē rather as common borrowings from a Mediterranean...

 Riviera 

 1630s, "Mediterranean seacoast around Genoa," from Italian riviera, literally "bank, shore" (see river)....

 parsley 

 biennial garden-herb, originally from the eastern Mediterranean; its aromatic leaves are used for flavoring and as a garnish...

 mint 

 Greek minthē, personified as a nymph transformed into an herb by Proserpine, which is probably a loan-word from a lost Mediterranean...

 oleander 

 "rose bay," a poisonous evergreen Mediterranean shrub, late 14c., oleaster, from Medieval Latin oleander, a word of uncertain...

 Sardinia 

 large island west of Italy, Latin, from Greek Sardō, Sardōn; perhaps named for the local Iberian people who had settled there; the original form and meaning of the name is lost. A Punic (Phoenician) stelle from 7c. B.C.E. refers to it as Shardan. The oblique cases in Greek are so

 Corsica 

 island in the Mediterranean north of Sardinia, a part of France since 1769, Latin, from Greek Korsis, which is of unknown origin. Renowned in ancient times for the honey and wax of wild bees. Corsican is from 1738 as an adjective; 1748 as a noun "native or inhabitant of Corsica."

 score 

 late Old English scoru "twenty," from Old Norse skor "mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock," also, in Icelandic, "twenty," from Proto-Germanic *skur-, from PIE root *sker- (1) "to cut." The notion probably is of counting large numbers (of a passing flock of sheep, etc.) by makin

 Share Mediterranean 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mediterranean Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mediterranean">Etymology of Mediterranean by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Mediterranean. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mediterranean Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Mediterranean," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mediterranean. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Mediterranean." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mediterranean. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Mediterranean." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Mediterranean (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Mediterranean 
 mediocritize 
 mediocrity 
 meditate 
 meditation 
 meditative 
 Mediterranean 
 medium 
 medlar 
 medley 
 medulla 
 medusa 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix