URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bombast
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:46:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bombast - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bombast - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bombast 

 bombast (n.) 

 1570s, "cotton padding," corrupted from earlier bombace "raw cotton" (1550s), from Old French bombace "cotton, cotton wadding," from Late Latin bombacem , accusative of bombax "cotton, 'linteorum aut aliae quaevis quisquiliae,' " a corruption and transferred use of Latin bombyx "silk," from Greek bombyx "silk, silkworm" (which also came to mean "cotton" in Medieval Greek), from some oriental word, perhaps related to Iranian pambak (modern panba ) or Armenian bambok , perhaps ultimately from a PIE root meaning "to twist, wind."

 Also from the same source are Swedish bomull , Danish bomuld "cotton," and, via Turkish forms, Modern Greek mpampaki , Rumanian bumbac , Serbo-Croatian pamuk . German baumwolle "cotton" probably is from the Latin word but altered by folk-etymology to look like "tree wool." Polish bawełna , Lithuanian bovelna are partial translations from German.

 From stuffing and padding for clothes or upholstery, meaning extended to "pompous, empty speech" (1580s).

 Bombast was originally applied to a stuff of soft, loose texture, once used to swell the garment. Fustian was also a kind of cloth of stiff expansive character. These terms are applied to a high, swelling style of writing, full of extravagant sentiments and expressions. Bathos is a word which has the same application, meaning generally the mock heroic—that "depth" into which one falls who overleaps the sublime; the step which one makes in order to pass from the sublime to the ridiculous. [James de Mille, "Elements of Rhetoric," 1878]
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to bombast 

 bombastic (adj.) 

 1704, "inflated," from bombast + -ic . The meaning "given to bombastic language, characterized by bombast" is from 1727. Related: Bombastical (1640s).

 bombazine (n.) 

 (also bombasine , bambazine ), 1550s, "raw cotton;" 1570s, "twilled or corded dress material woven of silk and wool, always inexpensive and of the same color," from French bombasin (14c.) "cotton cloth," from Medieval Latin bombacinium "silk texture," from Late Latin bombycinium , neuter of bombycinius "silken," from bombyx "silk, silkworm," from Greek bombyx (see bombast ). The post-classical transfer of the word from "silk" to "cotton" may reflect the perceived "silk-like" nature of the fabric, or a waning of familiarity with genuine silk in the European Dark Ages, but compare bombast .

 bombyx (n.) 

 "the silkworm," late 14c., from Latin, from Greek (see bombast ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fustian 

 "thick cotton cloth," c. 1200, from Old French fustaigne, fustagne (12c., Modern French futaine), from Medieval Latin fustaneum, perhaps from Latin fustis "staff, stick of wood; cudgel, club" (see fustigate) as a loan-translation of Greek xylina lina "linens of wood" (i.e. "cotto

 rant 

 c. 1600, "to be jovial and boisterous," also "to talk bombastically," from Dutch randten (earlier ranten) "talk foolishly, rave," of unknown origin (compare German rantzen "to frolic, spring about," dialectal rant "noise, uproar"). Related: Ranted; ranting. Ranters as the name of

 claptrap 

 1730, "a trick to 'catch' applause," a stage term; from clap (v.) + trap (n.). Extended sense of "cheap, showy language" is from 1819; hence "nonsense, rubbish." A CLAP Trap, a name given to the rant and rhimes that dramatick poets, to please the actors, let them go off with; as

 rhetoric 

 early 14c., rethorike, "the art of eloquence and persuasiveness in language, the art of using language to influence others," from Old French retorike, rethorique (Modern French rhétorique) and directly from Latin rhetorice, from Greek rhētorikē tekhnē  "art of an orator," fr

 dilemma 

 1520s in rhetoric (see below), from Late Latin dilemma, from Greek dilemma "double proposition," a technical term in rhetoric, from di- "two" (see di- (1)) + lemma "premise, anything received or taken," from root of lambanein "to take" (see lemma). A form of argument in which it

 facetious 

 "sportive, playful," 1590s, from French facétieux (16c.), from facétie "a joke" (15c.), from Latin facetiae "jests, witticisms" (singular facetia), from facetus "witty, elegant, fine, courteous," which is of unknown origin, perhaps related to facis "torch." Formerly often in a go

 John Doe 

 fictitious plaintiff in a legal action, attested from 1768 (in Blackstone). The fictitious defendant was Richard Roe. If female, Jane Doe, Jane Roe. Replaced earlier John-a-nokes (1530s) or Jack Nokes, who usually was paired with John-a-stiles or Tom Stiles. Also used of plaintif

 switch 

 1590s, "slender riding whip," probably from a variant of a Flemish or Low German word akin to Middle Dutch swijch "bough, twig," or from swutsche, variant of Low German zwukse "long thin stick, switch," from Germanic *swih- (source also of Old High German zwec "wooden peg," Germa

 myriad 

 1550s, "the number of 10,000," also "an indefinitely great number," from French myriade and directly from Late Latin myrias (genitive myriadis) "ten thousand," from Greek myrias (genitive myriados) "a number of ten thousand; countless numbers," from myrios (plural myrioi) "innume

 stamina 

 1670s, "rudiments or original elements of something," from Latin stamina "threads," plural of stamen (genitive staminis) "thread, warp" (see stamen). The sense of "power to resist or recover, strength, endurance" is attested by 1726 (originally plural), from the earlier meaning "

 Share bombast 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bombast Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bombast">Etymology of bombast by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bombast. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bombast Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bombast," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bombast. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bombast." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bombast. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bombast." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bombast (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bombast 
 bolt-upright 
 bomb 
 bombard 
 bombardier 
 bombardment 
 bombast 
 bombastic 
 Bombay 
 bombazine 
 bomber 
 bombinate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix