URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sod
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sod - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sod - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sod 

 sod (n.1) 

 "turf, slice of earth with grass on it," mid-15c., sodde , apparently from Middle Dutch sode "turf," or Middle Low German sode , both related to Old Frisian satha "sod" and all of uncertain origin. Perhaps the notion is water saturation and the group is related to sog . Colloquial the (old) sod "one's native country," especially if it is Ireland, is from 1812.
 also from mid-15c. 

 sod (n.2) 

 term of abuse, 1818, short for sodomite (also see sodomy ). British colloquial sod-all is attested from 1930.
 also from 1818 

 sod (v.1) 

 c. 1400, sodden , "to cover with sod," especially "put in a grave," from sod (n.). Related: Sodded ; sodding .
 also from c. 1400 

 sod (v.2) 

 "go, depart," in sod off (1960), British slang term of dismissal; see sod (n.2).
 also from 1960 

 Entries linking to sod 

 sodomite (n.) 

 late 14c., "one who practices sodomy," also "resident of biblical Sodom," from Old French Sodomite "inhabitant of Sodom; sodomite," also a general term of abuse, or directly from Late Latin Sodomita , from Greek Sodomit ē s "inhabitant of Sodom" (see Sodom , also sodomy ).

 Related: Sodomitical (1540s), sodometrous (1540s), sodomike (Middle English). Old English had adjective sodomitisc (Coverdale has sodomitish ). The alternative noun form sodomist is by 1891; sodomiter is attested 1520s. The King James Bible (1611) has fem. form sodomitesse in a marginal note to "whore" in Deuteronomy xxiii.17.

 sodomy (n.) 

 c. 1300, sodomie , "unnatural sexual relations," such as those customs imputed to the inhabitants of Biblical Sodom , especially between men but also with beasts, from Old French sodomie. Compare Late Latin peccatum Sodomiticum "anal sex," literally "the sin of Sodom," from Latin Sodoma . In Middle English also synne Sodomyke (early 14c.).

 sog 
 sodbuster 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 turf 

 Old English turf, tyrf "slab of soil and grass, sod," also "surface of grassland," from Proto-Germanic *turfa- (source also of Old Norse torf, Danish tørv, Old Frisian turf, Old High German zurba, German Torf), from PIE root *drebh- "to wind, compress" (source also of Sanskrit da

 sward 

 "grass-covered ground, grassy surface of land," c. 1300, "turf, sod," a specialized use from Old English sweard "skin, hide, rind" (of bacon, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *swardo- (source also of Old Frisian swarde "skin of the head," Middle Dutch swarde "rind of bacon," Dutch zwoo

 guy 

 "small rope, chain, wire," 1620s, nautical; earlier "leader" (mid-14c.), from Old French guie "a guide," also "a crane, derrick," from guier, from Frankish *witan "show the way" or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *witanan "to look after, guard, ascribe to, reproach

 rain 

 One of the less likely suggestions is pets sliding off sod roofs when the sod got too wet during a rainstorm....

 Exodus 

 Beekes derives the Greek word from PIE *sod- "course" and says it is traditionally connected with Slavic words for "course...

 set 

 Swedish sätta, Old Saxon settian, Old Frisian setta, Dutch zetten, German setzen, Gothic satjan), causative form of PIE *sod...

 land 

 Old English lond, land, "ground, soil," also "definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries," from Proto-Germanic *landja- (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, Gothic land, German Land), perhaps fro

 deviate 

 1630s, "turn aside or wander from the (right) way," from Late Latin deviatus, past participle of deviare "to turn aside, turn out of the way," from Latin phrase de via, from de "off" (see de-) + via "way" (see via). Meaning "take a different course, diverge, differ" is from 1690s

 silo 

 1835, "a pit in the ground or a cavity in rock for storage of green crops," often in reference to other countries, and the word in English is explained at first, from Spanish silo, traditionally derived from Latin sirum (nominative sirus), from Greek siros "a pit to keep corn in.

 soil 

 early 13c., "to defile or pollute with sin," from Old French soillier "to splatter with mud, to foul or make dirty," originally "to wallow" (12c., Modern French souillier), from souil "tub, wild boar's wallow, pigsty," which is from Latin solium "tub for bathing; seat" (from PIE 

 Share sod 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sod Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sod">Etymology of sod by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sod. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sod Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sod," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sod. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sod." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sod. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sod." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sod (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sod 
 socio-political 
 sock 
 sockdolager 
 socket 
 Socratic 
 sod 
 soda 
 sodality 
 sodbuster 
 sodden 
 sodium 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix