URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/carat
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:22:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Carat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Carat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of carat 

 carat (n.) 

 also karat , late 15c., "a measure of the fineness of gold," from Old French carat "measure of the fineness of gold" (14c.), from Italian carato or Medieval Latin carratus , both from Arabic qirat "fruit of the carob tree," also "weight of 4 grains," from Greek keration "carob seed," also the name of a small weight of measure, literally "little horn" diminutive of keras "horn of an animal" (from PIE root *ker- (1) "horn; head").

 Carob beans were a standard in the ancient world for weighing small quantities. The Greek measure was the equivalent of the Roman siliqua , which was one-twenty-fourth of a golden solidus of Constantine; hence karat took on a sense of "a proportion of one twenty-fourth, a twenty-fourth part," especially in expressing the fineness of gold when used as jewelry, and thus it became a measure of gold purity (1550s): 18-carat gold is eighteen parts gold, six parts alloy; 14-carat gold is 10/24ths alloy, etc.

 As a measure of weight for diamonds or other precious stones, carat is attested from 1570s in English. In U.S., karat is used for "proportion of fine gold in an alloy" and carat for "measure of weight of a precious stone."
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to carat 

 karat (n.) 

 1854, spelling variant of carat (q.v.). In U.S., karat is used for "proportion of fine gold in an alloy" and carat for "measure of weight of a precious stone."

 *ker- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "horn; head," with derivatives referring to horned animals, horn-shaped objects, and projecting parts.

 It might form all or part of: alpenhorn ; Capricorn ; carat ; carotid ; carrot ; carotene ; cerato- ; cerebellum ; cerebral ; cerebrum ; cervical ; cervix ; charivari ; cheer ; chelicerae ; corn (n.2) "hardening of the skin;" cornea ; corner ; cornet ; cornucopia ; cranium ; flugelhorn ; hart ; hartebeest ; horn ; hornbeam ; hornblende ; hornet ; keratin ; kerato- ; migraine ; monoceros ; reindeer ; rhinoceros ; saveloy ; serval ; triceratops ; unicorn .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit srngam "horn;" Persian sar "head," Avestan sarah- "head;" Greek karnon "horn," koryne "club, mace," koryphe "head;" Latin cornu "horn," cervus "deer;" Old English horn "horn of an animal;" Welsh carw "deer."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 point 

 As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a carat) it is recorded from 1931....

 gram 

 also gramme, metric unit of weight, 1797, from French gramme (18c.), from Late Latin gramma "small weight," from Greek gramma "small weight," a special use of the classical word meaning "a letter of the alphabet" (see -gram). Adopted into English about two years before it was est

 G 

 seventh letter of the alphabet, invented by the Romans; a modified gamma introduced c. 250 B.C.E. to restore a dedicated symbol for the "g" sound. For fuller history, see C. Before the vowels -e-, -i-, and -y-, Old English initial g- changed its sound and is represented in Modern

 unit 

 1560s, "single number regarded as an undivided whole," alteration of unity on the basis of digit. Popularized in John Dee's English translation of Euclid, to express Greek monas (Dee says unity formerly was used in this sense). Meaning "single thing regarded as a member of a grou

 Hebrew 

 late Old English, from Old French Ebreu, from Latin Hebraeus, from Greek Hebraios, from Aramaic (Semitic) 'ebhrai, corresponding to Hebrew 'ibhri "an Israelite." Traditionally from an ancestral name Eber, but probably literally "one from the other side," perhaps in reference to t

 protagonist 

 1670s, "principal character in a story, drama, etc.," from Greek prōtagōnistēs "actor who plays the chief or first part," from prōtos "first" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, first, chief") + agōnistēs "actor, competitor," from agōn "contest" (from PIE root

 conservation 

 late 14c., conservacioun, "preservation of health and soundness, maintenance in good condition, act of guarding or keeping with care," from Latin conservationem (nominative conservatio) "a keeping, preserving, conserving," noun of action from past-participle stem of conservare "t

 mafia 

 1875, from Italian Mafia "Sicilian secret society of criminals" (the prevailing sense outside Sicily), earlier, "spirit of hostility to the law and its ministers." A member is a mafioso (1870), fem. mafiosa, plural mafiosi, and this may be the older word in this sense. Arabic is 

 salvation 

 c. 1200, savacioun, saluatiun, sauvacioun, etc., originally in the Christian sense, "the saving of the soul, deliverance from the power of sin and admission to eternal bliss," from Old French salvaciun and directly from Late Latin salvationem (nominative salvatio, a Church Latin 

 OK 

 "all right, correct," 1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c. 1838-9 for abbreviations of common phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings, such as K.G. for "no go," as if spelled know go; N.C. for enough said (" 'nuff ced"); K.Y. for no use ("know yuse")

 Share carat 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/carat Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/carat">Etymology of carat by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of carat. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/carat Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of carat," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/carat. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of carat." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/carat. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of carat." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/carat (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near carat 
 carafe 
 caramba 
 caramel 
 caramelize 
 carapace 
 carat 
 caravan 
 caravansary 
 caravanserai 
 caravel 
 caraway 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix