URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/trap
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:12:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Trap - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Trap - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of trap 

 trap (n.1) 

 "contrivance for catching unawares," Middle English trappe , from late Old English træppe , treppe "snare, trap" (for taking game or other animals), from Proto-Germanic *trep- (source also of Middle Dutch trappe "trap, snare"), related to Germanic words for "stair, step, tread" (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe , treppe , German Treppe "step, stair," English tread (v.)).

 This is probably (Watkins) literally "that on or into which one steps," from PIE *dreb- , an extended form of a root *der- (1), base of words meaning "to run, walk, step." The English word also is probably akin to Old French trape , Spanish trampa "trap, pit, snare," but the exact relationship is uncertain.

 Figurative use is by c. 1200 in theology. The sense of "deceitful practice, device or contrivance to betray one unawares" is recorded from c. 1400.

 The meaning "U-shaped section of a drain pipe," to prevent passage of air or gases through the pipe, is from 1833. The slang meaning "mouth" is attested by 1776.

 It is attested from 1590s as the name of the pivoted wooden instrument used to throw in the game of trap-ball (short for trap-stick ; trap-sticks as a figure of thin legs is by 1714). By 1812 it was extended to any device for sudden throwing or releasing by means of a spring, etc. Hence trap-shooting (by 1892).

 In some specialized senses it has converged with provincial trap words for "stairs" from Low German and Scandinavian (see trap (n.2)). Also compare rattletrap .

 trap (n.2) 

 "expanse of dark-colored igneous rock of more or less columnar structure," 1794, from Swedish trapp (Torbern Bergman, 1766), from trappa "stair," related to Middle Low German trappe "staircase" (see trap (n.1); compare Danish trappe "a stair").

 So called from the step-like appearance of the rock. Trap was used earlier in England in reference to coal-mining seam-faults, "Perh. introduced by foreign miners in 16th c." [OED, 1989]. Related: Traps ; trappean , trapiferous .
 also from 1794 

 trap (v.) 

 late 14c., trappen , "ensnare (an animal), catch in a trap; encircle; capture," from trap (n.1) or from Old English betræppan . The figurative meaning, "take (persons) by stratagem" is attested slightly earlier (late 14c.). Related: Trapped ; trapping .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to trap 

 rattletrap 

 1766, originally a noun, a contemptuous term for a thing or things deemed trifling or of little value, especially a small, complicated structure not working as intended, from rattle (adj.) + trap (n.1) in some sense. Hence, "a shabby, rattling object," especially a small rickety coach or other vehicle (1806). The adjectival sense of "rickety" is recorded from 1834.

 trapping (n.2) 

 "cloth or covering spread over the saddle and harness of a horse," Middle English; see trappings .

 tread 
 claptrap 
 death-trap 
 entrap 
 firetrap 
 fly-trap 
 mousetrap 
 rat-trap 
 sand-trap 
 sink-trap 
 speed 
 traipse 
 trap-door 
 trapfall 
 trapper 
 trappy 
 trip 
 See All Related Words (21) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 traipse 

 1590s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French trepasser "pass over or beyond," from Old French trespasser "cross, traverse, transgress" (see trespass). Or from a source related to Middle Dutch trappen, dialectal Norwegian trappa "to tread, stamp" (see trap (n.)). Libe

 trip 

 late 14c., "tread or step lightly and nimbly, skip, dance, caper," from Old French triper "jump around, dance around, strike with the feet" (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch trippen "to skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample," Low German trippeln, Frisian tripje, D

 bunker 

 1758, originally Scottish, "seat, bench," a word of uncertain origin, possibly a variant of banker "bench" (1670s; see bank (n.2)); or possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Swedish bunke "boards used to protect the cargo of a ship"). The meaning "receptacle for coal ab

 skeet 

 form of trap-shooting involving varying angles, 1926, a name chosen from public submissions to National Sportsman as "a very...The game of "Skeet" was developed by a group of enthusiastic trap-shooters who were dissatisfied with the target methods...employed at various trap-shooting clubs and who desired to work out a system that would reproduce more closely actual field...

 scandal 

 Late Latin scandalum "cause for offense, stumbling block, temptation," from Greek skandalon "a stumbling block, offense; a trap...Biblical use is presumably figurative or metaphoric, and OED and others conclude that it is "certainly an old word meaning 'trap...Presumably, then, originally "trap with a springing device" (compare related skandalē "stick of a trap," the trigger which...

 bait 

 "food put on a hook or trap to attract prey," c. 1300, from Old Norse beita "food, bait," especially for fish, from beita...

 catch 

 late 14c., "device to hold a latch of a door," also "a trap;" also "a fishing vessel," from catch (v.)....

 plan 

 1670s as a technical term in perspective drawing; more generally by 1706 as "the representation of anything drawn on a plane; a drawing, sketch, or diagram of any object," from French plan "ground plot of a building, map," literally "plane surface" (mid-16c.), from Latin planum "

 mouth 

 Old English muþ "oral opening of an animal or human; opening of anything, door, gate," from Proto-Germanic *muntha- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund, German Mund, Gothic munþs "mouth"), 

 snare 

 "noose for catching animals," late Old English snearu, and also from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse snara "noose, snare," related to soenri "twisted rope," from Proto-Germanic *snarkho (source also of Middle Dutch snare, Dutch snaar, Old High German snare, German Schnur 

 Share trap 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/trap Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/trap">Etymology of trap by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of trap. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/trap Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of trap," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trap. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of trap." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trap. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of trap." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/trap (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near trap 
 transvection 
 transversal 
 transverse 
 transvestite 
 Transylvania 
 trap 
 trap-door 
 trapeze 
 trapezium 
 trapezius 
 trapezoid 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix