URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/holocaust
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:42:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Holocaust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Holocaust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of holocaust 

 holocaust (n.) 

 mid-13c., "sacrifice by fire, burnt offering," from Old French holocauste (12c.), or directly from Late Latin holocaustum , from Greek holokauston "a thing wholly burnt," neuter of holokaustos "burned whole," from holos "whole" (from PIE root *sol- "whole, well-kept") + kaustos , verbal adjective of kaiein "to burn" (see caustic ).

 Originally a Bible word for "burnt offerings," given wider figurative sense of "massacre, destruction of a large number of persons" from 1670s. The Holocaust "Nazi genocide of European Jews in World War II," first recorded 1957, earlier known in Hebrew as Shoah "catastrophe." The word itself was used in English in reference to Hitler's Jewish policies from 1942, but not as a proper name for them.

 English chronicler Richard of Devizes in his contemporary account of the coronation of Richard I in 1189 used the word holocaust when he described the mass murder of the Jews of London, although he meant it as "a sacrificial offering."

 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to holocaust 

 caustic (adj.) 

 c. 1400, "capable of burning or destroying organic tissue, corrosive," from Latin causticus "burning, caustic," from Greek kaustikos "capable of burning; corrosive," from kaustos "combustible; burnt," verbal adjective from kaiein , the Greek word for "to burn" (transitive and intransitive) in all periods, which is of uncertain origin with no certain cognates outside Greek.

 The figurative sense of "sarcastic, severely critical" is attested from 1771. As a noun "a caustic substance," early 15c., from the adjective.

 *sol- 

 also solə-, Proto-Indo-European root meaning "whole, well-kept." 

 It might form all or part of: catholic ; consolidate ; consolidation ; holism ; holo- ; holocaust ; Holocene ; hologram ; holograph ; insouciant ; safe ; safety ; sage (n.1) kind of herb; salubrious ; salutary ; salute ; salvage ; salvific ; salvo "simultaneous discharge of guns;" save (v.) "deliver from danger;" save (prep.) "except;" solder ; soldier ; solemn ; solicit ; solicitous ; solid ; solidarity ; solidity ; sou .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit sarvah "uninjured, intact, whole;" Avestan haurva- "uninjured, intact;" Old Persian haruva- ; Greek holos "whole;" Latin salvus "uninjured, in good health, safe," salus "good health," solidus "solid;" Armenian olj "whole, healthy."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 devastation 

 "ravage, act of devastating; state of being devastated," mid-15c., from Medieval Latin devastationem (nominative devastatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin devastare "lay waste completely," from de- "completely" (see de-) + vastare "lay waste," from vastus "em

 destruction 

 c. 1300, destruccioun "ruin;" early 14c., "act of destroying, devastation; state of being destroyed," from Old French destruction (12c.) and directly from Latin destructionem (nominative destructio) "a pulling down, destruction," noun of action from past-participle stem of destru

 solution 

 late 14c., solucioun, "explanation, answer; interpretation of a dream; the dissolving of a substance in a liquid, transformation of matter to a liquid state," from Old French solucion "division, dissolving; explanation; payment" and directly from Latin solutionem (nominative solu

 boondoggle 

 "wasteful expenditure," especially by the government under guise of public good, April 1935, American English; earlier it was a name for a kind of braided leather lanyard made by Boy Scouts and worn by them around the neck or hat. In this sense it is attested from 1930, and accor

 pamphlet 

 "small, unbound treatise," late 14c., pamflet, "brief written text; poem, tract, small book," from Anglo-Latin panfletus, which probably is a popular short form of "Pamphilus, seu de Amore" ("Pamphilus, or about Love"), a short 12c. Latin love poem popular and widely copied in th

 perspective 

 late 14c., perspectif, "the science of optics," from Old French perspective and directly from Medieval Latin perspectiva ars "science of optics," from fem. of perspectivus "of sight, optical" from Latin perspectus "clearly perceived," past participle of perspicere "inspect, look 

 community 

 late 14c., "a number of people associated together by the fact of residence in the same locality," also "the common people" (not the rulers or the clergy), from Old French comunité "community, commonness, everybody" (Modern French communauté), from Latin communitatem (nominative 

 dauphin 

 title of the eldest son of the king of France (in use from 1349-1830), early 15c., from Old French dauphin, literally "dolphin" (see dolphin). Originally it was the title attached to "the Dauphin of Viennois," whose province (in the French Alps north of Provence) came to be known

 attend 

 c. 1300, "be subject to" (obsolete); early 14c., "direct one's mind or energies" (archaic), from Old French atendre "to expect, wait for, pay attention" (12c., Modern French attendre) and directly from Latin attendere "give heed to," literally "to stretch toward," from ad "to, to

 symbiosis 

 1876, as a biological term, "union for life of two different organisms based on mutually benefit," from Greek symbiosis "a living together," from symbioun "live together," from symbios "(one) living together (with another), partner, companion, husband or wife," from assimilated f

 Share holocaust 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/holocaust Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/holocaust">Etymology of holocaust by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of holocaust. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/holocaust Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of holocaust," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/holocaust. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of holocaust." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/holocaust. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of holocaust." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/holocaust (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near holocaust 
 Hollywood 
 holm 
 Holmesian 
 holmium 
 holo- 
 holocaust 
 Holocene 
 hologram 
 holograph 
 holographic 
 holography 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix