URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/braise
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T13:52:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Braise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Braise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of braise 

 braise (v.) 

 "to stew in a closed pan with heat from above and below," 1797, braze , from French braiser "to stew, cook over live coals" (17c.), from braise "live coals," from Old French brese "embers" (12c.), ultimately (along with Italian bragia , Spanish brasa ) from Proto-Germanic *brasa , from PIE root *bhreu- "to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn." Related: Braised ; braising .
 also from 1797 

 Entries linking to braise 

 *bhreu- 

 also *bhreuə- , *bhreəu- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn," with derivatives referring to cooking and brewing.

 It might form all or part of: barm ; barmy ; bourn (n.1) "small stream;" braise ; bratwurst ; brawn ; brawny ; braze (v.1) "to expose to the action of fire;" brazier ; Brazil ; bread ; breed ; brew ; broth ; broil (v.2) "to quarrel, brawl;" brood ; effervesce ; effervescence ; effervescent ; embroil ; ferment ; fervent ; fervid ; fervor ; imbroglio .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit bhurnih "violent, passionate;" Greek phrear "well, spring, cistern;" Latin fervere "to boil, foam," Thracian Greek brytos "fermented liquor made from barley;" Russian bruja "current;" Old Irish bruth "heat;" Old English breowan "to brew," beorma "yeast;" Old High German brato "roast meat."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cook 

 "one whose occupation is the preparing and cooking of food," Old English coc, from Vulgar Latin *cocus "cook," from Latin coquus, from coquere "to cook, prepare food, ripen, digest, turn over in the mind" from PIE root *pekw- "to cook, ripen." Germanic languages had no one native

 trivial 

 "ordinary" (1580s); "insignificant, trifling" (1590s), from Latin trivialis "common, commonplace, vulgar," literally "of or belonging to the crossroads," from trivium "place where three roads meet," in transferred use, "an open place, a public place," from tri- "three" (see three

 conception 

 early 14c., "act of conceiving in the womb," from Old French concepcion (Modern French conception) "conception, grasp, comprehension," from Latin conceptionem (nominative conceptio) "a comprehending, conception," noun of action from past-participle stem of concipere "to take in a

 hoedown 

 "noisy dance," 1841, Southern U.S., apparently originally the name of a specific dance, perhaps from perceived similarity of dance motions to those of farm chores, hence from hoe (n.). The step of every negro dance that was ever known, was called into requisition and admirably e

 deal 

 "a part or portion," Middle English del, from from Old English dæl "a part of a whole, a share;" with qualification (great, etc.), "an extent, degree, quantity, amount," from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (source also of Old Norse deild, Old Frisian del "part; juridical district," Dutch

 fiction 

 early 15c., ficcioun, "that which is invented or imagined in the mind," from Old French ficcion "dissimulation, ruse; invention, fabrication" (13c.) and directly from Latin fictionem (nominative fictio) "a fashioning or feigning," noun of action from past participle stem of finge

 war 

 late Old English wyrre, werre "large-scale military conflict," from Old North French werre "war" (Old French guerre "difficulty, dispute; hostility; fight, combat, war;" Modern French guerre), from Frankish *werra, from Proto-Germanic *werz-a- (source also of Old Saxon werran, Ol

 tattoo 

 1680s, "signal calling soldiers or sailors to quarters at night," earlier tap-to (1640s), from Dutch taptoe, from tap "faucet of a cask" (see tap (n.1)) + toe "shut, to" (from Proto-Germanic *to; see to (prep.)). "So called because police formerly visited taverns in the evening t

 ambiguous 

 "of doubtful or uncertain nature, open to various interpretations," 1520s, from Latin ambiguus "having double meaning, shifting, changeable, doubtful," an adjective derived from ambigere "to dispute about, contend, debate," literally "to wander, go about, go around," figuratively

 log 

 unshaped large piece of tree, early 14c., of unknown origin. Old Norse had lag "felled tree" (from stem of liggja "to lie," hence "a tree that lies prostrate"), but many etymologists deny on phonological grounds that this can be the root of English log. Instead, they suggest an i

 Share braise 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/braise Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/braise">Etymology of braise by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of braise. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/braise Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of braise," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/braise. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of braise." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/braise. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of braise." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/braise (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near braise 
 brain-teaser 
 brainwash 
 brainwashing 
 brain-wave 
 brainy 
 braise 
 brake 
 brakeman 
 bramble 
 bran 
 branch 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix