URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bank
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:30:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bank - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bank - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bank 

 bank (n.1) 

 "financial institution," late 15c., originally "money-dealer's counter or shop," from Old Italian banca and also from French banque (itself from the Italian word), both meaning "table," from a Germanic source (such as Old High German bank "bench, moneylender's table"), from Proto-Germanic *bankiz- "shelf," *bankon- (see bank (n.2)). The etymological notion is of the moneylender's exchange table.

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 As "institution for receiving and lending money" from 1620s. In games of chance, "the sum of money held by the proprietor or one who plays against the rest," by 1720. Bank holiday is from 1871, though the tradition is as old as the Bank of England. To cry all the way to the bank was coined 1956 by U.S. pianist Liberace, after a Madison Square Garden concert that was panned by critics but packed with patrons.
 also from late 15c. 

 bank (n.2) 

 "natural earthen incline bordering a body of water," c. 1200, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse *banki , Old Danish banke "sandbank," from Proto-Germanic *bankon "slope," cognate with *bankiz "shelf" (see bench (n.)). As "rising ground in a sea or rover, shoal," from c. 1600. As "bench for rowers in an ancient galley," 1590s.

 There probably was an Old English cognate but it is not attested in surviving documents. The nasalized form likely is a variant of Old Norse bakki "(river) bank, ridge, mound; cloud bank," cognate with Swedish backe , Danish bakke "hill, rising ground."
 also from c. 1200 

 bank (v.1) 

 "to act as a banker," 1727, from bank (n.1). As "to deposit in a bank" from 1833. Figurative sense of "to rely on" (i.e. "to put money on") is from 1884, U.S. colloquial. Related: Banked ; banking ; bankable .
 also from 1727 

 bank (v.2) 

 1580s, "to form a bank or slope or rise," from bank (n.2). The meaning "rise in banks" is by 1870. That of "ascend," as of an incline, is from 1892. In aeronautics, from 1911. Related: Banked ; banking .
 also from 1580s 

 bank (v.3) 

 originally in billiards, "to make (the cue ball) touch the cushion ( bank ) of the table before touching another ball," by 1909, from a specialized sense of bank (n.2). The verb probably was abstracted from bank-shot (n.), which is attested by 1889. Related: Banked ; banking .
 also from 1909 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Entries linking to bank 

 bench (n.) 

 Middle English bench , from Old English benc "long seat," especially one without a back, from Proto-Germanic *bankon (source also of Old Frisian bank "bench," Old Norse bekkr , Danish bænk , Middle Dutch banc , Old High German banch ). The group is cognate with bank (n.2) "natural earthen incline beside a body of water," and perhaps the original notion is "man-made earthwork used as a seat."

 Used from late 14c. of a merchant's table. It is attested from c. 1300 in reference to the seat where judges sits in court, hence, by metonymy, "judges collectively, office of a judge." Hence also bencher "senior member of an inn of court" (1580s). A bench-warrant (1690s) is one issued by a judge, as opposed to one issued by an ordinary justice or magistrate.

 The sporting sense "reserve of players" (in baseball, North American football, etc.) is by 1909, from a literal sense in reference to where players sit when not in action (attested by 1889).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 banker (n.) 

 "keeper of a bank," 1530s, agent noun formed from bank (n.1), possibly modeled on French banquier (16c.).

 banking 
 bankroll 
 bankrupt 
 banquette 
 blood-bank 
 bunker 
 embankment 
 fog-bank 
 river-bank 
 sand-bank 
 snowbank 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 More to explore

 bankrupt 

 "in the state of one unable to pay just debts or meet obligations," 1560s, from Italian banca rotta, literally "a broken bench," from banca "moneylender's shop," literally "bench" (see bank (n.1)) + rotta "broken, defeated, interrupted" from (and in English remodeled on) Latin ru

 bunker 

 1758, originally Scottish, "seat, bench," a word of uncertain origin, possibly a variant of banker "bench" (1670s; see bank (n.2)); or possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Swedish bunke "boards used to protect the cargo of a ship"). The meaning "receptacle for coal ab

 cant 

 "pretentious or insincere talk, ostentatious conventionality in speech," 1709. The earliest use is as a slang word for "the whining speech of beggars asking for alms" (1640s), from the verb in this sense (1560s), from Old North French canter (Old French chanter) "to sing, chant,"

 riparian 

 "of or pertaining to river banks, situated on or near a river bank," 1849, with -an + Latin riparius "of a river bank," from...riparia "shore," later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa "(steep) bank of a river, shore...

 epeiric 

 land, continent" (as opposed to the sea and the islands), from PIE root *apero- "shore" (source also of Old English ofer "bank..., rim, shore," Old Frisian over "bank") + -ic....

 ditch 

 a variant of dike (q.v.), which at first meant "an excavation," but later in Middle English was applied to the ridge or bank...As the earth dug out of the ground in making a trench is heaped up on the side, the ditch and the bank are constructed by...

 Riviera 

 1630s, "Mediterranean seacoast around Genoa," from Italian riviera, literally "bank, shore" (see river)....

 dirge 

 c. 1200, dirige (the contracted form is from c. 1400), "that part of the Office for the Dead beginning with the antiphon for the first psalm of the first nocturn of matins," from Latin dirige "direct!" imperative of dirigere "to direct" (see direct (v.)). The antiphon begins, Dir

 ridge 

 Middle English rigge, from Old English hrycg "back of a man or beast," probably reinforced by Old Norse hryggr "back, ridge," from Proto-Germanic *hruggin (source also of Old Frisian hregg, Old Saxon hruggi, Dutch rug, Old High German hrukki, German Rücken "the back"). OED says "

 transact 

 1580s, back-formation from transaction, or else from Latin transactus, past participle of transigere "to drive through, accomplish, bring to an end, settle," from trans "across, beyond; through" (see trans-) + agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform"

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bank 
 bangs 
 banish 
 banishment 
 banister 
 banjo 
 bank 
 banker 
 banking 
 bankroll 
 bankrupt 
 bankruptcy