URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/king
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:52:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: King - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

King - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of king 

 king (n.) 

 a late Old English contraction of cyning "king, ruler" (also used as a title), from Proto-Germanic *kuningaz (source also of Dutch koning , Old Norse konungr , Danish konge , Old Saxon and Old High German kuning , Middle High German künic , German König ).

 This is of uncertain origin. It is possibly related to Old English cynn "family, race" (see kin ), making a king originally a "leader of the people." Or perhaps it is from a related prehistoric Germanic word meaning "noble birth," making a king etymologically "one who descended from noble birth" (or "the descendant of a divine race"). The sociological and ideological implications render this a topic of much debate. "The exact notional relation of king with kin is undetermined, but the etymological relation is hardly to be doubted" [Century Dictionary].

 General Germanic, but not attested in Gothic, where þiudans (cognate with Old English þeoden "chief of a tribe, ruler, prince, king") was used. Finnish kuningas "king," Old Church Slavonic kunegu "prince" (Russian knyaz , Bohemian knez ), Lithuanian kunigas "clergyman" are forms of this word taken from Germanic. Meaning "one who has superiority in a certain field or class" is from late 14c.

 As leon is the king of bestes. [John Gower, 
 "Confessio Amantis," 1390]

 In Old English, used for chiefs of Anglian and Saxon tribes or clans, of the heads of states they founded, and of the British and Danish chiefs they fought. The word acquired a more imposing quality with the rise of European nation-states, but then it was applied to tribal chiefs in Africa, Asia, North America. The chess piece is so called from c. 1400; the playing card from 1560s; the use in checkers/draughts is first recorded 1820. Three Kings for the Biblical Wise Men is from c. 1200.

 [I]t was [Eugene] Field who haunted the declining years of Creston Clarke with his review of that actor's Lear. ... Said he, "Mr. Clarke played the King all the evening as though under constant fear that someone else was about to play the Ace." ["Theatre Magazine," January 1922]

 king (adj.) 

 king (n.) applied, at first in natural history, to species deemed remarkably big or dominant, such as king crab (1690s); the U.S. king snake (1737), which attacks other snakes and is regarded especially as the enemy of the rattlesnake; king cobra (1888). In marketing, king-size is from 1939, originally of cigarettes. A king-bolt (1825) was the large bolt connecting the fore part of a carriage with the fore-axle.

 The 
 King-snake is the longest of all other Snakes in these parts, but are not common; the 
 Indians make Girdles and Sashes of their Skins, and it is reported by them, that they are not very venemous, and that no other Snake will meddle with them, which I suppose is the Reason that they are so fond of wearing their Skins about their Bodies as they do. [John Brickell, "The Natural History of North-Carolina," Dublin, 1737]

 Entries linking to king 

 kin (n.) 

 c. 1200, from Old English cynn "family; race; kind, sort, rank; nature" (also "gender, sex," a sense obsolete since Middle English), from Proto-Germanic *kunja- "family" (source also of Old Frisian kenn , Old Saxon kunni "kin, kind, race, tribe," Old Norse kyn , Old High German chunni "kin, race;" Danish kjön , Swedish kön , Middle Dutch, Dutch kunne "sex, gender;" Gothic kuni "family, race," Old Norse kundr "son," German Kind "child"), from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget," with derivatives referring to procreation and familial and tribal groups.

 In the Teutonic word, as in Latin 
 genus and Greek [
 genos ], three main senses appear, (1) race or stock, (2) class or kind, (3) gender or sex .... [OED]

 Related to both words kind and to child . From 1590s as an adjective, from the noun and as a shortening of akin . Legal next of kin (1540s) does not include the widow , "she being specifically provided for by the law as widow" [Century Dictionary], and must be a blood relation of the deceased.

 kingdom (n.) 

 Old English cyningdom ; see king (n.) + -dom . Cognate with Old Saxon kuningdom , Middle Dutch koninghdom , Old Norse konungdomr . The usual Old English word was cynedom ; Middle English also had kingrick (for second element, see the first element in Reichstag ). Meaning "one of the realms of nature" is from 1690s.

 Kingdom-come (n.) "the next world, the hereafter" (1785), originally slang, is from the Lord's Prayer, where it is an archaic simple present subjunctive ("may Thy kingdom come") in reference to the spiritual reign of God or Christ.

 kingfish 
 kingfisher 
 kingly 
 kingpin 
 kingship 
 overking 
 unkingly 
 *gene- 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kingpin 

 also king-pin, 1801 as the name of the large pin in the game of kayles (similar to bowls except a club or stick was thrown instead of a ball; see "Games, Gaming and Gamesters' Laws," Frederick Brandt, London, 1871), from king with a sense of "chief" + pin (n.). The modern use is 

 queen 

 Middle English quene, "pre-eminent female noble; consort of a king," also "female sovereign, woman ruling in her own right," from Old English cwen "queen, female ruler of a state; woman; wife," from Proto-Germanic *kwoeniz (source also of Old Saxon quan "wife," Old Norse kvaen, G

 baron 

 c. 1200, "a member of the nobility," also a low rank in the peerage, from Old French baron (nominative ber) "baron, nobleman, military leader, warrior, virtuous man, lord, husband," probably from or related to Late Latin baro "man" (source of Spanish varon, Italian barone), which

 Basil 

 masc. proper name, from Latin Basilius, from Greek Basileios "kingly, royal," from basileus "king," especially the king of...Persia, "prince," possibly from a language of Asia Minor (compare Lydian battos "king"), but according to Beekes, it "is...The youngest of the Greek words for "king" (alongside koiranos and anax). St....

 checkmate 

 mid-14c., in chess, said of a king when it is in check and cannot escape it, from Old French eschec mat (Modern French échec...et mat), which (with Spanish jaque y mate, Italian scacco-matto) is from Arabic shah mat "the king died" (see check (n.1...Hence Persian shah mat, if it is the ultimate source of the word, would be literally "the king is left helpless, the king...

 shah 

 title of the king of Persia, 1560s, shaw, from Persian shah "a king, the ruler of a land," shortened from Old Persian xšayathiya..."king," from Indo-Iranian *ksayati "he has power over, rules" from PIE *tke- "to gain control of, gain power over" (source...

 Regulus 

 bright white star in constellation Leo, 1550s, Modern Latin, apparently first so-called by Copernicus, literally "little king...," diminutive of rex "king" (from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight...Probably a translation of Basiliskos "little king," a Hellenistic Greek name for the star, mentioned in Geminos and Ptolemy...Almagest," though elsewhere in his writings it is usually "the star on the heart of Leo"); perhaps a translation of Lugal "king...

 eminence 

 c. 1400, "projection, protuberance;" early 15c., "high or exalted position," from Old French eminence or directly from Latin eminentia "a distinctive feature, conspicuous part," from eminentem (nominative eminens) "standing out, projecting," figuratively, "prominent, distinctive,

 tycoon 

 1857, title given by foreigners to the shogun of Japan (said to have been used by his supporters when addressing foreigners, as an attempt to convey that the shogun was more important than the emperor), from Japanese taikun "great lord or prince," from Chinese tai "great" + kiun 

 competition 

 c. 1600, "action of seeking or endeavoring to gain what another is endeavoring to gain at the same time," from Late Latin competitionem (nominative competitio) "rivalry," in classical Latin "agreement," noun of action from past participle stem of competere (see compete). Meaning 

 Share king 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/king Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/king">Etymology of king by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of king. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/king Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of king," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/king. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of king." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/king. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of king." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/king (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near king 
 kinesthetics 
 kinetic 
 kinetics 
 kineto- 
 kinfolk 
 king 
 King Kong 
 king's evil 
 kingdom 
 kingfish 
 kingfisher 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix