URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bazaar
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:39:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bazaar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bazaar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bazaar 

 bazaar (n.) 

 1580s, from Italian bazarra , ultimately from Persian bazar (Pahlavi vacar ) "a market," from Old Iranian *vaha-carana "sale, traffic," from suffixed form of PIE root *wes- (1) "to buy, sell" (see venal ) + PIE *kwoleno- , suffixed form of root *kwel- (1) "revolve, move round; sojourn, dwell."
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to bazaar 

 venal (adj.) 

 mid-15c., "capable of being obtained for a price; that can be corrupted;" 1660s, "offered for sale," from French vénal , Old French venel "for sale" (of prostitutes, etc.; 12c.) and directly from Latin venalis "for sale, to be sold; capable of being bribed."

 This is from venum (nominative *venus ) "for sale," reconstructed to be from PIE *wes-no- "price," from root *wes- (1) "to buy, sell," source also of Sanskrit vasnah "purchase money," vasnam "reward," vasnayati "he bargains, haggles;" Greek onos "price paid, purchase," oneisthai "to buy."

 Typically with a bad sense of "ready to sell one's services or influence for money and from sordid motives; to be bought basely or meanly."

 Venal is strongest in expressing the idea of complete sale to a purchaser—character, honor, principle, and even individuality being surrendered for value received, the venal man doing whatever his purchaser directs, a venal press advocating whatever it is told to advocate. [Century Dictionary, 1891]

 bazar (n.) 

 alternative spelling of bazaar .

 *kwel- (1) 

 also *kwelə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "revolve, move round; sojourn, dwell."

 It might form all or part of: accolade ; ancillary ; atelo- ; bazaar ; bicycle ; bucolic ; chakra ; chukker ; collar ; collet ; colonial ; colony ; cult ; cultivate ; culture ; cyclamen ; cycle ; cyclo- ; cyclone ; Cyclops ; decollete ; encyclical ; encyclopedia ; entelechy ; epicycle ; hauberk ; hawse ; inquiline ; kultur ; lapidocolous ; nidicolous ; palimpsest ; palindrome ; palinode ; pole (n.2) "ends of Earth's axis;" pulley ; rickshaw ; talisman ; teleology ; telic ; telophase ; telos ; torticollis ; wheel .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit cakram "circle, wheel," carati "he moves, wanders;" Avestan caraiti "applies himself," c'axra "chariot, wagon;" Greek kyklos "circle, wheel, any circular body, circular motion, cycle of events," polos "a round axis" (PIE *kw- becomes Greek p- before some vowels), polein "move around;" Latin colere "to frequent, dwell in, to cultivate, move around," cultus "tended, cultivated," hence also "polished," colonus "husbandman, tenant farmer, settler, colonist;" Lithuanian kelias "a road, a way;" Old Norse hvel , Old English hweol "wheel;" Old Church Slavonic kolo , Old Russian kolo , Polish koło , Russian koleso "a wheel."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fair 

 Old English fæger "pleasing to the sight (of persons and body features, also of objects, places, etc.); beautiful, handsome, attractive," of weather, "bright, clear, pleasant; not rainy," also in late Old English "morally good," from Proto-Germanic *fagraz (source also of Old Sax

 pizazz 

 [Harper's Bazaar, March 1937] There is an earlier use, with an uncertain (but seemingly negative) sense, in a satirical...

 tram 

 c. 1500, "beam or shaft of a barrow or sledge," also "a barrow or truck body" (1510s), Scottish, originally in reference to the iron trucks used in coal mines, probably from Middle Flemish tram "beam, handle of a barrow, bar, rung," a North Sea Germanic word of unknown origin. Th

 store 

 mid-13c., storen, "to supply or stock" (a town, castle, etc.) with supplies, including food, from Old French estorer "provide, furnish; erect, construct, build; restore, repair; furnish, equip, provision," from Latin instaurare "to set up, establish; renew, restore," in Medieval 

 market 

 early 12c., "a meeting at a fixed time for buying and selling livestock and provisions, an occasion on which goods are publicly exposed for sale and buyers assemble to purchase," from Old North French market "marketplace, trade, commerce" (Old French marchiet, Modern French march

 posh 

 by 1914 (1903 as push), a word of uncertain origin, but there is no evidence for the common derivation from an acronym of port outward, starboard home, supposedly the shipboard accommodations of wealthy British traveling to India on the P & O Lines (to keep their cabins out o

 shop 

 c. 1300, "booth or shed for trade or work," perhaps from Old English scoppa, a rare word of uncertain meaning, apparently related to scypen "cowshed," from Proto-Germanic *skoppan "small additional structure" (source also of Old High German scopf "building without walls, porch," 

 sale 

 Middle English sale, from late Old English sala "a sale, act of selling," which according to OED probably is from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse sala "sale," but in either case from Proto-Germanic *salo (source also of Old High German sala, Swedish salu, Danish salg), fr

 seal 

 "design stamped on wax," especially an impressed figure attached to a document as evidence of authenticity, c. 1200, sel, sele, from Old French seel, seal "seal on a letter" (Modern French sceau), from Vulgar Latin *sigellum (source of Italian suggello, Spanish sello; also Old Fr

 sabbatical 

 1590s, "recurring in sevens or on every seventh;" 1640s, "of or suitable for the Sabbath," from Latin sabbaticus, from Greek sabbatikos "of the Sabbath," from sabbaton (see Sabbath). By 1836 as "characterized by rest or cessation from labor or tillage." Other adjectives from Sabb

 Share bazaar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bazaar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bazaar">Etymology of bazaar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bazaar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bazaar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bazaar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bazaar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bazaar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bazaar. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bazaar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bazaar (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bazaar 
 bay 
 Bayard 
 bayberry 
 bayonet 
 bayou 
 bazaar 
 bazar 
 bazooka 
 bazooms 
 BBC 
 BBQ 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix