URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ostrich
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:49:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ostrich - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ostrich - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ostrich 

 ostrich (n.) 

 "very large flightless bird inhabiting the sandy plains of Africa and Arabia," early 13c., also hostriche, estrich, ostrig, esterige , etc., from Old French ostruce "ostrich" (Modern French autruche ) and Medieval Latin ostrica , ostrigius , all from Vulgar Latin avis struthio. 

 ﻿ This is from Latin avis "bird" (from PIE root *awi- "bird") + Late Latin struthio "ostrich," from Greek strouthion "ostrich," from strouthos megale "big sparrow," the first word perhaps from PIE *trozdo- "thrush" (see thrush (n.1)).

 The Greeks also knew the bird as strouthokamelos "camel-sparrow," for its long neck. Among its proverbial peculiarities are indiscriminate voracity (especially a habit of swallowing small bits of iron and stone to aid digestion), a supposed want of regard for its eggs (which are incubated partly by the heat of the sun), and a tendency to hide its head when pursued. Ostriches do put their heads in sand, but ostrich farmers say they do this in search of something to eat.

 Like the Austridge, who hiding her little head, supposeth her great body obscured. ["Something written by occasion of that fatall and memorable accident in the Blacke Friers on Sonday, being the 26. of October 1623"]

 Hence expressions cruel as an ostrich  (late 14c.); foolish as an ostrich  (late 15c.). From the Vulgar Latin word also come Spanish avestruz , Italian struzzo , Old English struta , German Strausz , Dutch struis , Danish struds .

 For generic use of "sparrow" for "bird," compare Spanish pájaro , Romanian pasăre "bird," from Latin passer "sparrow."
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to ostrich 

 thrush (n.1) 

 type of songbird, especially the song-thrush or mavis, Old English þræsce , variant of þrysce , from Proto-Germanic *thruskjon (source also of Old Norse þröstr , Norwegian trost , Old High German drosca ), from PIE *trozdo- (source also of Latin turdus , Lithuanian strazdas "thrush," Middle Irish truid , Welsh drudwy "starling," Old Church Slavonic drozgu , Russian drozdu ). Extended to many unrelated species resembling it.

 An aged thrush, frail, gaunt, and small, 

      In blast-beruffled plume, 

 Had chosen thus to fling his soul 

      Upon the growing gloom. 

 [Hardy, "The Darkling Thrush," Dec. 31, 1900] 

 struthious (adj.) 

 "of the ostrich, ostrich-like," 1773, from Latin struthio "ostrich," from Greek strouthion (see ostrich ) + -ous . Related: Struthiously ; struthian . Koestler (1963) introduced struthionian in reference to a person tending to ignore unwelcome facts, or the image of hiding one's head in the sand.

 *awi- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "bird." It also might be the source of *woyo, *oyyo , Proto-Indo-European words for "egg."

 It might form all or part of: auspex ; auspices ; auspicious ; avian ; aviary ; aviation ; aviator ; avicide ; aviculture ; aviform ; caviar ; cockney ; egg (n.); ocarina ; oo- ; oocyte ; oolite ; oology ; osprey ; ostrich ; oval ; ovary ; ovate (adj.); oviform ; oviparous ; ovoviviparous ; ovoid ; ovulate ; ovulation ; ovule ; ovum .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit vih , Avestan vish , Latin avis "bird;" Greek aietos "eagle;" Old Church Slavonic aja , Russian jajco , Breton ui , Welsh wy , Greek ōon , Latin ovum , Old Norse egg , Old High German ei , Gothic ada all meaning "egg."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 meerkat 

 [Annie Martin, "Home Life on an Ostrich Farm," 1890]...

 N 

 early 15c.), a nappyle ("an apple," early 15c.), a negge ("an egg," 15c.), a nynche ("an inch," c. 1400), a nostryche ("an ostrich...

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 person 

 c. 1200, persoun, "an individual, a human being," from Old French persone "human being, anyone, person" (12c., Modern French personne) and directly from Latin persona "human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character," originally "a mask, a false face," such a

 soul 

 "A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks, and wills" [Century Dictionary], Middle English soule, from Old English sawol "spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence; life, living being," from Proto-Germanic *saiwalō (sour

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 somebody 

 c. 1300 as two words, from 16c. as one word, "indeterminate person, person unnamed or unknown," from some + body. Used in place of the name of a person whose name is to be unspoken, by c. 1600. The meaning "important person, person of consequence" is from 1560s. Related: Somebodi

 cruel 

 c. 1200, "stern;" early 13c., of suffering, death, etc., "attended by much distress;" c. 1300, "inclined or willing to make another suffer, disposed to inflict suffering, mental or physical, on any sentient being," from Old French cruel (12c.), earlier crudel, from Latin crudelis

 aesthetic 

 1798, from German Ästhetisch (mid-18c.) or French esthétique (which is from German), ultimately from Greek aisthetikos "of or for perception by the senses, perceptive," of things, "perceptible," from aisthanesthai "to perceive (by the senses or by the mind), to feel," from PIE *a

 palate 

 late 14c., "roof of the mouth of a human or animal; the parts which separate the oral from the nasal cavity," from Old French palat and directly from Latin palatum "roof of the mouth," also "a vault," which is perhaps of Etruscan origin [Klein], but de Vaan suggests an IE root me

 Share ostrich 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ostrich Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ostrich">Etymology of ostrich by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ostrich. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ostrich Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ostrich," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ostrich. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ostrich." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ostrich. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ostrich." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ostrich (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ostrich 
 ostomy 
 ostracean 
 ostracise 
 ostracism 
 ostracize 
 ostrich 
 Ostrogoth 
 Oswald 
 Oswego 
 otalgia 
 other 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix