URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/canal
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:02:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Canal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Canal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of canal 

 canal (n.) 

 early 15c., in anatomy, "tubular passage in the body through which fluids or solids pass;" mid-15c., "a pipe for liquid;" from French canal , chanel "water channel, tube, pipe, gutter" (12c.), from Latin canalis "water pipe, groove, channel," noun use of adjective from canna "reed" (see cane (n.)). The sense was transferred by 1670s to "artificial waterway for irrigation or navigation."
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to canal 

 cane (n.) 

 late 14c., "long slender woody stem," from Old French cane "reed, cane, spear" (13c., Modern French canne ), from Latin canna "reed, cane," from Greek kanna , perhaps from Babylonian-Assyrian qanu "tube, reed" (compare Hebrew qaneh , Arabic qanah "reed"), which may come from Sumerian-Akkadian gin "reed." The sense of "length of cane used as a walking stick" is from 1580s.

 channel (n.) 

 early 14c., "bed of a stream of water," from Old French chanel "bed of a waterway; tube, pipe, gutter," from Latin canalis "groove, channel, waterpipe" (see canal ). The English word was given a broader, figurative sense by 1530s: "that by which something passes or is transmitted" (in reference to information, commerce, etc.); the meaning "circuit for telegraph communication" (1848) probably led to that of "band of frequency for radio or TV signals" (1928). Also "part of a sea making a passageway between land masses, a large strait" (1550s).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 duct 

 1640s, "course, direction," from Latin ductus "a leading, a conduit pipe," noun use of past participle of ducere "to lead" (from PIE root *deuk- "to lead"). Anatomical sense "vessel of an animal body by which blood, lymph, etc., are conveyed" is from 1660s. Meaning "conduit, chan

 shantytown 

 A few miles from Williamsburg [Pennsylvania], there was a canal opening, and a little village of huts called Shantytown inhabited...by the Irishmen who work on the canal....

 digestion 

 late 14c., digestioun, "conversion of food to a state in which it can be absorbed into the blood from the alimentary canal...

 peristaltic 

 "of or pertaining to the involuntary muscular movements of the hollow organs of the body," especially the alimentary canal...

 vessel 

 Meaning "canal or duct of the body" (especially for carrying blood) is attested from late 14c....

 intestine 

 "lower part of the alimentary canal," early 15c., from Old French intestin (14c.) or directly from Latin intestinum "a gut...

 navigator 

 Meaning "laborer employed in excavating a canal" is by 1775, from sense in inland navigation "communication by canals and...

 race 

 [act of running] late Old English, also rase, "a narrative, an account;" c. 1300, "an act of swift running, a hurried attack," also "a course of life or conduct, a swift current;" from Old Norse rās "a running, a rush (of water)," cognate with Old English ræs "a running, a rush, 

 acre 

 Old English æcer "tilled field, open land," from Proto-Germanic *akraz "field, pasture" (source also of Old Norse akr, Old Saxon akkar, Old Frisian ekker, Middle Dutch acker, Dutch akker, Old High German achar, German acker, Gothic akrs "field"), from PIE root *agro- "field." "[O

 care 

 Old English caru, cearu "sorrow, anxiety, grief," also "burdens of mind; serious mental attention," in late Old English also "concern, anxiety caused by apprehension of evil or the weight of many burdens," from Proto-Germanic *karō "lament; grief, care" (source also of Old Saxon 

 Share canal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/canal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/canal">Etymology of canal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of canal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/canal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of canal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/canal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of canal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/canal. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of canal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/canal (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near canal 
 Canaan 
 Canada 
 Canadian 
 Canadianism 
 canaille 
 canal 
 canard 
 canary 
 canasta 
 Canberra 
 cancan 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix