URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/January
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:28:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: January - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

January - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of January 

 January (n.) 

 late 13c., Ieneuer (early 12c. in Anglo-French), from Old North French Genever , Old French Jenvier (Modern French Janvier ), from Latin Ianuarius (mensis) "(the month) of Janus " (q.v.), to whom the month was sacred as the beginning of the year according to later Roman reckoning.

 The English word is cognate with Italian Gennaio , Provençal Genovier , Spanish Enero , Portuguese Janeiro . The form was gradually Latinized by c. 1400. It replaced Old English geola se æfterra "Later Yule." In Chaucer, a type-name for an old man. Also see New Year's Eve .
 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to January 

 Janus 

 ancient Italic deity, to the Romans the guardian god of portals, doors, and gates; patron of beginnings and endings, c. 1500, from Latin Ianus , literally "gate, arched passageway," perhaps from PIE root *ei- "to go" (cognates: Sanskrit yanah "path," Old Church Slavonic jado "to travel"). He is shown as having two faces, one in front the other in back (they may represent sunrise and sunset and reflect an original role as a solar deity). His temple in Rome was closed only in times of peace. Related: Janian .

 New Year's Eve 

 "evening before the first day of the new year," c. 1300; "þer þay dronken & dalten ... on nwe gerez euen" ["Sir Gawain and the Green Knight"]. The Julian calendar began on January 1, but the Christian Church frowned on pagan celebrations of this event and chose the Feast of the Annunciation (March 25) as its New Year's Day.

 The civic year in England continued to begin January 1 until late 12c., and though legal documents then shifted to March 25, popular calendars and almanacs continued to begin on January 1. Gower ( "Confessio Amantis," late 14c.) writes of "The frosti colde Janever, Whan comen is the newe yeer," and in 1579 Spenser ("Shepherd's Kalendar") wrote that "according to the simplicitie of common understanding" the year began in January. The calendar reform of 1751 restored the Julian New Year in England.

 New Year's was the main midwinter festival in Scotland from 17c., when Protestant authorities banned Christmas, and continued so after England reverted to Christmas, hence the Scottish flavor ("Auld Lang Syne," etc.).

 New Year's gathering in public places began 1878 in London, after new bells were installed in St. Paul's. In Pepys' day the turning of the year was celebrated at 1 a.m.

 For New Year's Day, Middle English used yeres dai (c. 1300).

 Rio de Janeiro 
 *ei- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 New Year's Eve 

 The Julian calendar began on January 1, but the Christian Church frowned on pagan celebrations of this event and chose the...The civic year in England continued to begin January 1 until late 12c., and even though legal documents then shifted to March...25, popular calendars and almanacs continued to begin on January 1....

 unscramble 

 [Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science, January 1912] Related: Unscrambled; unscrambling....

 Juliet 

 ["Fabrics, Fancy-Goods & Notions," trade publication, New York, January 1904]...

 ladies 

 and Varnish Club of Chicago, which was given in the Crystal ballroom of the Blackstone Hotel, Chicago, Thursday evening January...

 pseudo-science 

 James's Magazine, January 1842]...

 nuanced 

 [Scribner's Magazine," January 1911]...

 potamology 

 [The Monthly Repository and Review, January, 1829]...

 epiphany 

 early 14c., "festival of the manifestation of Christ to the gentiles" (celebrated Jan. 6; usually with a capital -E-), from Old French epiphanie, from Late Latin epiphania, neuter plural (taken as feminine singular), from late Greek epiphaneia "manifestation, striking appearance,

 yule 

 Old English geol, geola "Christmas Day, Christmastide," which is cognate with Old Norse jol (plural), the name of a heathen feast, later taken over by Christianity; the Germanic word is of unknown origin. The Old English (Anglian) cognate giuli was the Anglo-Saxons' name for a tw

 Noel 

 late 14c., nowel, nouel "Christmas, the Feast of the Nativity," from Old French noel "the Christmas season," variant of nael, from Latin natalis (dies) "birth (day)," used in Church Latin in reference to the birthday of Christ, from natus, past participle of nasci "be born" (Old 

 Share January 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/January Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/January">Etymology of January by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of January. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/January Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of January," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/January. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of January." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/January. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of January." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/January (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near January 
 janitor 
 janitorial 
 janizary 
 Jankin 
 Jansenism 
 January 
 Janus 
 JAP 
 Japan 
 Japanese 
 Japanesque 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix