URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/baboon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:52:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Baboon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Baboon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of baboon 

 baboon (n.) 

 type of old world ape, c. 1400, babewyn , earlier "a grotesque figure used in architecture or decoration" (early 14c.), from French babouin "baboon," from Old French baboin "ape," earlier "simpleton, dimwit, fool" (13c.), also "gaping figure (such as a gargoyle)," so perhaps from Old French baboue "grimacing;" or perhaps it is imitative of an ape's babbling speech-like cries. Also see -oon .

 German Pavian "baboon" is from Dutch baviaan , from Middle Dutch baubijn , a borrowing of the Old French word. Century Dictionary says Arabic maimun probably is from the European words.
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to baboon 

 -oon 

 spelling conventional in 15c.-17c. English to add emphasis to borrowed French nouns ending in stressed -on ; also used to represent Italian -one , Spanish - ón ; all from Latin -onem . Compare shalloon (1670s) for French chalon , a kind of material used for linings. The ending is used occasionally to form words in English, such as spittoon , quadroon , and some older ones no longer with us, such as shabberoon "disreputable person" (c. 1700).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hamadryad 

 Use in 19c. biology for a type of butterfly, a type of venomous Indian serpent, and a type of large hairy baboon....

 mandrill 

 .) + drill (n.4) "baboon," which is of West African origin....

 drill 

 "tool for making holes in hard substances," 1610s, from Dutch dril, drille "a hole, instrument for boring holes," from drillen "to bore (a hole), turn around, whirl," from PIE root *tere- (1) "to rub, turn."..."small furrow; trench or channel in which seeds are deposited," 1727; 

 admonish 

 mid-14c., amonesten "remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning," from Old French amonester "urge, encourage, warn" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere "bring to mind, remind (of a debt);" also "warn, advise, urge," from ad "to," here probably with frequenta

 connoisseur 

 1714, "a critical judge of any art, one well-acquainted with any of the fine arts and thus competent to pass judgment on its products," from French connoisseur (Modern French connaiseur), from Old French conoisseor "an expert, a judge, one well-versed," from conoistre "to know," 

 attitude 

 1660s, "posture or position of a figure in a statue or painting," via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine "disposition, posture," also "aptness, promptitude," from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo; see aptitude, which is its doublet). Originally 17c. a tech

 exile 

 c. 1300, from Old French essillier "exile, banish, expel, drive off" (12c.), from Late Latin exilare/exsilare, from Latin exilium/exsilium "banishment, exile; place of exile," from exul "banished person," from ex "away" (see ex-); according to Watkins the second element is from P

 obvious 

 1580s, "frequently met with" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin obvius "that is in the way, presenting itself readily, open, exposed, commonplace," from obviam (adv.) "in the way," from ob "in front of, against" (see ob-) + viam, accusative of via "way" (from PIE root *wegh- "to 

 interest 

 mid-15c., "legal claim or right; a concern; a benefit, advantage, a being concerned or affected (advantageously)," from Old French interest "damage, loss, harm" (Modern French intérêt), from noun use of Latin interest "it is of importance, it makes a difference," third person sin

 bless 

 Middle English blessen, from Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian "to consecrate by a religious rite, make holy, give thanks," from Proto-Germanic *blodison "hallow with blood, mark with blood," from *blotham "blood" (see blood (n.)). Originally a blood sprinkli

 Share baboon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/baboon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/baboon">Etymology of baboon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of baboon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/baboon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of baboon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/baboon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of baboon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/baboon. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of baboon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/baboon (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near baboon 
 babe 
 Babel 
 babelicious 
 babify 
 Babism 
 baboon 
 babouche 
 babu 
 babushka 
 baby 
 baby boom 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix