URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ribbon
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:06:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ribbon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ribbon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ribbon 

 ribbon (n.) 

 early 14c., riban , ribane , from Anglo-French rubain , Old French riban "a ribbon," variant of ruban (13c.), a word of unknown origin, possibly from a Germanic compound whose second element is related to band (n.1); compare Middle Dutch ringhband "necklace."

 The modern spelling is from mid-16c. Originally a stripe in a material; the sense of "narrow woven band of some find material" for ornamental or other purposes is by 1520s. The word was extended to other long, thin, flexible strips by 1763; the meaning "ink-soaked strip wound on a spool for use on a typewriter" is by 1883. A a torn strip of anything (fabric, clouds, etc.) by 1820. As a verb, "adorn with ribbons," by 1716. Related: Ribboned . The custom of wearing colored ribbon loops on the lapel to declare support for some group perceived as suffering or oppressed began in 1991 with AIDS red ribbons.
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to ribbon 

 band (n.1) 

 "a flat strip," also "something that binds," Middle English bende , from Old English bend "bond, fetter, shackle, chain, that by which someone or something is bound; ribbon, ornament, chaplet, crown," with later senses and spelling from cognate Old Norse band and technical senses from Old French bande "strip, edge, side" (12c., Old North French bende ), all three ultimately from Proto-Germanic *bindan , from PIE root *bhendh- "to bind."

 The meaning "a flat strip" (late 14c.) is from French. In Middle English, this was sometimes distinguished by the spelling bande , bonde , but with loss of terminal -e the words have fully merged via the notion of "flat strip of flexible material used to wind around something."

 The meaning "broad stripe of color, ray of colored light" is from late 14c.; the electronics sense of "range of frequencies or wavelengths" is from 1922. Most of the figurative senses ("legal or moral commitment; captivity, imprisonment," etc.) have passed into bond (n.), which originally was a phonetic variant of this band . The Middle English form of the word is retained in heraldic bend (n.2) "broad diagonal stripe on a coat-of-arms."

 riband (n.) 

 "ribbon," late 14c., a now-archaic variant of ribbon with an unetymological -d (see D ).

 *bhendh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to bind."

 It might form all or part of: band ; bandanna ; bend ; bind ; bindle ; bond ; bund ; bundle ; cummerbund ; ribbon ; woodbine .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit badhnati "binds," bandhah "a tying, bandage;" Old Persian bandaka- "subject;" Lithuanian bendras "partner;" Middle Irish bainna "bracelet;" Old English bendan "to bend a bow, confine with a string," bindan "to bind," Gothic bandi "that which binds."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 thread 

 Old English þræd "fine cord, especially when twisted" (related to þrawan "to twist"), from Proto-Germanic *thredu- "twisted yarn" (source also of Old Saxon thrad, Old Frisian thred, Middle Dutch draet, Dutch draad, Old High German drat, German Draht, Old Norse þraðr), literally "

 decoration 

 early 15c., decoracioun, "the covering of blemishes with cosmetics;" 1580s, "action of adorning with something becoming or ornamental," from Medieval Latin decorationem (nominative decoratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin decorare "to decorate, adorn, embelli

 medal 

 1580s, "a metal disk bearing a figure or inscription," from French médaille (15c.), from Italian medaglia "a medal," according to OED from Vulgar Latin *metallea (moneta) "metal (coin)," from Latin metallum (see metal). The other theory [Klein, Barnhart, Watkins] is that medaglia

 cordon 

 mid-15c., "cord, lace, or ribbon of fine material worn as an ornament or token of victory," from Old French cordon "ribbon...The original sense is preserved in cordon bleu (1727) "the highest distinction," literally "blue ribbon," for the sky-blue...ribbon worn by the old French order of Knights-grand-cross of the Holy Ghost (the highest order of chivalry under the Bourbons...

 label 

 "narrow band or strip of cloth" (oldest use is as a technical term in heraldry), from Old French label, lambel, labeau "ribbon...Meanings "dangling strip of cloth or ribbon used as an ornament in dress," also "strip attached to a document to hold a seal...

 remnant 

 Specific sense of "end of a piece of ribbon, drapery, cloth, etc."...

 Nike 

 based near Portland, Oregon, has been so known since 1971, named for the Greek goddess, having been founded in 1964 as Blue Ribbon...

 object 

 late 14c., "tangible thing, something perceived with or presented to the senses," from Old French object and directly from Medieval Latin obiectum "thing put before" (the mind or sight), noun use of neuter of Latin obiectus "lying before, opposite" (as a noun in classical Latin, 

 accolade 

 1620s, "an embrace about the neck then the tapping of a sword on the shoulders to confer knighthood," from French accolade "an embrace, a kiss" (16c.), from Provençal acolada or Italian accollata, ultimately from noun use of a fem. past participle of Vulgar Latin *accollare "to e

 coordinate 

 1640s, "of the same order, belonging to the same rank or degree," from Medieval Latin coordinatus, past participle of coordinare "to set in order, arrange," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see com-) + ordinatio "arrangement," from ordo "row, rank, series, arrangeme

 Share ribbon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ribbon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ribbon">Etymology of ribbon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ribbon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ribbon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ribbon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ribbon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ribbon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ribbon. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ribbon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ribbon (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ribbon 
 rib 
 ribald 
 ribaldry 
 riband 
 rib-band 
 ribbon 
 riboflavin 
 ribonucleic 
 ribose 
 ribosome 
 rice 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix