URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gauze
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:59:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gauze - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gauze - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gauze 

 gauze (n.) 

 1560s, gais , from French gaze , which is of uncertain origin. It has been conjectured to be from Arabic gazz "raw silk" [Barnhart], or from Gaza , Palestinian city associated with production of this fabric [Klein, Du Cagne], but Century Dictionary calls the latter conjecture, and there has been no evidence for either.
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to gauze 

 Gaza 

 Arabic form of Hebrew 'az "force, strength." Gaza Strip was created by the division of 1949.

 gauzy (adj.) 

 1790, from gauze + -y (2). Related: Gauziness .

 Till gauzy zephyrs flutt'ring o'er the plain,

 On Twilight's bosom drop their filmy rain.

 [Robert Merry, "The Laurel of Liberty," 1790]

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 turban 

 1560s, from French turbant (15c.), from Italian turbante (Old Italian tolipante), from Turkish tülbent "gauze, muslin, tulle...

 chiffon 

 The meaning "sheer silk fabric, thin gauze" is from 1890....

 mosquito 

 Mosquito-net "gauze or other fabric used as a screen against mosquitoes" is from 1745....

 tulip 

 1570s, via Dutch or German tulpe, French tulipe "a tulip" (16c.), all ultimately from Turkish tülbent "turban," also "gauze...

 gossamer 

 The meaning "anything light or flimsy" is from c. 1400; as a type of gauze used for veils, 1837....

 mesh 

 late 14c., mesche, "open space in a net or netting," probably from late Old English max "net," earlier mæscre, from Proto-Germanic *mask- (source also of Old Norse möskvi, Danish maske, Swedish maska, Old Saxon masca, Middle Dutch maessce, Dutch maas "mesh," Old High German masca

 cotton 

 late 13c., "white fibrous substance containing the seeds of the cotton plant," from Old French coton (12c.), ultimately (via Provençal, Italian, or Old Spanish) from Arabic qutn, a word perhaps of Egyptian origin. Also ultimately from the Arabic word are Dutch katoen, German Katt

 net 

 Old English net "open textile fabric tied or woven with a mesh for catching fish, birds, or wild animals alive; network; spider web," also figuratively, "moral or mental snare or trap," from Proto-Germanic *natjo- (source also of Old Saxon net, Old Frisian nette, Old Norse, Dutch

 ten 

 "1 more than nine, twice five; the number which is one more than nine; a symbol representing this number;" Old English ten (Mercian), tien (West Saxon), adjective and noun, from Proto-Germanic *tehun (source also of Old Saxon tehan, Old Norse tiu, Danish ti, Old Frisian tian, Old

 network 

 1550s, "net-like arrangement of threads, wires, etc., anything formed in the manner of or presenting the appearance of a net or netting," from net (n.) + work (n.). Extended sense of "any complex, interlocking system" is from 1839 (originally in reference to transport by rivers, 

 Share gauze 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gauze Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gauze">Etymology of gauze by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gauze. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gauze Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gauze," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gauze. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gauze." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gauze. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gauze." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gauze (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gauze 
 Gaulish 
 gaunt 
 gauntlet 
 gauss 
 Gautama 
 gauze 
 gauzy 
 gavage 
 gave 
 gavel 
 gavotte 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix