URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cymbal
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:04:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cymbal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cymbal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cymbal 

 cymbal (n.) 

 "one of a pair of plates of brass or bronze which, when struck together, produce a sharp, ringing sound," mid-15c., from Old English cimbal and from Old French cymbale (13c.), both from Latin cymbalum , from Greek kymbalon "a cymbal," from kymbē "bowl, drinking cup." This previously has been connected with Sanskrit kumbha- , Avestan xumba- "pot;" Middle Irish comm, cummal . Beekes writes that, for structural reasons, "the word cannot be inherited. It is rather a 'Wanderwort', which fits a vessel term very well."
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to cymbal 

 chime (n.) 

 c. 1300, chymbe "a cymbal," from Old French chimbe or directly from Latin cymbalum (see cymbal , the modern word for what this word originally meant). Old English had cymbal, cimbal in the "cymbal" sense. Evidently the word was shortened in Old French then misinterpreted in Middle English as chymbe bellen (a form also attested from c. 1300) and its sense shifted to "set of bells in a church or clock tower, apparatus or arrangement for striking bells," which is attested from mid-15c. Meaning "set of bells tuned to a musical scale" is from 1560s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ride 

 A ride cymbal (1956) is used by jazz drummers for keeping up continuous rhythm, as opposed to a crash cymbal (ride as "rhythm...

 sage 

 "wise, judicious, prudent," c. 1300 (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sage "wise, knowledgeable, learned; shrewd, skillful" (11c.), from Gallo-Roman *sabius, from Vulgar Latin *sapius, from Latin sapere "have a taste, have good taste, be wise" (from PIE root *sap- "to tas

 interview 

 1510s, "face-to-face meeting, formal conference," from French entrevue, verbal noun from s'entrevoir "to see each other, visit each other briefly, have a glimpse of," from entre- "between" (see inter-) + Old French voir "to see" (from Latin videre, from PIE root *weid- "to see").

 consternation 

 "astonishment combined with terror," 1610s, from French consternation "dismay, confusion," from Latin consternationem (nominative consternatio) "confusion, dismay," noun of state from past-participle stem of consternare "overcome, confuse, dismay, perplex, terrify, alarm," which 

 tradition 

 late 14c., "statement, belief, or practice handed down from generation to generation," especially "belief or practice based on Mosaic law," from Old French tradicion "transmission, presentation, handing over" (late 13c.) and directly from Latin traditionem (nominative traditio) "

 experiment 

 mid-14c., "action of observing or testing; an observation, test, or trial;" also "piece of evidence or empirical proof; feat of magic or sorcery," from Old French esperment "practical knowledge, cunning; enchantment, magic spell; trial, proof, example; lesson, sign, indication," 

 bolt 

 Old English bolt "short, stout arrow with a heavy head;" also "crossbow for throwing bolts," from Proto-Germanic *bultas (source also of Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps originally "arrow, missile," and from PIE *bheld- "to knock, strike" (source 

 dispense 

 mid-14c., dispensen, "to dispose of, deal or divide out," from Old French dispenser "give out" (13c.), from Latin dispensare "disburse, administer, distribute (by weight)," frequentative of dispendere "pay out," from dis- "out" (see dis-) + pendere "to hang, cause to hang; weigh;

 salmon 

 early 13c., samoun, the North Atlantic salmon, from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem (nominative salmo) "a salmon," probably originally "leaper," from salire "to leap" (see salient (adj.)), though some dismiss this as folk etymolo

 press 

 c. 1300, presse, "a crowd, throng, company; crowding and jostling of a throng; a massing together," from Old French presse (n.) "a throng, a crush, a crowd; wine or cheese press" (11c.), from Latin pressare (see press (v.1)). Late Old English had press in the sense of "clothes pr

 Share cymbal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cymbal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cymbal">Etymology of cymbal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cymbal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cymbal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cymbal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cymbal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cymbal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cymbal. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cymbal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cymbal (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cymbal 
 cyclosporiasis 
 cyclotron 
 cygnet 
 cylinder 
 cylindrical 
 cymbal 
 Cymric 
 cynanthropy 
 cynic 
 cynical 
 cynicism 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix