URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/strategy
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:37:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Strategy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Strategy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of strategy 

 strategy (n.) 

 1810, "the art of a general, the science of war," from French stratégie (16c.) and directly from Latinized form of Greek stratēgia "office or command of a general," from stratēgos "general, commander of an army," also the title of various civil officials and magistrates, from stratos "multitude, troop, a division of the people; army, navy, expedition, encamped army," probably originally "a camping army," and meaning etymologically "that which is spread out" (from PIE *str-to- , from root *stere- "to spread"). With Greek agos "leader," from agein "to lead" (from PIE root *ag- "to drive, draw out or forth, move").

 As "an instance of strategy, a particular strategy" by 1833. In non-military use by 1887.
 also from 1810 

 Entries linking to strategy 

 stratagem (n.) 

 "artifice, trick," especially in war, late 15c., from French strattegeme , stratagème "trick, especially to outwit an enemy" (15c.), from Italian stratagemma , from Latin strategema "artifice, stratagem," from Greek strategema "the act of a general; military stratagem," from strategein "to be a general, command," from strategos "general" (see strategy ). Related: Stratagematic ; stratagemic ; stratagemical . The second -a- is a Romanic misspelling (compare Spanish estratagema ).

 strategic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to strategy, characterized by strategy," 1807, from French stratégique and directly from Latinized form of Greek strat ē gikos , in classical use, "of or for a general; fitted for command," from stratēgein "be a general," from strategos "commander of an army" (see strategy ).

 In reference to materials essential to fighting wars, by 1958. Related: Strategical ; strategically (1810). Strategetic in the same sense is by 1848, from Greek stratēg ētikos "pertaining to the command of an army." Related: Strategetical .

 strategist 
 strategize 
 *ag- 
 *stere- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scheme 

 1550s, "figure of speech" (a sense now obsolete), from Medieval Latin schema "a shape, a figure, a form, appearance; figure of speech; posture in dancing," from Greek skhēma (genitive skhematos) "figure, appearance, the nature of a thing," which is related to skhein "to get," and

 massive 

 Cold War deterrent strategy of massive retaliation "threat of using thermonuclear weapons in response to aggression against...

 scorch 

 Scorched earth military strategy is by 1937, said to be a translation of Chinese jiaotu, in reference to tactics to stem...

 stonewall 

 Johnston, "Bull Run: Its Strategy and Tactics," Boston, 1913]...

 filibuster 

 Senate, but that's where the strategy works best. [The 1853 use of filibustering by U.S. Rep. Albert G....

 dodge 

 1560s, "go this way and that in speech or action," a sense now obsolete; from 1680s as "start suddenly aside, shift suddenly," as to evade a blow;" 1704 as "to move to and fro, shift about;" origin and sense evolution obscure. Perhaps it is from or akin to Scottish and Northern E

 bubble 

 "small vesicle of water or some other fluid inflated with air or gas," early 14c., perhaps from Middle Dutch bobbel (n.) and/or Middle Low German bubbeln (v.), all probably of echoic origin. Figurative use in reference to anything wanting firmness, substance, or permanence is fro

 plot 

 late Old English plot "small piece of ground of defined shape," a word of unknown origin. The sense of "ground plan," and thus "map, chart, survey of a field, farm, etc." is from 1550s. Plat is a Middle English collateral form. The meaning "a secret, plan, fully formulated scheme

 game 

 c. 1200, from Old English gamen "joy, fun; game, amusement," common Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian game "joy, glee," Old Norse gaman "game, sport; pleasure, amusement," Old Saxon gaman, Old High German gaman "sport, merriment," Danish gamen, Swedish gamman "merriment"), said to 

 mage 

 "magician, enchanter," c. 1400, Englished form of Latin magus "magician, learned magician," from Greek magos, a word used for the Persian learned and priestly class as portrayed in the Bible (said by ancient historians to have been originally the name of a Median tribe), from Old

 Share strategy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/strategy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/strategy">Etymology of strategy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of strategy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/strategy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of strategy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/strategy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of strategy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/strategy. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of strategy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/strategy (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near strategy 
 strata 
 stratagem 
 strategic 
 strategist 
 strategize 
 strategy 
 strath 
 stratification 
 stratify 
 stratigraphy 
 strato- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix