URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/origin
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:41:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Origin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Origin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of origin 

 origin (n.) 

 c. 1400, "ancestry, race," from Latin originem (nominative origo ) "a rise, commencement, beginning, source; descent, lineage, birth," from stem of oriri "arise, rise, get up; appear above the horizon, become visible; be born, be descended, receive life;" figuratively "come forth, take origin, proceed, start" (of rivers, rumors, etc.), from PIE *heri- "to rise" (source also of Hittite arai- "to arise, lift, raise," Sanskrit iyarti "to set in motion, move," Armenian y-arnem "to rise"). Meaning "beginning of existence" is from 1560s; sense of "that from which something derives its being or nature" is from c. 1600.
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to origin 

 aborigine (n.) 

 "person, animal, or plant that has been in a country or region from earliest times," 1858, mistaken singular of aborigines (1540s; aboriginal is considered the correct singular in English), from Latin aborigines "the first inhabitants," especially of Latium, hence "the first ancestors of the Romans." This is possibly a tribal name, or from or made to conform to the Latin phrase ab origine , which means literally "from the beginning."

 This is from ab "off, away from" (see ab- ) + ablative of origo "a rise, commencement, beginning, source; descent, lineage, birth," from stem of oriri "arise, rise; be born, be descended, receive life" (see origin ).

 It was extended by 1789 to natives of other countries which Europeans had colonized, especially "aboriginal inhabitant of Australia," with capital A- . The Australian English slang shortening Abo is attested from 1922 as a noun, by 1906 as an adjective.

 abort (v.) 

 1570s, "to miscarry in giving birth," from Latin abortus , past participle of aboriri "to miscarry, be aborted, fail, disappear, pass away," a compound word used in Latin for deaths, miscarriages, sunsets, etc., which according to OED is from ab , here as "amiss" (see ab- ), + stem of oriri "appear, be born, arise," from PIE *heri- "to rise" (see origin ). [Watkins, contra de Vaan, etc., derives the second element from a suffixed form of PIE root *er- (1) "move, set in motion."]

 The English word is attested from 1610s as "to deliberately terminate" anything (intransitive), but especially a pregnancy in a human or animal. Intransitive use in aeronautics and space-flight is by 1946. Transitive meaning "to cause (a woman) to miscarry" is recorded by 1916; with the fetus or pregnancy as the object of the action, by 1966. Related: Aborted ; aborting . The Latin verb for "produce an abortion" was abigo , literally "to drive away."

 abortion 
 orient 
 original 
 origination 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 abortion 

 1540s, "the expulsion of the fetus before it is viable," originally of deliberate as well as unintended miscarriages; from Latin abortionem (nominative abortio) "miscarriage; abortion, procuring of an untimely birth," noun of action from past-participle stem of aboriri "to miscar

 orient 

 late 14c., "the direction east; the part of the horizon where the sun first appears," also (now with capital O-) "the eastern regions of the world, eastern countries" (originally vaguely meaning the region east and south of Europe, what is now called the Middle East but also some

 original 

 early 14c., "first in time, earliest," from Old French original "first" (13c.) and directly from Latin originalis, from originem (nominative origo) "beginning, source, birth," from oriri "to rise" (see origin). The first reference is to sin, synne original, "innate depravity of m

 provenance 

 "origin, source or quarter from which anything comes," 1785, from French provenance "origin, production," from provenant,...

 taffy 

 coarse candy made from sugar or molasses boiled down and cooled, 1817, related to toffee, but of uncertain origin; perhaps...with tafia (1763), a rum-like alcoholic liquor distilled from molasses, presumably of West Indian or Malay (Austronesian) origin...

 swarm 

 "to climb (a tree, pole, etc.) by clasping with the arms and legs alternately, to shin," 1540s, of uncertain origin....meaning has been discovered for phonetically corresponding words" [OED]. perhaps originally a sailors' word, of uncertain origin...

 entice 

 instigate" (to sin or violence) from Old French enticier "to stir up (fire), to excite, incite," which is of uncertain origin...set on fire," from Latin in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + titio (genitive titionis) "firebrand," which is of uncertain origin...

 course 

 c. 1300, "onward movement, motion forward, a running in a prescribed direction or over a prescribed distance; path or distance prescribed for a race, a race-course" from Old French cors "course; run, running; flow of a river" (12c.), from Latin cursus "a running; a journey; direc

 source 

 mid-14c., "support, base," from Old French sourse "a rising, beginning, fountainhead of a river or stream" (12c.), fem. noun taken from past participle of sourdre "to rise, spring up," from Latin surgere "to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack," a contraction of surrige

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 Share origin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/origin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/origin">Etymology of origin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of origin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/origin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of origin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/origin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of origin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/origin. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of origin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/origin (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near origin 
 oriented 
 orienteering 
 orifice 
 oriflamme 
 origami 
 origin 
 original 
 originality 
 originate 
 origination 
 originator 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix