URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hegira
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:14:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hegira - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hegira - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hegira 

 hegira (n.) 

 flight of Muhammad from Mecca to Medina (July 16, 622 C.E.), the event from which the Islamic calendar reckons, 1580s, from Medieval Latin hegira , from Arabic hijrah "departure," from hajara "to depart."

 Entries linking to hegira 

 A.H. 

 in Islamic calendrical reckoning, 1788, abbreviation of Medieval Latin Anno Hegirae , "Year of the Hegira," the flight of Muhammad from Mecca in 622 C.E., from which Muslims reckon time; from ablative of annus "year" (see annual (adj.)) + genitive of hegira .

 Anno Hegirae 

 Medieval Latin, "in the year of the hegira," the flight of Muhammad from Mecca, 622 C.E., from which Muslims reckon time; from ablative of annus "year" (see annual (adj.)) + genitive of hegira . Abbreviated A.H. 

 hijra (n.) 

 also hijrah , the more correct form of hegira .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Exodus 

 late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus, from Greek exodos "a military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death," literally "a going out," from ex "out" (see ex-) + hodos "a way, path, road; a ride, journey, march," figuratively "way out

 epoch 

 1610s, epocha, "point marking the start of a new period in time" (such as the founding of Rome, the birth of Christ, the Hegira...

 escape 

 c. 1300, transitive and intransitive, "free oneself from confinement; extricate oneself from trouble; get away safely by flight (from battle, an enemy, etc.)," from Old North French escaper, Old French eschaper (12c., Modern French échapper), from Vulgar Latin *excappare, literal

 flight 

 "act of flying," Old English flyht "a flying, act or power of flying," from Proto-Germanic *flukhtiz (source also of Dutch vlucht "flight of birds," Old Norse flugr, Old High German flug, German Flug "flight"), from Proto-Germanic *flugti-, suffixed form of PIE root *pleu- "to fl

 frustration 

 "act of frustrating, disappointment, defeat," 1550s, from Latin frustrationem (nominative frustratio) "a deception, a disappointment," noun of action from past-participle stem of frustrari "to deceive, disappoint, make vain," from frustra (adv.) "in vain, in error," which is rela

 fit 

 1680s, "process of fitting," from fit (v.). From 1823 as "the fitting of one thing to another;" 1831 as "the way something fits."..."paroxysm, sudden attack" (as of anger), 1540s, probably via Middle English fit (n.) "painful, exciting experience" (early 14c.), from Old English f

 bow 

 [bend the body] Middle English bouen, from Old English bugan "to bend, become bent, have or assume a curved direction; to bow down, bend the body in condescension or reverence, to submit," also "to turn back" (class II strong verb; past tense beag, past participle bogen), from Pr

 spare 

 Middle English sparren, from Old English sparian, Mercian spearian, "refrain from harming or injury, leave undamaged; be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly," from the source of Old English spær "sparing, frugal," from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (source also of Old Saxon sp

 cast 

 c. 1200, "throw, throw violently, fling, hurl," from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse kasta "to throw" (cognate with Swedish kasta, Danish kaste, North Frisian kastin), a word of uncertain origin. The meaning "to form in a mold" is late 15c. In the sense of "to throw" it r

 lotus 

 a name given to various plants, not all related or alike, 1540s, from Latin lotus, from Greek lotos, a word used as a name for several plants before it came to mean Egyptian white lotus (a sense attested in English from 1580s). It is perhaps from Semitic (compare Hebrew lot "myrr

 Share hegira 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hegira Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hegira">Etymology of hegira by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hegira. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hegira Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hegira," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hegira. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hegira." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hegira. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hegira." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hegira (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hegira 
 hegemon 
 hegemonic 
 hegemonism 
 hegemonist 
 hegemony 
 hegira 
 heh 
 he-he 
 heifer 
 heigh-ho 
 height 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix