URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cupid
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:57:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cupid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cupid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Cupid 

 Cupid 

 Roman god of passionate love, late 14c., from Latin Cupido , personification of cupido "desire, love, passion," from cupere "to desire" (see cupidity ). Identified with Greek Eros . Cupid's bow as a shape, especially of lips, is from 1858.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to Cupid 

 cupidity (n.) 

 "eager desire to possess something," mid-15c., from Anglo-French cupidite and directly from Latin cupiditatem (nominative cupiditas ) "passionate desire, lust; ambition," from cupidus "eager, passionate," from cupere "to desire." This is perhaps from a PIE root *kup-(e)i- "to tremble; to desire," and cognate with Sanskrit kupyati "bubbles up, becomes agitated;" Old Church Slavonic kypeti "to boil;" Lithuanian kupėti "to boil over;" Old Irish accobor "desire."

 Despite the primarily erotic sense of the Latin word, in English cupidity originally, and still especially, means "desire for wealth."

 kewpie (n.) 

 1909, American English, coined by their inventor and illustrator, Rose C. O'Neill (1874-1944), as an altered form of a diminutive of Cupid . Kewpie doll is from 1916.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 emblem 

 1580s, "relief, raised ornament on vessels, etc.," from Latin emblema "inlaid ornamental work," from Greek emblema (genitive emblematos) "an insertion," from emballein "to insert," literally "to throw in," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + ballein "to throw" (from 

 allegory 

 "figurative treatment of an unmentioned subject under the guise of another similar to it in some way," late 14c., allegorie, from Old French allegorie (12c.), from Latin allegoria, from Greek allegoria "figurative language, description of one thing under the image of another," li

 bow 

 [bend the body] Middle English bouen, from Old English bugan "to bend, become bent, have or assume a curved direction; to bow down, bend the body in condescension or reverence, to submit," also "to turn back" (class II strong verb; past tense beag, past participle bogen), from Pr

 Creole 

 "person born in a country but of a people not indigenous to it," c. 1600, from French créole (17c.), from Spanish criollo "(person) native to a locality," from Portuguese crioulo, diminutive of cria "person (especially a servant) raised in one's house," from criar "to raise or br

 emotion 

 1570s, "a (social) moving, stirring, agitation," from French émotion (16c.), from Old French emouvoir "stir up" (12c.), from Latin emovere "move out, remove, agitate," from assimilated form of ex "out" (see ex-) + movere "to move" (from PIE root *meue- "to push away"). The sense 

 gentleman 

 c. 1200, perhaps mid-12c., "well-born man, man of good family or birth," also extended to Roman patricians and ancient Greek aristocrats, from gentle + man (n.); the compound probably is modeled on Old French gentilhomme (the English gentleman itself was borrowed into French in 1

 conference 

 1550s, "act of consulting together," from French confrence (15c.), from Medieval Latin conferentia, from Latin conferens, present participle of conferre "to bring together; deliberate, talk over," literally "to bring together," from assimilated form of com "together" (see con-) +

 hatch 

 early 13c., hachen, "to produce young from eggs by incubation," probably from an unrecorded Old English *hæccan, of unknown origin, related to Middle High German, German hecken "to mate" (used of birds). Meaning "to come forth from an egg," also "cause to come forth from an egg" 

 dodge 

 1560s, "go this way and that in speech or action," a sense now obsolete; from 1680s as "start suddenly aside, shift suddenly," as to evade a blow;" 1704 as "to move to and fro, shift about;" origin and sense evolution obscure. Perhaps it is from or akin to Scottish and Northern E

 boycott 

 1880, noun and verb, "to combine in refusing to have dealings with, and preventing or discouraging others from doing so, as punishment for political or other differences." From Irish Land League ostracism of Capt. Charles C. Boycott (1832-1897), land agent of Lough-Mask in County

 Share Cupid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cupid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cupid">Etymology of Cupid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Cupid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cupid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Cupid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cupid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Cupid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cupid. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Cupid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Cupid (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Cupid 
 cunt 
 cup 
 cupboard 
 cupcake 
 cupful 
 Cupid 
 cupidity 
 cupola 
 cuppa 
 cupping 
 cupreous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix