URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/musk
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Musk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Musk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of musk 

 musk (n.) 

 odoriferous reddish-brown substance secreted by the male musk deer (dried and used in medicinal preparations and as a perfume), late 14c., from Old French musc (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin muscus , from Late Greek moskhos , from Persian mushk , from Sanskrit muska-s "testicle," from mus "mouse" (so called, presumably, for resemblance; compare muscle ). The deer gland was thought to resemble a scrotum. German has Moschus , from a Medieval Latin form of the Late Greek word. Spanish has almizcle , from Arabic al misk "the musk," from Persian.

 The musk-deer , the small ruminant of central Asia that produces the substance, is so called from 1680s. The name musk was applied to various plants and animals of similar smell, such as the Arctic musk-ox (1744). Musk-melon "the common melon" (1570s) probably originally was an oriental melon with a musky smell, the name transferred by error [OED, 1989]. Also compare Muscovy .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to musk 

 muscle (n.) 

 "contractible animal tissue consisting of bundles of fibers," late 14c., "a muscle of the body," from Latin musculus "a muscle," literally "a little mouse," diminutive of mus "mouse" (see mouse (n.)).

 So called because the shape and movement of some muscles (notably biceps) were thought to resemble mice. The analogy was made in Greek, too, where mys is both "mouse" and "muscle," and its combining form gives the medical prefix myo- . Compare also Old Church Slavonic mysi "mouse," mysica "arm;" German Maus "mouse; muscle," Arabic 'adalah "muscle," 'adal "field mouse;" Cornish logodenfer "calf of the leg," literally "mouse of the leg." In Middle English, lacerte , from the Latin word for "lizard," also was used as a word for a muscle.

 Musclez & lacertez bene one selfe þing, Bot þe muscle is said to þe fourme of mouse & lacert to þe fourme of a lizard. [Guy de Chauliac, "Grande Chirurgie," c. 1425]

 Hence muscular and mousy are relatives, and a Middle English word for "muscular" was lacertous , "lizardy." Figurative sense of "muscle, strength, brawn" is by 1850; that of "force, violence, threat of violence" is 1930, American English. Muscle car "hot rod" is from 1969.

 Muscovy 

 former principality in central Russia that formed the nucleus of the modern Russian nation; from French Moscovie , from Modern Latin Moscovia , old name of Russia, from Russian Moskova "(Principality of) Moscow." In Muscovy duck (1650s), the tropical American bird, and certain other uses it is a corruption of musk . Related: Muscovite; Muscovian .

 muscat 
 musky 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nutmeg 

 or Anglo-French *noiz mugue, from Old French nois muguete, an unexplained alteration of nois muscade "nut smelling like musk...

 scent 

 late 14c., senten, originally a hunting term, "to find the scent of, perceive by smell," from Old French sentir "to feel, smell, touch, taste; realize, perceive; make love to," from Latin sentire " to feel, perceive by the senses; give one's opinion or sentiments" (see sense (n.)

 Atlantic 

 early 15c., Atlantyke, "of or pertaining to the sea off the west coast of Africa," from Latin Atlanticus, from Greek Atlantikos "of Atlas," adjectival form of Atlas (genitive Atlantos) as used in reference to Mount Atlas in Mauritania (see Atlas). The name has been extended since

 flesh 

 Old English flæsc "flesh, meat, muscular parts of animal bodies; body (as opposed to soul)," also "living creatures," also "near kindred" (a sense now obsolete except in phrase flesh and blood), from Proto-Germanic *flaiska-/*fleiski- (source also of Old Frisian flesk, Middle Low

 propaganda 

 1718, "committee of cardinals in charge of foreign missions of the Catholic Church," short for Congregatio de Propaganda Fide "congregation for propagating the faith," a committee of cardinals established 1622 by Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the 

 offend 

 early 14c., offenden, "to disobey or sin against (a person, human or divine)," a sense now obsolete, from Old French ofendre "hit, attack, injure; sin against; antagonize, excite to anger" and directly from Latin offendere "to hit, thrust, or strike against," figuratively "to stu

 resent 

 c. 1600, "feel pain or distress" (a sense now obsolete); 1620s, "take (something) ill, consider as an injury or affront; be in some degree angry or provoked at," from French ressentir "feel pain, regret," from Old French resentir "feel again, feel in turn" (13c.), from re-, here 

 aubergine 

 "fruit of the eggplant" (Solanum esculentum), 1775, from French aubergine, from Catalan alberginera (showing typical change of al- to au- in French), from Arabic al-badinjan "the eggplant" (source also of Spanish alberengena, 15c.), from Persian badin-gan, from Sanskrit vatigagam

 camp 

 1520s, "place where an army lodges temporarily," from French camp, in this sense from Italian campo, from Latin campus "open field, level space," especially "open space for military exercise" (see campus). The direct descendant of Latin campus in French is champ "a field." The La

 behold 

 Old English bihaldan (West Saxon behealdan) "give regard to, hold in view," also "keep hold of; belong to," from be- + haldan, healdan (see hold (v.)). Related: Beheld; beholding. A common West Germanic compound, compare Old Saxon bihaldan "hold, keep," Old Frisian bihalda "hold,

 Share musk 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/musk Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/musk">Etymology of musk by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of musk. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/musk Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of musk," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/musk. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of musk." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/musk. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of musk." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/musk (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near musk 
 musician 
 musicianship 
 musico- 
 musicology 
 musing 
 musk 
 muskeg 
 muskellunge 
 musket 
 musketeer 
 musketry 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix