URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/anchor
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T20:08:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Anchor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Anchor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of anchor 

 anchor (n.) 

 "device for securing ships to the ground under the water by means of cables," Old English ancor , borrowed 9c. from Latin ancora "an anchor," which is from or cognate with Greek ankyra "an anchor, a hook," from PIE root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (see angle (n.)).

 A very early borrowing into English and said to be the only Latin nautical term used in the Germanic languages (German Anker , Swedish ankar , etc.). The unetymological -ch- emerged late 16c., a pedantic imitation of a corrupt spelling of the Latin word. The figurative sense of "that which gives stability or security" is from late 14c. The meaning "host or presenter of a TV or radio program" is from 1965, short for anchorman (q.v.).

 anchor (v.) 

 "fix or secure in a particular place," c. 1200, perhaps in Old English, from anchor (n.) or from Medieval Latin ancorare . Figurative use from 1580s; in reference to television or radio programs, 1961. Related: Anchored ; anchoring .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to anchor 

 anchorman (n.) 

 1903, "last man of a tug-of-war team," from anchor (n.) + man (n.). Later, "one who runs last in a relay race" (1934). Transferred sense "host or presenter of a TV or radio program" is from 1958.

 angle (n.) 

 "space or difference in direction between intersecting lines," late 14c., from Old French angle "an angle, a corner" (12c.) and directly from Latin angulus "an angle, a corner," a diminutive form from PIE root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (source also of Greek ankylos "bent, crooked," Latin ang(u)ere "to compress in a bend, fold, strangle;" Old Church Slavonic aglu "corner;" Lithuanian anka "loop;" Sanskrit ankah "hook, bent," angam "limb;" Old English ancleo "ankle;" Old High German ango "hook").

 The figurative sense "point or direction from which one approaches something" is from 1872. Angle-bracket is attested by 1781 in carpentry; 1956 in typography.

 anchorage 
 lachrymose 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lachrymose 

 also lacrymose, 1660s, "tear-like," from Latin lacrimosus "tearful, sorrowful, weeping," also "causing tears, lamentable," from lacrima, lacryma "a tear," a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma "a tear," from dakryein "to shed tears, weep, lament with tears," from dakry "a 

 keystone 

 "stone in the middle of an arch (typically the uppermost stone), which holds up the others," 1630s, earlier simply key (1520s), from key (n.1) in figurative sense of "that which holds together other parts," or from its Middle English architectural sense "projecting ornament of at

 ground 

 Old English grund "bottom; foundation; surface of the earth," also "abyss, Hell," and "bottom of the sea" (a sense preserved in run aground), from Proto-Germanic *grundu-, which seems to have meant "deep place" (source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish grund, Dutch 

 bitter end 

 , "the part of a cable which is round about the bitts" (the two great timbers used to belay cables) when the ship is at anchor...

 weigh 

 The older sense of "lift, carry" survives in the nautical phrase weigh anchor....

 cable 

 Technically, in nautical use, a rope 10 or more inches around, to hold the ship when at anchor; in non-nautical use, a rope...

 talk 

 In reference to a person who habitually appears on television in talking-head shots (usually a news anchor), by 1970....

 vessel 

 c. 1300, "container," from Old French vessel "container, receptacle, barrel; ship" (12c., Modern French vaisseau) from Late Latin vascellum "small vase or urn," also "a ship," alteration of Latin vasculum, diminutive of vas "vessel." Sense of "ship, boat" is found in English from

 shank 

 "leg of a human or animal," especially "the part of the leg from the knewe to the ankle," Old English sceanca "leg, shank, shinbone," specifically, the part of the leg from the knee to the ankle, from Proto-Germanic *skunkia- (source also of Middle Low German schenke, German sche

 fasten 

 Old English fæstnian "make fast, make firm, fix, secure," also "ratify, betroth, confirm," from Proto-Germanic *fastinon "to make firm or fast" (source also of Old Frisian festnia "to make firm, bind fast," Old Saxon fastnon, Old High German fastnion, German festnen, Old Norse fa

 Share anchor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/anchor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/anchor">Etymology of anchor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of anchor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/anchor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of anchor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anchor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of anchor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anchor. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of anchor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/anchor (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near anchor 
 anatomy 
 -ance 
 ancestor 
 ancestral 
 ancestry 
 anchor 
 anchorage 
 anchoress 
 anchorite 
 anchorman 
 anchovy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix