URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/noxious
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:32:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Noxious - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Noxious - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of noxious 

 noxious (adj.) 

 "unwholesome, harmful," c. 1500, noxius , from Latin noxius "hurtful, injurious," from noxa "injury, hurt, damage entailing liability" (related to nocere "to hurt," and to nex "slaughter"), from PIE *noks- , from root *nek- (1) "death." Related: Noxiously; noxiousness .
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to noxious 

 *nek- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "death." It might form all or part of: innocent ; innocuous ; internecine ; necro- ; necropolis ; necrosis ; necromancy ; nectar ; nectarine ; nociceptive ; nocuous ; noxious ; nuisance ; obnoxious ; pernicious .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit nasyati "disappears, perishes," Avestan nasyeiti "disappears," nasu- "corpse," Old Persian vi-nathayatiy "he injures;" Greek nekros "corpse;" Latin nex , genitive necis "violent death, murder" (as opposed to mors ), nocere "to harm, hurt," noxius "harmful;" Greek nekus "dead" (adj.), nekros "dead body, corpse;" Old Irish ec , Breton ankou , Welsh angeu "death."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pestilence 

 a plague, an unwholesome atmosphere," noun of condition from pestilentem (nominative pestilens) "infected, unwholesome, noxious...

 damp 

 early 14c., "noxious vapor in a coal mine, fire-damp, stifling poisonous gas," perhaps in Old English but there is no record...

 venomous 

 "full of venom, noxious or hurtful by means of venom," c. 1300, from Anglo-French venimeus, Old French venimos (12c., Modern...

 miasma 

 the ground and floating in the atmosphere, considered to be infectious or injurious to health," from Modern Latin miasma "noxious...

 malignant 

 As an adjective, Middle English used simple malign (early 14c.), also malignous "poisonous, noxious."...

 sparrow 

 , whose food is principally seeds and grain, yet it has been introduced in many countries for the purpose of destroying noxious...It speedily becomes a pest wherever introduced, and seldom destroys noxious insects to any appreciable extent....

 baleful 

 Old English bealufull "dire, wicked, cruel," with -ful + bealu "harm, injury, ruin, evil, mischief, wickedness, a noxious...

 deliberate 

 early 15c., "done with careful consideration," from Latin deliberatus "resolved upon, determined," past participle of deliberare "consider carefully, consult," literally "weigh well," from de, here probably "entirely" (see de-) + -liberare, altered (probably by influence of liber

 fail 

 c. 1200, "be unsuccessful in accomplishing a purpose;" also "cease to exist or to function, come to an end;" early 13c. as "fail in expectation or performance," from Old French falir "be lacking, miss, not succeed; run out, come to an end; err, make a mistake; be dying; let down,

 perfection 

 early 13c., perfeccioun, "consummate state or form, that degree of excellence which leaves nothing to be desired," from Old French perfection "perfection, completeness" (12c.), from Latin perfectionem (nominative perfectio) "a finishing, completing, perfection," noun of action fr

 Share noxious 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/noxious Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/noxious">Etymology of noxious by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of noxious. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/noxious Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of noxious," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/noxious. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of noxious." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/noxious. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of noxious." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/noxious (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near noxious 
 nowadays 
 nowhere 
 nowhither 
 no-win 
 no-wise 
 noxious 
 nozzle 
 nth 
 nuance 
 nuanced 
 nub 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix