URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ski
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:07:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ski - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ski - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ski 

 ski (n.) 

 in early use often skee , "one of a pair of long, slender boards or slats fastened to the feet and used to glide over snow," 1883 (there is an isolated instance from 1755), from Norwegian ski , related to Old Norse skið "long snowshoe," literally "stick of wood, firewood," cognate with Old English scid "stick of wood," obsolete English shide "piece of wood split off from timber;" Old High German skit , German Scheit "log," from Proto-Germanic *skid- "to divide, split," from PIE root *skei- "to cut, split."

 THE new sport which has lately been introduced at Beloit is skeeing. They are long ash planks, carefully planed and turned up at the end, and are warranted to take you down hill quicker than a wink. After some practice performers become very expert, and the speed with which they go is something surprising. [Beloit College, Wisconsin, Round Table, Dec. 18, 1885]

 Ski-jumper  is attested from 1894; ski bum , a skiing enthusiast who works casual jobs at resorts for the opportunity to ski, is attested by 1960; ski-mask , originally to protect the face while skiing, is from 1963; noted as part of criminal disguises by 1968.
 also from 1883 

 ski (v.) 

 "to go or travel on skis," 1885, from ski (n.). Related: Skied ; skiing .
 also from 1885 

 Entries linking to ski 

 skiing (n.) 

 "action of going on skis, especially as a sport," 1885, originally also skeeing , verbal noun from ski (v.).

 Skee-Ball (n.) 

 1909, proprietary name (Skee-Ball Alley Company, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.), the first element said to represent the old alternative spelling of ski (v.).

 Skee ball bowling, in which the ball is jumped or skeed into the pockets in the same manner as a skee-jumper rises from the bump in his flight, is a new and unique hand-ball game that seems destined to great popularity. [Popular Mechanics, July 1909]

 skid 
 skidoo 
 skier 
 ski-lift 
 water-ski 
 *skei- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 skid 

 c. 1600, "beam, log, or plank on which something rests," especially on which something heavy can be rolled from place to place (1782), of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse skið "stick of wood" (see ski (n.)). As "a sliding along" from 1890; s

 skidoo 

 a vogue word of 1905, "to leave in a hurry," perhaps a variant of skedaddle (q.v.). The association with twenty-three is as old as the word, but the exact connection was obscure when it emerged and none of the guesses seem to hold much water. You only know that "twenty-three mea

 gondola 

 Of ski-lifts from 1957....

 flow 

 [Ski magazine, November 1980]...

 go 

 Old English gan "to advance, walk; depart, go away; happen, take place; conquer; observe, practice, exercise," from West Germanic *gaian (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian gan, Middle Dutch gaen, Dutch gaan, Old High German gan, German gehen), from PIE root *ghē- "to release,

 travel 

 late 14c., "to journey," from travailen (1300) "to make a journey," originally "to toil, labor" (see travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced 

 runner 

 c. 1300, "messenger on foot," agent noun from run (v.). The meaning "one who runs, a racer" is from early 14c. With many technical senses. The meaning "smuggler, one who risks or evades dangers, impediments, or legal restrictions" is by 1721; the sense of "police officer" is from

 move 

 late 13c., meven, in various senses (see below), from Anglo-French mover, Old French movoir "to move, get moving, set out; set in motion; introduce" (Modern French mouvoir), from Latin movere "move, set in motion; remove; disturb" (past participle motus, frequentative motare), fr

 hot dog 

 also hotdog, "sausage on a split roll," c. 1890, American English, from hot (adj.) + dog (n.). Many early references are in college student publications; later popularized, but probably not coined, by cartoonist T.A. "Tad" Dorgan (1877-1929). It is said in early explanations to e

 orphan 

 "a child bereaved of one or both parents, generally the latter," c. 1300, from Late Latin orphanus "parentless child" (source of Old French orfeno, orphenin, Italian orfano), from Greek orphanos "orphaned, without parents, fatherless," literally "deprived," from orphos "bereft." 

 Share ski 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ski Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ski">Etymology of ski by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ski. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ski Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ski," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ski. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ski." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ski. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ski." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ski (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ski 
 skew 
 skewbald 
 skewed 
 skewer 
 skewness 
 ski 
 skid 
 skid row 
 skidoo 
 Ski-doo 
 skier 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix