URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/leopard
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:02:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Leopard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Leopard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of leopard 

 leopard (n.) 

 late 13c. (early 13c. as a surname), "large cat of the wooded country of Africa and South Asia," from Old French lebard , leupart "leopard," heraldic or real (12c., Modern French léopard ), from Late Latin leopardus , literally "lion-pard, lion-panther" (the animal was thought in ancient times to be a hybrid of these two species), from Greek leopardos , from leon "lion" (see lion ) + pardos "male panther," which generally is said to be connected to Sanskrit prdakuh "panther, tiger."

 Largest spotted cat of the Old World, the name later also was applied to big cats in the Americas. The word is widespread in Europe: Dutch luipaard , German, Danish leopard , Spanish, Italian leopardo . Middle English spelling variants included lubard , lebarde , lypard , lyepart . Proverbial references to its inability to change its spots are from Jeremiah xiii.23. In Middle English the word is used often in heraldry, but there it refers to a lion passant gardant (as on the emblem of Edward the Black Prince).
 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to leopard 

 lion (n.) 

 late 12c., from Old French lion "lion," also figuratively "hero" (12c.), from Latin leonem (nominative leo ) "lion; the constellation Leo," from Greek leon (genitive leontos ), a word from a non-Indo-European language, perhaps Semitic (compare Hebrew labhi "lion," plural lebaim; Egyptian labai, lawai "lioness"). Old English had the word straight from Latin as leo (Anglian lea ).

 The Latin word was borrowed throughout Germanic (compare Old Frisian lawa ; Middle Dutch leuwe , Dutch leeuw ; Old High German lewo , German Löwe ); it is also found in most other European languages, often via Germanic (Old Church Slavonic livu , Polish lew , Czech lev , Old Irish leon , Welsh llew ).

 Extended 17c. to American big cats. Sometimes used ironically of other animals (for example Cotswold lion "sheep" (16c.; lyons of Cotteswold is from mid-15c.). In early 19c., to avoid advertising breaches of the game laws, hare, when served as food was listed as lion .

 Paired alliteratively with lamb since late 14c. Used figuratively from c. 1200 in English of lion-like persons, in an approving sense, "one who is fiercely brave," and a disapproving one, "tyrannical leader, greedy devourer." Lion-hearted is from 1708. Lion's share "the greatest portion" is attested from 1701. The image of the lion's mouth as a place of great danger is from c. 1200. 

 Lowse me, lauerd, ut of þe liunes muð. ["St. Margaret of Antioch," c. 1200]

 pard (n.1) 

 archaic form of leopard , c. 1300, parde , from Latin pardus "a male panther," from Greek pardos "male panther," from the same source (probably Iranian) as Sanskrit prdaku-s "leopard, tiger, snake," and Persian palang "panther."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 spoonerism 

 involuntary transposition of sounds in two or more words (such as "shoving leopard" for "loving shepherd," "half-warmed fish...

 fur 

 late 14c. "trimming or lining of a garment" (implied c. 1300 in surname Furhode "fur hood"), probably from Old French forrer, fourrer "cover with fur, line (clothing)," in general "to cover, fill with," from fuerre "sheath, scabbard" (via notion of "covering"), from Frankish *fod

 panther 

 mid-13c., panter, another name for the leopard, from Old French pantere "panther" (12c.) and directly from Latin panthera, from Greek panther "panther, leopard," probably of Oriental origin. An ancient folk-etymology derivation from Greek pan- "all" + thēr "beast" led to many cur

 pelt 

 "to strike repeatedly" (with something), c. 1500, a word of unknown origin; according to one old theory it is perhaps from early 13c. pelten "to strike," a variant of pilten "to thrust, strike," from an unrecorded Old English *pyltan, from Medieval Latin *pultiare, from Latin pul

 act 

 late 14c., "a thing done," from Latin actus "a doing; a driving, impulse, a setting in motion; a part in a play," and actum "a thing done" (originally a legal term), both from agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform," figuratively "incite to action; 

 cat 

 Old English catt (c. 700) "domestic cat," from West Germanic (c. 400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (source also of Old Frisian katte, Old Norse köttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late Latin cattus. The near-universal European word now, it appeared in

 renounce 

 late 14c., renouncen, "give up (something, especially to another), resign, surrender," from Old French renoncier "give up, cede" (12c., Modern French renoncer) and directly from Latin renuntiare "bring back word; proclaim; protest against, renounce," from re- "against" (see re-) 

 hedge 

 Old English hecg "hedge," originally any fence, living or artificial, from West Germanic *hagjo (source also of Middle Dutch hegge, Dutch heg, Old High German hegga, German Hecke "hedge"), from a verb *hagjanan, from PIE root *kagh- "to catch, seize; wickerwork, fence" (source al

 fatigue 

 1660s, "that which causes weariness," from French fatigue "weariness," from fatiguer "to tire" (15c.), from Latin fatigare "to weary, to tire out," originally "to cause to break down," from pre-Latin adjective *fati-agos "driving to the point of breakdown," with first half from O

 guild 

 also gild, early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi "guild, brotherhood"), a semantic fusion of Old English gegield "guild, brotherhood," and gield "service, offering; payment, tribute; compensation," from Proto-Germanic *geldja- "payment, contribution" (so

 Share leopard 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/leopard Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/leopard">Etymology of leopard by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of leopard. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/leopard Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of leopard," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/leopard. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of leopard." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/leopard. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of leopard." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/leopard (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near leopard 
 lento 
 Leo 
 Leon 
 Leonard 
 leonine 
 leopard 
 Leopold 
 leotard 
 leper 
 lepido- 
 Lepidoptera 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix