URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/admiral
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Admiral - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Admiral - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of admiral 

 admiral (n.) 

 c. 1200, amiral , admirail , "Saracen commander or chieftain," from Old French amirail (12c.) "Saracen military commander; any military commander," ultimately from medieval Arabic amir "military commander," probably via Medieval Latin use of the word for "Muslim military leader."

 Amiral de la mer "commander of a fleet of ships" is in late 13c. Anglo-French documents. Meaning "highest-ranking naval officer" in English is from early 15c. The extension of the word's meaning from "commander on land" to "commander at sea" likely began in 12c. Sicily with Medieval Latin amiratus and then spread to the continent, but the word also continued to mean "Muslim military commander" in Europe in the Middle Ages. The Arabic word was later Englished as emir .

 As 
 amīr is constantly followed by 
 -al- in all such titles, 
 amīr-al- was naturally assumed by Christian writers as a substantive word, and variously Latinized .... [OED]

 Also in Old French and Middle English the word was further conformed to familiar patterns as amirauld , amiraunt . The unetymological -d- probably is from influence of Latin ad-mirabilis (see admire ). Italian form almiraglio , Spanish almirante are from confusion with Arabic words in al- . As the name of a type of butterfly from 1720, according to OED possibly a corruption of admirable .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to admiral 

 admire (v.) 

 early 15c. (implied in admired ), "regard with wonder, marvel at," from Old French admirer "look upon, contemplate" (correcting earlier amirer , 14c.), or directly from Latin admirari "regard with wonder, be astonished," from ad "to, with regard to" (see ad- ) + mirari "to wonder," from mirus "wonderful" (see smile (v.)). The sense has gradually weakened toward "regard with pleasure and esteem," but for a time they overlapped.

 Doe not admire why I admire :

 My fever is no other's fire :

 Each severall heart hath his desire ;

 Els proof is false, and truth a lier.

 [Campion, "And would You Faine the Reason Knowe," in "Rosseter's Booke of Ayres Part II," 1601]

 Related: Admiring ; admiringly .

 emir (n.) 

 among Arabic or Muslim peoples, "chief of a family or tribe; a ruling prince," 1590s, from Arabic amir "commander" (see admiral ).

 admiralship 
 admiralty 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 triumph 

 Modern French triomphe), from Latin triumphus "an achievement, a success; celebratory procession for a victorious general or admiral...

 rear 

 The naval rank of rear admiral is attested from 1580s, said to be so called from his originally ranking "behind" an admiral...

 grog 

 alcoholic drink diluted with water," supposedly a reference to Old Grog, nickname of Edward Vernon (1684-1757), British admiral...

 dory 

 The name also applies to the subject of a folk song (by 1590s, maybe 1560s) and was used to anglicize the name of Admiral...

 bluestocking 

 Hence the term, first applied in derision to the whole set by Admiral Boscawen. None of the ladies wore blue stockings....

 Pennsylvania 

 Not named for William Penn, the proprietor, but, on suggestion of Charles II, for Penn's late father, Admiral William Penn...

 Vanessa 

 Patrick, Near Dublin," 1820] As the name of a genus of butterflies that includes the Red Admiral and the Painted Lady, it...

 full 

 Old English full "containing all that can be received; having eaten or drunk to repletion; filled; perfect, entire, utter," from Proto-Germanic *fullaz "full" (source also of Old Saxon full, Old Frisian ful, Dutch vol, Old High German fol, German voll, Old Norse fullr, Gothic ful

 canon 

 "a rule or law," Old English canon "rule, law, or decree of the Church," from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon "Church law, a rule or doctrine enacted by ecclesiastical authority," in classical Latin, "measuring line, rule," from Greek kanon "any straight rod or

 adamant 

 late 14c., "hard, unbreakable," from adamant (n.). The figurative sense of "unshakeable" (in belief, etc.) is by 1670s. Related: Adamantly; adamance...."a very hard stone," mid-14c., adamant, adamaunt, from Old French adamant "diamond; magnet" or directly from Latin adamantem (no

 Share admiral 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/admiral Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/admiral">Etymology of admiral by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of admiral. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/admiral Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of admiral," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/admiral. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of admiral." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/admiral. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of admiral." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/admiral (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near admiral 
 administration 
 administrative 
 administrator 
 admirable 
 admirably 
 admiral 
 admiralship 
 admiralty 
 admiration 
 admire 
 admirer 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix