URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lull
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:42:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lull - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lull - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lull 

 lull (v.) 

 early 14c., lullen "to calm or hush to sleep," probably imitative of lu-lu sound used to lull a child to sleep (compare Swedish lulla "to hum a lullaby," German lullen "to rock," Sanskrit lolati "moves to and fro," Middle Dutch lollen "to mutter"). Figurative use from 1570s; specifically "to quiet (suspicion) so as to delude into a sense of security" is from c. 1600. Related: Lulled ; lulling .
 also from early 14c. 

 lull (n.) 

 1650s as the name of a soothing drink, from lull (v.). The meaning "temporary period of quiet or rest amid turmoil or activity" is attested by 1751, originally figurative ("... the first appearance of a lull of his resentment ...," "Memoirs of a Coxcomb"); literal use by 1778, said to be a sailors' word, in reference to violent surf or storms.
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to lull 

 lullaby (n.) 

 "soothing song sung to infants," 1580s, noun use of the words lulley by (1560s), from Middle English lollai or lullay , a common burden in nursery songs, from lullen (see lull (v.)). Second element perhaps simply a meaningless extension; as a sound used to lull a child to sleep, by is attested from c. 1500 .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 calm 

 late 14c., of the sea, "windless, without motion or agitation;" of a wind, "light, gentle," perhaps via Old French calme "tranquility, quiet," or directly from Old Italian calma "quiet, fair weather," which probably is from Late Latin cauma "heat of the mid-day sun" (in Italy, a 

 quiet 

 c. 1300, "freedom from disturbance or conflict; calm, stillness," from Old French quiete "rest, repose, tranquility" and directly from Latin quies (genitive quietis) "a lying still, rest, repose, peace" (from PIE root *kweie- "to rest, be quiet"). From late 14c. as "inactivity, r

 still 

 Old English stille "motionless, stable, fixed, stationary," from Proto-Germanic *stilli- (source also of Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch stille, Dutch stil, Old High German stilli, German still), from suffixed form of PIE root *stel- "to put, stand, put in order," wi

 slack 

 The meaning "quiet period, lull, interval in activity," especially in reference to business, is by 1851....

 console 

 "alleviate the grief or mental distress of," 1690s, from French consoler "to comfort, console," from Latin consolari "offer solace, encourage, comfort, cheer," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + solari "to comfort" (see solace (n.)). Or 

 soothe 

 Middle English sothen, from Old English soðian "show to be true, bear witness, offer confirmation" (senses now obsolete), from soð "true" (see sooth). The sense of "quiet, comfort, restore to tranquility," in reference to a person or animal, is by 1690s, via the notion of "to ass

 conciliate 

 "overcome distrust or hostility of by soothing and pacifying," 1540s, from Latin conciliatus, past participle of conciliare "to bring together, unite in feelings, make friendly," from concilium "a meeting, a gathering of people," from assimilated form of com "together, together w

 gentle 

 early 13c., gentile, gentle "well-born, of noble rank or family," from Old French gentil/jentil "high-born, worthy, noble, of good family; courageous, valiant; fine, good, fair" (11c., in Modern French "nice, graceful, pleasing; fine, pretty") and directly from Latin gentilis "of

 agitate 

 1580s, "to disturb," from Latin agitatus, past participle of agitare "to put in constant or violent motion, drive onward, impel," frequentative of agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," figuratively "incite to action; keep in movement, stir up" (from PIE root *ag- "to dr

 hush 

 1540s (trans.), 1560s (intrans.), variant of Middle English huisht (late 14c.), probably of imitative origin, with terminal -t lost probably by being mistaken for a past tense suffix. The sounds chosen presumably for "being sibilations requiring the least muscular effort and admi

 Share lull 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lull Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lull">Etymology of lull by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lull. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lull Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lull," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lull. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lull." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lull. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lull." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lull (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lull 
 lugubriosity 
 lugubrious 
 lug-worm 
 luke 
 lukewarm 
 lull 
 lullaby 
 lulu 
 lumbaginous 
 lumbago 
 lumbar 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix