URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dairy
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dairy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dairy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dairy 

 dairy (n.) 

 c. 1300, daerie , "building for making butter and cheese; dairy farm," formed with Anglo-French -erie (from Latin -arius ; see -ery ) affixed to Middle English daie (in daie maid "dairymaid"), which is from Old English dæge "kneader of bread, housekeeper, female servant" (see dey (n.1)). The pure native word was dey-house (mid-14c.). Meaning "branch of farming concerned with the production of milk, butter, and cheese" is from 1670s. Later also "shop where milk, butter, etc. are sold."

 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to dairy 

 dey (n.1) 

 Old English dæge "female servant, woman who handles food in a household, housekeeper," from Proto-Germanic *daigjon (source also of Old Norse deigja "maid, female servant," Swedish deja "dairymaid"), from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build." Now obsolete (though OED says, "Still in living use in parts of Scotland"), it forms the first element of dairy and the second of lady .

 OED says the ground sense of the ancient word seems to be "kneader, maker of bread;" it would have then advanced via Old Norse deigja and Middle English daie to mean "female servant, woman employed in a house or on a farm." By c. 1200 it had acquired the specific sense of "woman in charge of milking and making butter and cheese, dairy-maid." Dæge as "servant" is the second element in many surnames ending in -day (such as Faraday , and perhaps Doubleday, if it means "servant of the Twin," etc.).

 -ery 

 word-forming element making nouns meaning "place for, art of, condition of, quantity of," from Middle English -erie , from Latin -arius (see -ary ). Also sometimes in modern colloquial use "the collectivity of" or "an example of."

 *dheigh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to form, build."

 It might form all or part of: configure ; dairy ; dey (n.1) "female servant, housekeeper, maid;" disfigure ; dough ; effigy ; faineant ; faint ; feign ; feint ; fictile ; fiction ; fictitious ; figment ; figure ; figurine ; lady ; paradise ; prefigure ; thixotropy ; transfigure .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dehah "body," literally "that which is formed," dih- "to besmear;" Greek teikhos "wall;" Latin fingere "to form, fashion," figura "a shape, form, figure;" Old Irish digen "firm, solid," originally "kneaded into a compact mass;" Gothic deigan "to smear," Old English dag , Gothic daigs "dough."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wick 

 "dairy farm," now surviving, if at all, as a localism in East Anglia or Essex, it was once the common Old English wic "dwelling...place, lodging, house, mansion, abode," then coming to mean "village, hamlet, town," and later "dairy farm" (as in Gatwick...

 cooper 

 etc., to hold dry goods, a wet cooper those to contain liquids, a white cooper pails, tubs, and the like for domestic or dairy...

 cheese 

 The cheese will be on exhibition at the National Dairy Show at Chicago next week....

 lady 

 .)) + -dige "maid," which is related to dæge "maker of dough" (which is the first element in dairy; see dey (n.1))....

 proof 

 attested from 1909 in reference to carpet sweepers, by 1920 also in newspaper ads for garbage cans, clothes for boys, a dairy...

 meat 

 In Middle English, vegetables still could be called grene-mete (15c.) and white meat was "a dairy food or product" (early...

 farm 

 c. 1300, "fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent," from Old French ferme "a rent, lease" (13c.), from Medieval Latin firma "fixed payment," from Latin firmare "to fix, settle, confirm, strengthen," from firmus "strong; stable," figuratively "con

 maid 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in place names and surnames), "an unmarried woman (usually young); the Virgin Mary;" shortening of maiden (n.). Like that word, used in Middle English of unmarried men as well as women (as in maiden-man, c. 1200, which was used of both sexes, reflecting also th

 filibuster 

 1580s, flibutor "pirate," especially, in history, "West Indian buccaneer of the 17th century" (mainly French, Dutch, and English adventurers), probably ultimately from Dutch vrijbueter (now vrijbuiter) "freebooter," a word which was used of pirates in the West Indies in Spanish (

 earnest 

 "serious or grave in speech or action," early 14c., ernest, from Old English eornoste (adj.) "zealous, serious," or from Old English noun eornost "seriousness, serious intent" (surviving only in the phrase in earnest), from Proto-Germanic *er-n-os-ti- (source also of Old Saxon er

 Share dairy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dairy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dairy">Etymology of dairy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dairy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dairy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dairy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dairy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dairy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dairy. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dairy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dairy (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dairy 
 daimon 
 daimyo 
 daintily 
 dainty 
 daiquiri 
 dairy 
 dais 
 daisy 
 Dakota 
 dal 
 Dalai Lama 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix