URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/borax
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T13:55:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Borax - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Borax - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of borax 

 borax (n.) 

 late 14c., name given to several useful minerals, specifically to a salt formed from the union of boracic acid and soda, from Anglo-French boras , from Medieval Latin baurach , from Arabic buraq , applied by the Arabs to various substances used as fluxes, probably from Persian burah . Originally obtained in Europe from the beds of salt lakes in Tibet. Related: Boracic .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to borax 

 boron (n.) 

 non-metallic chemical element, 1812, from borax + ending abstracted unetymologically from carbon (its properties somewhat resemble those of carbon). Originally called boracium by Humphry Davy because it was drawn from boracic acid . Related: Boric .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 B 

 second letter of the Latin alphabet, corresponding to Greek beta, Phoenician beth, literally "house." It "has nothing of that variety of pronunciation shown by most English letters" [Century Dictionary]. The Germanic "b" is said to represent a "bh" sound in Proto-Indo-European, w

 mineral 

 late 14c., "substance obtained by mining," from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin minerale "something mined," noun use of neuter of mineralis "pertaining to mines," from minera "a mine" (see mine (n.1)). Meaning "material substance that is neither animal nor veg

 Sabbath 

 Middle English sabat, from Old English sabat "seventh day of the week in the Jewish calendar; Saturday" as observed by the Jews as a day of rest from secular employment and of religious observance, from Old French sabat and directly from Latin sabbatum, from Greek sabbaton, from 

 geometry 

 early 14c., also gemetrie, gemetry, from Old French geometrie (12c., Modern French géométrie), from Latin geometria, from Greek geometria "measurement of earth or land; geometry," from combining form of gē "earth, land" (see Gaia) + -metria "a measuring of" (see -metry). Old Engl

 emphasis 

 1570s, "intensity of expression," from Latin emphasis, from Greek emphasis "an appearing in, outward appearance;" in rhetoric, "significance, indirect meaning," from emphainein "to present, exhibit, display, let (a thing) be seen; be reflected (in a mirror), become visible," from

 patent 

 late 14c., "open letter or official document from some authority granting permission to do something; a licence granting an office, right, title, etc.," shortened from Anglo-French lettre patent (also in Medieval Latin litteræ patentes), literally "open letter" (late 13c.), from 

 drive 

 Old English drifan "to compel or urge to move, impel in some direction or manner; to hunt (deer), pursue; to rush against" (class I strong verb; past tense draf, past participle drifen), from Proto-Germanic *dreibanan (source also of Old Frisian driva "I lead, impel, drive (away)

 Antioch 

 ancient city, modern Antakya in Turkey, anciently the capital of Syria, founded c. 300 B.C.E. by Seleucus I Nictor and named for his father, Antiochus. The name, also borne by several Syrian kings and an eclectic philosopher, is a Latinized form of Greek Antiokhos, literally "res

 shower 

 Middle English shour, from Old English scur, scura "a short fall of rain, storm, tempest; fall of missiles or blows; struggle, commotion; breeze," from Proto-Germanic *skuraz (source also of Old Norse skur, Old Saxon and Old Frisian scur "fit of illness;" Old High German scur, Ge

 angle 

 "to fish with a hook," mid-15c., from Old English angel (n.) "angle, hook, fish-hook," related to anga "hook," from Proto-Germanic *angul-, from PIE *ankulo-, suffixed form of root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (see angle (n.)). Compare Old English angul, Old Norse öngull, Old High Germa

 Share borax 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/borax Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/borax">Etymology of borax by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of borax. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/borax Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of borax," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borax. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of borax." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borax. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of borax." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/borax (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near borax 
 booze 
 boozy 
 bop 
 bo-peep 
 borage 
 borax 
 borborygmus 
 Bordeaux 
 bordel 
 bordello 
 border 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix