URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lizard
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:14:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lizard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lizard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lizard 

 lizard (n.) 

 "an animal resembling a serpent, with legs added to it" [Johnson], late 14c., lusarde , from Anglo-French lusard , Old French laisarde "lizard" (Modern French lézard ), from Latin lacertus (fem. lacerta ) "lizard," a word of unknown origin. The ending in French and English is probably influenced by words in -ard .

 It is identical to Latin lacertum "upper arm, muscular part of the arm, from the shoulder to the elbow" (opposed to bracchium ), which suggests a pattern similar to that of Latin musculus "a muscle," literally "little mouse" (diminutive of mus "mouse"), so called because the shape and movement of the biceps were thought to resemble mice. It is unclear which Latin sense, the arm-muscle or the lizard, is original. De Vaan finds the words perhaps connected to Greek likertizein "to jump, dance," which Beekes finds likely from Pre-Greek.

 Run fast, stand still. This, the lesson from lizards. [Ray Bradbury]
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to lizard 

 alligator (n.) 

 1560s, "large carnivorous reptile of the Americas," lagarto , aligarto , a corruption of Spanish el lagarto (de Indias) "the lizard (of the Indies)," from Latin lacertus (see lizard ), with Spanish definite article el , from Latin ille (see le ).

 The modern form of the English word is attested from 1620s, with unetymological -r as in tater , feller , etc. ( Alligarter was an early variant) and an overall Latin appearance. The slang meaning "non-playing devotee of swing music" is attested from 1936; the phrase see you later, alligator is from a 1956 song title.

 lacertine (adj.) 

 "lizard-like," 1841, from Latin lacerta (see lizard ) + -ine (1). Other adjectives in this sense from the early years of dinosaur paleontology were lacertian (1841), lacertilian (1848), lacertiform . In decorative arts, lacertine work (1854) consists of intertwined serpents.

 -ard 

 also -art , from Old French -ard , -art , from German -hard , -hart "hardy," forming the second element in many personal names, often used as an intensifier, but in Middle High German and Dutch used as a pejorative element in common nouns, and thus passing into Middle English in bastard , coward , blaffard ("one who stammers"), tailard "one who has a tail" (a term of abuse), etc.

 It thus became a living element in English, as in buzzard , drunkard . The German element is from Proto-Germanic *-hart / *-hard "bold, hardy" (from PIE root *kar- "hard").

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 plesiosaurus 

 1857) from Greek plēsios "near" (related to pelas "near, nearby," and probably from PIE *pelh- "to approach") + sauros "lizard...earliest "antediluvian" reptile fossils discovered in the scientific age and was so called for being more like a modern lizard...

 basilisk 

 fabulous lizard-like creature, c. 1400, earlier basiliscus (Trevisa, late 14c.), from Latin basiliscus, from Greek basiliskos...The South American lizard was so called (1813) because it, like the mythical beast, has a crest....

 perch 

 dark"), typically in names of animals; compare Middle Irish erc, Welsh erch "spotted, dark red; salmon, trout," also "cow, lizard...

 saurian 

 reptile of the order Sauria," 1817, from Modern Latin Sauria "the order of reptiles" (Brongniart, 1799), from Greek sauros "lizard...

 muscle 

 In Middle English, lacerte, from the Latin word for "lizard," also was used as a word for a muscle....Musclez & lacertez bene one selfe þing, Bot þe muscle is said to þe fourme of mouse & lacert to þe fourme of a lizard...

 salamander 

 mid-14c., salamandre, "legendary lizard-like creature supposed to live in fire," from Old French salamandre "legendary fiery...beast," also "cricket" (12c.), from Latin salamandra, from Greek salamandra, a kind of lizard supposed to be an extinguisher...

 chameleon 

 lizard-like reptile notable for its ability to change color, mid-14c., camelion, from Old French caméléon, from Latin chamaeleon...

 monitor 

 1540s, "senior pupil at a school charged with keeping order, etc.," from Latin monitor "one who reminds, admonishes, or checks," also "an overseer, instructor, guide, teacher," agent noun from monere "to remind, bring to (one's) recollection, tell (of); admonish, advise, warn, in

 skink 

 type of lizard common in North Africa and Arabia, 1580s, from French scinc (Modern French scinque), from Latin scincus, from Greek skinkos, a name given to some kind of lizard common in Asia and North Africa, of unknown origin. Formerly thought to have medicinal qualities. The by

 gigolo 

 "professional male escort or dancing partner, young man supported financially by an older woman in exchange for his attentions," 1922, from French gigolo, formed as a masc. of gigole "tall, thin woman; dancing girl; prostitute," perhaps from verb gigoter "to move the shanks, hop,

 Share lizard 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lizard Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lizard">Etymology of lizard by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lizard. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lizard Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lizard," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lizard. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lizard." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lizard. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lizard." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lizard (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lizard 
 living room 
 livingness 
 Livonia 
 livre 
 lixiviate 
 lizard 
 Lizzie 
 Ljubljana 
 LL. 
 llama 
 Llanfair 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix