URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/paint
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:48:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Paint - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Paint - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of paint 

 paint (v.) 

 mid-13c., peinten , "represent (someone or something) in paint;" c. 1300, "decorate (something or someone) with drawings or pictures;" early 14c., "put color or stain on the surface of; coat or cover with a color or colors;" from Old French peintier "to paint," from peint , past participle of peindre "to paint," from Latin pingere "to paint, represent in a picture, stain; embroider, tattoo," from a nasalized form of PIE root *peig- "to cut, mark by incision."

 The sense evolution between PIE and Latin was, presumably, "decorate with cut marks" to "decorate" to "decorate with color." Compare Sanskrit pingah "reddish," pesalah "adorned, decorated, lovely;" Old Church Slavonic pegu "variegated;" Greek poikilos "variegated;" Old High German fehjan "to adorn;" Old Church Slavonic pisati , Lithuanian piešiu, piešti "to write." Probably also representing the "cutting" branch of the family is Old English feol (see file (n.2)).

 From late 14c. as "represent persons and things in pictures or drawing, portray." To paint the town (red) "go on a boisterous or disorderly spree" is by 1883; to paint (someone or something) black "represent it as wicked or evil" is from 1590s. Adjective paint-by-numbers "simple" is attested by 1970; the art-for-beginners kits themselves date to c. 1953.
 also from mid-13c. 

 paint (n.) 

 late 13c. (in compounds), "that with which something is painted, a substance used in painting," from paint (v.) or from the derived noun in Old French. Of rouge, makeup, etc., from 1650s. Paint-brush "brush for applying paints" is attested from 1827. Paint-box "box with compartments for holding different paints" is by 1725. 

 It differs from a 
 dye  in that it is not designed to sink into the substance to which it is applied, but to form a superficial coating. The term 
 pigment is sometimes restricted to the dry coloring material of which a paint is made. [Century Dictionary]
 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to paint 

 file (n.2) 

 metal tool for abrading or smoothing, Old English feol (Mercian fil ) "file," from Proto-Germanic *fihalo "cutting tool," which is probably from PIE root *peig- "to cut, mark by incision" (source also of Old Church Slavonic pila "file, saw," Lithuanian piela "file"). Germanic cognates include Old Saxon fila , Old High German fila , Middle Dutch vile , Dutch vijl , German Feile . Century Dictionary (1906) lists and names 60 types of them for various purposes. Nail file (for the fingernails) is by 1819.

 depict (v.) 

 early 15c., "portray, paint, form a likeness of in color," from Latin depictus , past participle of depingere "to portray, paint, sketch; describe, imagine," from de "down" (see de- ) + pingere "to paint" (see paint (v.)). Extended sense of "portray in words, describe" is from mid-15c. Related: Depicted ; depicting .

 depiction 
 painted 
 painter 
 painting 
 pictogram 
 pictograph 
 pictorial 
 picture 
 pigment 
 pint 
 pinto 
 pinxit 
 repaint 
 spray-paint 
 war-paint 
 *peig- 
 See All Related Words (18) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pictorial 

 1640s, "of or pertaining to pictures or the making of them," with -al (1) + Latin pictorius "of a painter," from pictor "painter," from past participle stem of pingere "to make pictures" (see paint (v.)). Meaning "expressed or depicted in pictures" is from 1807; the sense of "ill

 picture 

 early 15c., pictur, pictoure, pittour, pectur, "the process or art of drawing or painting," a sense now obsolete; also "a visual or graphic representation of a person, scene, object, etc.," from Latin pictura "painting," from pictus, past participle of pingere "to make pictures, 

 pigment 

 late 14c., "a red dye," from Latin pigmentum "coloring matter, pigment, paint," figuratively "ornament," from stem of pingere "to color, paint" (see paint (v.)). By 1610s in the broader sense "any substance that is or can be used by painters to impart color" (technically a dry su

 maulstick 

 used by painters to support the painting hand," 1650s, from Dutch maalstok, literally "painting stick," from mallen "to paint...," from Proto-Germanic *mal- (source also of Old Norse mæla, Old High German malon "trace, draw, paint," German malen "to...paint"), from mal "spot, mark, stain," perhaps from the same root as Greek melas "black" (see melano-), but the original...

 portray 

 mid-13c., portraien, "to draw, paint" (something), from Anglo-French purtraire, Old French portraire "to draw, to paint,...Latin protrahere was "to draw forth" but in Medieval Latin also "to draw, paint."...

 orpiment 

 trisulphide, yellow color," from Latin auripigmentum, from aurum "gold" (see aureate) + pigmentum "coloring matter, pigment, paint...," from stem of pingere "to color, paint," from a nasalized form of PIE root *peig- "to cut, mark by incision."...

 ladies 

 and genuine enjoyment it is doubtful if any occasion has been more truly "the best ever" than the ladies' night of the Paint...["Paint, Oil and Drug Review," Feb. 1, 1911]...

 key 

 "instrument for opening locks," Middle English keie, from Old English cæg "metal piece that works a lock, key" literal and figurative ("solution, explanation, one who or that which opens the way or explains"), a word of unknown origin, abnormal evolution, and no sure cognates oth

 make-up 

 also makeup, "manner in which something is put together," 1821, from the verbal phrase (see make (v.) + up (adv.)). To make up as "build, collect into one form by bringing together" is from late 14c., also "prepare." It is attested from late 15c. as "supply as an equivalent," fro

 grain 

 early 14c., "a small, hard seed," especially of one of the cereal plants, also as a collective singular, "seed of wheat and allied grasses used as food;" also "something resembling grain; a hard particle of other substances" (salt, sand, later gunpowder, etc.), from Old French gr

 Share paint 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/paint Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/paint">Etymology of paint by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of paint. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/paint Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of paint," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/paint. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of paint." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/paint. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of paint." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/paint (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near paint 
 paillard 
 pain 
 painful 
 painless 
 painstaking 
 paint 
 painted 
 painter 
 painting 
 pair 
 paisano 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix