URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fume
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:15:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fume - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fume - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fume 

 fume (n.) 

 late 14c., "vapor, odorous vapor; exhalation," from Old French fum "smoke, steam, vapor, breath, aroma, scent" (12c.), from Latin fumus "smoke, steam, fume, old flavor" (source also of Italian fumo , Spanish humo ), from PIE root *dheu- (1) "dust, vapor, smoke."

 In old medicine, an "exhalation" of the body that produces emotions, dreams, sloth, etc; later especially of smokes or vapors that go to the head and affect the senses with a narcotic or stifling quality.
 also from late 14c. 

 fume (v.) 

 c. 1400, "to fumigate" (transitive), from Old French fumer "to smoke, burn" (12c.), from Latin fumare "to smoke, steam," from fumus "smoke, steam, fume" (from PIE root *dheu- (1) "dust, vapor, smoke"). Intransitive meaning "throw off smoke, emit vapor" is from 1530s; the figurative sense "show anger, be irritated" is slightly earlier (1520s). Related: Fumed ; fumes ; fuming .
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to fume 

 fuming (adj.) 

 1570s," emitting fumes;" 1580s, "raging, angry," present-participle adjective from fume (v.). Earlier were fumish (1510s); fumous (late 14c., from Latin fumosus ).

 February (n.) 

 month following January, late 14c., ultimately from Latin februarius mensis "month of purification," from februare "to purify," from februa "purifications, expiatory rites" (plural of februum "means of purification, expiatory offerings"), which is of uncertain origin, said to be a Sabine word. De Vaan says from Proto-Italic *f(w)esro- , from a PIE word meaning "the smoking" or "the burning" (thus possibly connected with fume (n.)). The sense then could be either purification by smoke or a burnt offering.

 The last month of the ancient (pre-450 B.C.E.) Roman calendar, so named in reference to the Roman feast of purification, held on the ides of the month. The Old English name for it was solmonað , which is said to mean "mud month." English first borrowed the Roman name from Old French Feverier , which yielded Middle English Feverer , Feoverel , etc. (c. 1200) before the 14c. respelling to conform to Latin.

 fumigate 
 funk 
 perfume 
 *dheu- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 perfume 

 1530s, "fumes from a burning substance," from French parfum (16c.), from parfumer "to scent," from Old Provençal perfumar or cognate words in dialectal Italian (perfumare) or Spanish (perfumar), from Latin per "through" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through") + fumar

 smoke 

 late Old English smoca, smocca (rare) "visible fumes and volatile material given off by burning or smoldering substances," related to smeocan "give off smoke," from Proto-Germanic *smuk- (source also of Middle Dutch smooc, Dutch smook, Middle High German smouch, German Schmauch),

 reek 

 Middle English reke "smoke, fumes; steam, vapor," from Old English rec (Anglian), riec (West Saxon), "smoke from burning material," probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse reykr, Danish rǿg, Swedish rök "smoke, steam." These are reconstructed to be from Proto-German

 fumigation 

 (nominative fumigatio) "a smoking," noun of action from past-participle stem of fumigare "to smoke," from fumus "smoke, fume...

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 treat 

 c. 1300, "negotiate, bargain, deal with," from Old French traitier "deal with, act toward; set forth (in speech or writing)" (12c.), from Latin tractare "manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward," originally "drag about, tug, haul, pull violently," frequentative of trahe

 experience 

 late 14c., "observation as the source of knowledge; actual observation; an event which has affected one," from Old French esperience "experiment, proof, experience" (13c.), from Latin experientia "a trial, proof, experiment; knowledge gained by repeated trials," from experientem 

 exude 

 1570s (intransitive), "to ooze from a body by a natural or abnormal discharge, be secreted," as juice or gum from a tree, pus from a wound, or serous fluid from a blister, from Latin exudare/exsudare "ooze out like sweat," from ex "out, out of" (see ex-) + sudare "to sweat," from

 Share fume 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fume Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fume">Etymology of fume by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fume. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fume Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fume," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fume. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fume." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fume. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fume." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fume (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fume 
 fulmination 
 fulness 
 fulsome 
 fumble 
 fumbling 
 fume 
 fumigate 
 fumigation 
 fuming 
 fun 
 funambulist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix