URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bow
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:20:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bow 

 bow (v.1) 

 [bend the body] Middle English bouen , from Old English bugan "to bend, become bent, have or assume a curved direction; to bow down, bend the body in condescension or reverence, to submit," also "to turn back" (class II strong verb; past tense beag , past participle bogen ), from Proto-Germanic *bugon , from *beugen , from PIE root *bheug- "to bend." Related: Bowed ; bowing .

 To bow out "withdraw" is by 1917, from the notion of "exit with a bow or bows."

 Germanic cognates include Dutch buigen , Middle Low German bugen , Old High German biogan , German biegen , Gothic biugan "to bend," Old Norse boginn "bent."

 bow (n.1) 

 [strung, elastic weapon for shooting arrows] Middle English boue , from Old English boga "archery bow; anything bent or arched, an arch, a rainbow," from Proto-Germanic *bugon (source also of Old Norse bogi , Old Frisian boga , Dutch boog , German Bogen "bow"), from PIE root *bheug- "to bend," with derivatives referring to bent, pliable, or curved objects.

 The sense of "a looped knot," especially an ornamental one, is from 1540s. The musician's bow (1570s) formerly was curved like the archer's.

 The former popularity of the longbow as a characteristic English weapon is attested in expressions such as bow-legged ; to have the bent of (one's) bow "know one's intentions or inclinations" (1560s), to shoot in (another's) bow "practice an art other than one's own;" bow-hand "the left hand," hence "on the wrong side, inaccurately;" have two strings to (one's) bow "have more than one means to accomplish something;" draw the long bow "exaggerate, lie."

 bow (n.2) 

 "forward part of a ship," beginning where the sides trend inward, mid-14c., bou , boue , from a source such as Old Norse bogr , Middle Low German boog , Middle Dutch boech "bow of a ship," from Proto-Germanic *bugon- , from PIE root *bheug- "to bend," with derivatives referring to bent, pliable, or curved objects.
 also from mid-14c. 

 bow (n.3) 

 "an inclination of the body or head" (in reverence, etc.), 1650s, from bow (v.1).
 also from 1650s 

 bow (v.2) 

 [have or assume the form of a bow] late 18c., from bow (n.1), but the word is difficult to distinguish in print from bow (v.1). In music, "to perform with a bow upon a stringed instrument," by 1838. Related: Bowed ; bowing .
 also from late 18c. 

 Entries linking to bow 

 bow-legged (adj.) 

 also bowlegged , "having the legs bowed outward," 1550s, from bow (n.1) + legged .

 arch (n.) 

 "structure (in a building, bridge, etc.) in the shape of a curve that stands when supported only a the extremities," c. 1300, from Old French arche "arch of a bridge, arcade" (12c.), from Latin arcus "a bow" (see arc (n.)). It largely replaced native bow (n.1) in this sense.

 Originally architectural in English; transferred by early 15c. to anything having a curved form (eyebrows, feet, etc.). The commemorative or monumental arch is attested in English from late 14c.

 Compare Middle English Seinte Marie Chirche of the Arches (c. 1300) in London, later known as St. Mary-le-Bow , site of an ecclesiastical court, so called for the arches that supported its steeple (the modern church is by Sir Christopher Wren, rebuilt after the Great Fire of 1666).

 Bow bells 
 Bow Street 
 bow tie 
 bowhead 
 bowline 
 bowman 
 bowshot 
 bowsprit 
 bow-string 
 bow-window 
 bowyer 
 crossbow 
 longbow 
 oxbow 
 rainbow 
 unbowed 
 *bheug- 
 See All Related Words (19) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bowsprit 

 "large spar projecting forward from the bow of a ship," late 13c., probably from Middle Low German bochspret, from boch "bow of a ship" (see bow (n.2)) + spret "pole" (compare Old English spreot "pole," Dutch spriet "spear;" see sprit). The variation in early forms (including bol

 rainbow 

 "arc of prismatic colors formed by the refraction of light rays by drops of rain or vapor," Middle English rein-bowe, from Old English renboga; see rain (n.) + bow (n.). Common Germanic compound (Old Frisian reinboga, Old Norse regnbogi, Swedish regenbåge, Dutch regenboog, German

 arc 

 late 14c., "part of a curved line," originally in reference to the sun's apparent motion across the sky, from Old French arc "bow, arch, vault" (12c.), from Latin arcus "a bow, arch," from Proto-Italic *arkwo- "bow." This has Germanic cognates in Gothic arhvazna, Old English earh

 toxic 

 pharmakon) "(poison) for use on arrows," from toxikon, neuter of toxikos "pertaining to arrows or archery," and thus to a bow..., from toxon "bow," probably from a Scythian word that also was borrowed into Latin as taxus "yew."...Watkins suggests a possible source in Iranian taxša- "bow," from PIE *tekw- "to run, flee." As a noun from 1890....

 bend 

 Old English bendan "to bend a bow, bring into a curved state; confine with a string, fetter," causative of bindan "to bind...The meaning "curve or make crooked" (early 14c.) is via the notion of bending a bow to string it....The figurative meaning "bow, be submissive" is from c. 1400. Cognate with band, bind, bond, and Bund....

 akimbo 

 elbows bent outward at sharp angles," c. 1400, in kenebowe, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English phrase in keen bow..."at a sharp angle" (with keen in its Middle English sense of "sharp" + bow "arch"), or from a Scandinavian word akin to...Icelandic kengboginn "bow-bent," but this seems not to have been used in this exact sense....

 lout 

 "bow down" (c. 1300), from Old English lutan "bow low," from Proto-Germanic *lut- "to bow, bend, stoop" (source also of Old...

 vessel 

 c. 1300, "container," from Old French vessel "container, receptacle, barrel; ship" (12c., Modern French vaisseau) from Late Latin vascellum "small vase or urn," also "a ship," alteration of Latin vasculum, diminutive of vas "vessel." Sense of "ship, boat" is found in English from

 knot 

 Old English cnotta "intertwining of ropes, cords, etc.," from Proto-Germanic *knuttan- (source also of Low German knütte, Old Frisian knotta "knot," Dutch knot, Old High German knoto, German Knoten, perhaps also Old Norse knutr "knot, knob"). For pronunciation, see kn-. Figurativ

 motion 

 late 14c., mocioun, "process of moving; change of place, continuous variation of position;" also "suggestion, proposal or proposition formally made," from Old French mocion "movement, motion; change, alteration" (13c., Modern French motion) and directly from Latin motionem (nomin

 Share bow 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bow Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bow">Etymology of bow by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bow. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bow Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bow," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bow. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bow." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bow. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bow." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bow (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bow 
 bout 
 boutique 
 boutonniere 
 bovine 
 bovver 
 bow 
 Bow bells 
 Bow Street 
 bow tie 
 bowdlerize 
 bowel 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix