URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ginger
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:22:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ginger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ginger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Origin and history of ginger 

 ginger (n.) 

 11c., from Old English ginȝifer, ginȝiber , from Late Latin gingiber , from Latin zingiberi , from Greek zingiberis , from Prakrit (Middle Indic) singabera , from Sanskrit srngaveram , from srngam "horn" + vera- "body," so called from the shape of its root. But this may be Sanskrit folk etymology, and the word may be from an ancient Dravidian word that also produced the modern name for the spice, inchi-ver ( inchi "ginger", ver "root"). 

 Bishop Caldwell and Drs. Burnell and Gundert considered that the Tamil iñci must have had an initial ś- formerly, that the Sanskrit śṛṅgabera was an imitation of the (supposititious) Tamil ciñcivēr and that European zingiber was derived from the Tamil name. [R. Swaminatha Aiyar, Dravidian Theories]

 The word apparently was readopted in Middle English from Old French gingibre (12c., Modern French gingembre ). In reference to coloring, by 1785 of fighting cocks, 1885 of persons ( gingery with reference to hair is from 1852). The meaning "spirit, spunk, temper" is from 1843, American English (see gin (v.1)).

 Ginger-ale is recorded by 1822, the term adopted by manufacturers to distinguish their product from ginger beer (1809), which was sometimes fermented. Ginger-snap as a type of hard cookie flavored with ginger is by 1855, American English.
 also from 11c. 

 Entries linking to ginger 

 gin (v.1) 

 in slang phrase gin up "enliven, make more exciting," 1887 ( ginning is from 1825), perhaps a special use of the verb associated with gin (n.2) "engine," but perhaps rather or also from to ginger (1797), which is from ginger in sense of "spice, pizzazz;" specifically in reference to the treatment described in the 1785 edition of Grose's slang dictionary under the entry for feague :

 ... to put ginger up a horse's fundament, and formerly, as it is said, a live eel, to make him lively and carry his tail well; it is said, a forfeit is incurred by any horse-dealer's servant, who shall shew a horse without first feaguing him. Feague is used, figuratively, for encouraging or spiriting one up.

 gingerbread (n.) 

 late 13c., gingerbrar , "preserved ginger," from Old French ginginbrat "ginger preserve," from Medieval Latin gingimbratus "gingered," from gingiber (see ginger ). The ending changed by folk etymology to -brede "bread," a formation attested by mid-14c. Meaning "sweet cake spiced with ginger" is from 15c. Figurative use, indicating anything considered showy and insubstantial, is from c. 1600. Sense of "fussy decoration on a house" is first recorded 1757; gingerbread-work (1748) was a sailor's term for carved decoration on a ship. Gingerbread-man as a confection is from 1850; the rhyme ("The Chase of the Gingerbread Man," by Ella M. White) is from 1898.

 gravy (n.1) 

 late 14c. (perhaps mid-13c. in Anglo-French), grave, gravei, gravi, greve, gravey, gravee, grovi, grauvey , with u/v interchange being typical of medieval spelling. From Old French  gravé ,  graué , "seasoned broth or sauce." Originally a spiced stew, it became popular in Europe in the 14th century.

 Compare Persian zirbaja, said by H.F. Amedroz to mean “concoction in a pot.” The unattested intermediate term should have been something like * girveie (see evolution of ginger for comparison.) 

 Recipe for Zîrbâja […] Take a young, cleaned hen and put it in a pot with a little salt, pepper, coriander, cinnamon, saffron and sufficient of vinegar and fresh oil, and when the meat is cooked, take peeled, crushed almonds and good white sugar, four ûqiyas of each; dissolve them in rosewater, pour in the pot and let it boil; then leave it on the embers until the fat rises. It is the most nutritious of dishes and good for all temperaments; this dish is made with hens or pigeons or doves, or with the meat of a young lamb. [ An Anonymous Andalusian Cookbook of the 13th Century , translated by Charles Perry.]

 Conyngys in graueye. Take Conyngys, and make hem clene, and hakke hem in gobettys, and sethe hem, other larde hem and Rost hem; and thanne hakke hem, and take Almaundys, and grynde hem, and temper hem vppe with gode Freysshe brothe of Flesshe, and coloure it wyth Safroun, and do ther-to a porcyon of flowre of Rys, and do ther-to then pouder Gyngere, Galyngale, Canel, Sugre, Clowys, Maces, and boyle it onys and sethe it; then take the Conyngys, and putte ther-on, and dresse it and serue it forth. [Harleian MS 279, date ca. 1420]

 A claim that traces to Frédéric Godefroy in 19c. is that  gravé  is a non-word created as a persistent mistranscription of grané, but Godefroy adjusted the spellings of his citations to match his theory. Grané is a similar soup mixture with which gravé is indeed conflated in French manuscripts, but which does not appear in English cookery. It is usually supposed to be from Medieval Latin granatum  "corned, grained."

 There may have been a second word, combined through folk-etymology, that led to gravé's secondary sense of "juice of cooked meat." Perhaps Old French engravee  "carved, sliced" or Old English greofa , an oil-pan (related to greaves , 1610s, "fibrous matter cooked out of animal fat.") The sense of broths or drippings appears to originally be of fishes, then soon extended to meat drippings or gelatin, which sense grows dominant in English from mid-15c, though still used most typically of fish or other seafood till 16c.

 As "a sauce made with meat drippings," 1670s, originally sauce gravy  or gravy sauce . Applied to vegetarian mixtures by 1875.

 The meaning "money easily acquired" is attested by 1910; gravy train (by 1899) as something lucrative or productive is said to have been originally railroad slang for a short haul that paid well. Gravy-boat "small, deep dish for holding gravy or sauce" is from 1827.

 More to explore

 gallimaufry 

 French galimafrée "hash, ragout, dish made of odds and ends," from Old French galimafree, calimafree "sauce made of mustard, ginger...

 pop 

 A new manufactory of a nectar, between soda-water and ginger-beer, and called pop, because 'pop goes the cork' when it is...

 garble 

 In later-medieval Europe, pepper and ginger and some other spices were always imports from the Arabic-speaking Eastern Mediterranean...

 float 

 —An ade upon the top of which is floated a layer of grape juice, ginger ale, or in some cases a disher of fruit sherbet or...

 cocktail 

 The 1798 reference gives the alternate name "ginger" for the drink, which seems to connect it to the concept of feaguing...

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 spice 

 c. 1200, "vegetable substance aromatic or pungent to the taste added to food or drink to enhance the flavor," also "a spice used as a medication or an alchemical ingredient," from Anglo-French spece, Old French espice (Modern French épice), from Late Latin species (plural) "spice

 spirit 

 mid-13c., "life, the animating or vital principle in man and animals," from Anglo-French spirit, Old French espirit "spirit, soul" (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus "a breathing (of respiration, also of the wind), breath;" also "breath of a god," hence

 file 

 "place (papers) in consecutive order for future reference," mid-15c., from Old French filer "string documents on a thread or wire for preservation or reference" (15c.), earlier "to spin thread," from fil "thread, string" (12c.), from Latin filum "a thread, string; thread of fate;

 lief 

 "dearly, gladly, willingly" (obsolete or archaic), c. 1250, from Middle English adjective lief "esteemed, beloved, dear," from Old English leof "dear, valued, beloved, pleasant" (also as a noun, "a beloved person, friend"), from Proto-Germanic *leuba- (source also of Old Norse lj

 Share ginger 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ginger Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ginger">Etymology of ginger by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ginger. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ginger Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ginger," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ginger. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ginger." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ginger. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ginger." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ginger (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ginger 
 gimmickry 
 gimmicky 
 gimp 
 gimpy 
 gin 
 ginger 
 gingerbread 
 gingerly 
 gingham 
 gingival 
 gingivitis