URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangrene
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:23:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gangrene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gangrene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gangrene 

 gangrene (n.) 

 "putrefaction or necrosis of soft tissues," 1540s, cancrena , from Latin gangraena (Medieval Latin cancrena ), from medical Greek gangraina "an eating or gnawing sore," literally "that which eats away," a dissimilated, reduplicated form of gran- "to gnaw," from PIE root *gras- "to devour" (see gastric ).
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to gangrene 

 gastric (adj.) 

 1650s, from Modern Latin gastricus , from Greek gast ē r (genitive gastros ) "stomach, paunch, belly," often figurative of gluttony or greed, also "womb, uterus; sausage," by dissimilation from *graster , literally "eater, devourer," from gran "to gnaw, eat," from PIE root *gras- "to devour" (source also of Greek grastis "green fodder," Latin gramen "fodder, grass," Old English cærse "cress").

 gangrenous (adj.) 

 1610s, from gangrene + -ous . Perhaps modeled on French gangréneux .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 slough 

 "muddy place in a road or way, mudhole, swamp, deep quagmire," Middle English slough, from Old English sloh "soft, muddy ground," a word of uncertain origin. Compare Middle Low German sloch "muddy place," Middle High German sluoche "ditch." Figurative use (in reference to moral s

 mortify 

 late 14c., mortifien, "to kill, destroy the life of," from Old French mortefiier "destroy, overwhelm, punish," from Late Latin mortificare "cause death, kill, put to death," literally "make dead," from mortificus "producing death," from Latin mors (genitive mortis) "death" (from 

 mortification 

 late 14c., mortificacioun, "mortifying of the flesh, act of subduing the passions and appetites, suppression of bodily desires," from Late Latin mortificationem (nominative mortificatio) "a killing, putting to death," from past-participle stem of mortificare (see mortify). Meanin

 tor 

 "high, rocky hill," Old English torr "rock, crag;" said to be a different word than torr "tower." Obviously cognate with Gaelic torr "lofty hill, mound," Old Welsh twrr "heap, pile;" and perhaps ultimately with Latin turris "high structure" (see tower (n.)). But sources disagree 

 rot 

 Middle English roten, from Old English rotian, of animal substances, "to decay, putrefy, undergo natural decomposition" (intransitive), also of vegetable matter," from Proto-Germanic *rutjan (source also of Old Saxon roton, Old Norse rotna, Old Frisian rotia, Middle Dutch roten, 

 sweat 

 Middle English sweten, from Old English swætan "perspire, excrete moisture from the skin," also "toil, labor, work hard," from Proto-Germanic *swaitjan "to sweat," from the source of sweat (n.). Compare Frisian swette, Dutch zweeten, Danish svede, German schwitzen. The meaning "b

 pathology 

 "science of diseases," 1610s, from French pathologie (16c.), from medical Latin pathologia "study of disease," from Greek pathos "suffering" (from PIE root *kwent(h)- "to suffer") + -logia "study" (see -logy). In reference to the study of abnormal mental conditions from 1842. Anc

 carpenter 

 "artificer in timber, one who does the heavier sort of wood-working," c. 1300 (attested from early 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French carpenter, Old North French carpentier (Old French and Modern French charpentier), from Late Latin (artifex) carpentarius "wagon (maker); carri

 poindexter 

 "nerdy intellectual," by 1986, U.S. teenager slang, from the character Poindexter, introduced 1959 in the made-for-TV cartoon version of "Felix the Cat." The name originally was a surname, said to be Norman. There is a rare name Poindexter, appearing in French as Poingdestre, "r

 decision 

 mid-15c., "act of deciding," from Old French décision (14c.), from Latin decisionem (nominative decisio) "a decision, settlement, agreement," noun of action from past-participle stem of decidere "to decide, determine," literally "to cut off," from de "off" (see de-) + caedere "to

 Share gangrene 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangrene Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangrene">Etymology of gangrene by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gangrene. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangrene Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gangrene," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangrene. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gangrene." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangrene. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gangrene." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangrene (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gangrene 
 ganglia 
 gangling 
 ganglion 
 gangly 
 gang-plank 
 gangrene 
 gangrenous 
 gangsta 
 gangster 
 gangway 
 ganja 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix