URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/locust
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:14:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Locust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Locust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of locust 

 locust (n.1) 

 "grasshopper, large orthopterous insect noted for mass migrations accompanied by destructive ravages of vegetation," early 14c., borrowed earlier in Old French form languste (c. 1200), from Latin locusta "locust; lobster" (see lobster ).

 In the Hebrew Bible there are nine different names for the insect or for particular species or varieties; in the English Bible they are rendered sometimes 'locust,' sometimes 'beetle,' 'grasshopper,' 'caterpillar,' 'palmerworm,' etc. The precise application of several names is unknown. [OED, 1989]
 also from early 14c. 

 locust (n.2) 

 North American tree, used for ornament and lumber, 1630s, a transferred use (based on resemblance) from locust-tree "carob tree" (1610s), the fruit of which supposedly resembles the insect (see locust (n.1)). Greek akris "locust" often was applied in the Levant to carob pods. In U.S. from late 19c. policemen's clubs were famously made from locust wood ( locust-club is attested from 1887).
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to locust 

 lobster (n.) 

 large, long-tailed, stalk-eyed, 10-legged marine shellfish ( Homarus vulgaris ), early Middle English lopster , lopister , from Old English loppestre "lobster," also "locust," a corruption of Latin locusta , lucusta "marine shellfish, lobster;" also "locust, grasshopper," which is of unknown origin.

 De Vaan writes that "The only word similar in form and meaning is lacerta 'lizard; mackerel', but there is no common preform in sight. ... [T]hey could be cognate words in the language from which Latin borrowed these forms."

 The change of Latin -c- to English -p- (and, from late 14c., to -b- ) is unexplained; perhaps it is by influence of Old English loppe , lobbe "spider." The ending seems to have been altered by the old fem. agent noun suffix (preserved in Baxter , Webster , etc.; see -ster ), which approximated the sound of Latin -sta .

 OED (1989) says the Latin word originally meant "lobster or some similar crustacean, the application to the locust being suggested by the resemblance in shape." Trilobite fossils in Worcestershire limestone quarries were known colloquially as locusts , which seems to have been the generic word for "unidentified arthropod" (as apple was for "foreign fruit").

 Locusta in the sense "lobster" also appears in Old Cornish legast and French langouste (12c.), now "crawfish, crayfish," but in Old French both "lobster" and "locust" (a 13c. psalter has God giving over the crops of Egypt to the langoustes ).

 As slang for "a British soldier" since 1640s, originally in reference to the jointed armor of the Roundhead cuirassiers, later (1660) to the red coat, the color of a boiled lobster.

 Sir William Waller having received from London [in June 1643] a fresh regiment of five hundred horse, under the command of sir Arthur Haslerigge, which were so prodigiously armed that they were called by the other side the regiment of lobsters, because of their bright iron shells with which they were covered, being perfect curasseers. [Lord Clarendon, "History of the Rebellion," 1647]

 trilobite (n.) 

 extinct marine arthropod of the order Trilobita , 1820, from Modern Latin Trilobites (Walch, 1771), from Greek tri- "three" (see three ) + lobos "lobe" (see lobe ); so called for the three longitudinal lobes into which its body is divided. Related: Trilobitic . Extinct from the close of the Carboniferous, they are among the largest and most widely known fossils in the extensive Cambrian and Silurian beds of England (compare locust ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 katydid 

 popular name for a large, green locust-like insect, 1784, American English, imitative of the stridulous sound the male makes...

 pray 

 Praying mantis attested from 1809 (praying locust is from 1752; praying insect by 1816; see mantis)....

 honey 

 Honey-locust, North American tree, so called from 1743, said to be named from a sweet pulp made by Native Americans from...

 septemdecimal 

 [John Hooper, report on the seventeen-year locust, in "Annual Report of the American Institute," New York, 1855] ...

 tree 

 Old English treo, treow "tree" (also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake"), from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o-, suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with speci

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic *widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu- "tree, wood" (source als

 reproach 

 mid-14c., reproche, "a rebuke, blame, censure" directed against a person; also "object of scorn or contempt;" c. 1400, as "disgrace, state of disgrace," from Anglo-French repruce, Old French reproche "blame, shame, disgrace" (12c.), from reprochier "to blame, bring up against." O

 dodge 

 1560s, "go this way and that in speech or action," a sense now obsolete; from 1680s as "start suddenly aside, shift suddenly," as to evade a blow;" 1704 as "to move to and fro, shift about;" origin and sense evolution obscure. Perhaps it is from or akin to Scottish and Northern E

 diamond 

 mid-14c., diamaunt, diamond, "extremely hard and refractive precious stone made of pure or nearly pure carbon," from Old French diamant, from Medieval Latin diamantem (nominative diamas), from Vulgar Latin *adiamantem (which was subsequently altered by influence of the many Greek

 satellite 

 1540s, "follower or attendant of a superior person" (but rare in this sense before late 18c.), from French satellite (14c.), from Latin satellitem (nominative satelles)  "an attendant" upon a distinguished person; "a body-guard, a courtier; an assistant," in Cicero often in 

 Share locust 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/locust Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/locust">Etymology of locust by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of locust. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/locust Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of locust," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/locust. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of locust." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/locust. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of locust." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/locust (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near locust 
 locomotive 
 locomotor 
 loco-weed 
 locum-tenens 
 locus 
 locust 
 locution 
 locutory 
 lode 
 loden 
 lodestar 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix