URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/senior
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Senior - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Senior - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of senior 

 senior (adj.) 

 late 13c., "the elder," from Latin senior "older," comparative of senex (genitive senis ) "old" (from PIE root *sen- "old"). Its original use in English was as an addition to a personal name indicating "the father" when father and son have the same name (e.g. Walterus Baddyng, seniore in late 13c. Leet rolls of the City of Norwich). The meaning "higher in rank, longer in service" is recorded by 1510s.

 The Latin word yielded titles of respect in many languages, such as French sire , Spanish señor , Portuguese senhor , Italian signor . Also compare Herr . Senior citizen "elderly person" (typically one past retirement age) is by 1938, American English.
 also from late 13c. 

 senior (n.) 

 mid-14c., "person of authority;" late 14c., "person who is older than another," from senior (adj.). Sense of "older fellow of a college; fourth-year student" is by 1888, from an earlier general sense of "advanced student" (1610s). The meaning "aged person, one of the older inhabitants" is by 1889.
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to senior 

 Herr 

 German equivalent of Mister (but also used without a name), 1650s, originally "nobler, superior," from Middle High German herre , from Old High German herro , comparative of hēr "noble, worthy, important, exalted," from PIE *kei- (2), a color adjective (see hue (n.1)), in suffixed form *koi-ro- here meaning "gray, hoary," hence "gray-haired, venerable." Cognate with Old Frisian hera , Dutch heer ; perhaps in this usage a loan-translation of Latin senior in the High German area that spread into other Germanic languages. Hence also Herrenvolk "master race," the concept of the German people in Nazi ideology.

 old (adj.) 

 Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon, Kentish) "antique, of ancient origin, belonging to antiquity, primeval; long in existence or use; near the end of the normal span of life; elder, mature, experienced," from Proto-Germanic *althaz "grown up, adult" (source also of Old Frisian ald , Gothic alþeis , Dutch oud , German alt ), originally a past-participle stem of a verb meaning "grow, nourish" (compare Gothic alan "to grow up," Old Norse ala "to nourish"), from PIE root *al- (2) "to grow, nourish."

 The original Old English vowel is preserved in Scots auld , also in alderman . The original comparative and superlative (elder, eldest) are retained in particular uses.

 The usual PIE root is *sen- (see senior (adj.)). A few Indo-European languages distinguish words for "old" (vs. young) from words for "old" (vs. new), and some have separate words for aged persons as opposed to old things. Latin senex was used of aged living things, mostly persons, while vetus (literally "having many years") was used of inanimate things. Greek geraios was used mostly of humans; palaios was used mostly of things, of persons only in a derogatory sense. Greek also had arkhaios , literally "belonging to the beginning," which parallels French ancien , used mostly with reference to things "of former times."

 Old English also had fyrn "ancient," which is related to Old English feor "far, distant" (see far , and compare Gothic fairneis , Old Norse forn "old, of old, of former times," Old High German firni "old, experienced").

 The meaning "of a specified age" ( three days old ) is from late Old English. The sense of "pertaining to or characteristic of the earlier or earliest of two or more stages of development or periods of time" is from late Old English.

 As an intensive, "great, high," mid-15c., now only following another adjective ( gay old time , good old Charlie Brown ). As a noun, "those who are old," 12c. Of old "of old times" is from late 14c.

 Old age "period of life of advanced years" is from early 14c. Old Testament is attested from mid-14c. (in late Old English it was old law ). Old lady "wife, mother" is attested from c. 1775 (but compare Old English seo ealde hlæfdige "the queen dowager"). Old man "man who has lived long" is from late Old English; the sense of "husband, father, boss" is from 1854, earlier (1830) it was military slang for "commanding officer;" old boy as a familiar form of address is by c. 1600.

 Old days "former times" is from late Old English; old time "times gone by" is from late 14c.; good old days , "former times conceived as better than the present," sometimes ironic, is by 1670s. Good old with a person's name is by 1837, "A familiar address, derisive or affectionate according to circumstances" [Farmer], often suggesting a nostalgic connection.

 Old Light (adj.), in religion, "favoring the old faith or principles," is by 1819.

 *sen- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "old."

 It might form all or part of: monseigneur ; seignior ; senate ; senescent ; seneschal ; senicide ; senile ; senility ; senior ; seniority ; senor ; senora ; senorita ; shanachie ; Shannon ; signor ; sir ; sire ; surly .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit sanah "old;" Avestan hana- "old," Old Persian hanata- "old age, lapse of time;" Armenian hin "old;" Greek enos "old, of last year;" Latin senilis "of old age," senex "old, old man;" Lithuanian senas "old," senis "an old man;" Gothic sineigs "old" (used only of persons), sinistra "elder, senior;" Old Norse sina "dry standing grass from the previous year;" Old Irish sen , Old Welsh hen "old."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 junior 

 late 13c., "younger, not as old as another," from Latin iunior "younger, more young," comparative of iuvenis "young; a young man," etymologically "one who possesses vital force" (from PIE root *yeu- "vital force, youthful vigor;" see young (adj.)). Used after a person's name to m

 elder 

 "more old," Old English (Mercian) eldra, comparative of eald, ald (see old); only English survival of umlaut in comparison. Superseded by older since 16c. Elder statesman (1921) originally was a translation of Japanese genro (plural)....type of berry tree, c. 1400, from earlier e

 inquisitor 

 Of the fem. forms, inquisitress (1727) is senior to inquisitrix (1825)....

 litigious 

 The word was in Middle English with a now-obsolete sense "fond of disputes" (late 14c.), making it senior in English to litigate...

 seignior 

 from Old French seignior, signieur (11c., Anglo-French seinur, Modern French seigneur), from Latin seniorem (nominative senior...

 tutor 

 Specific sense of "senior boy appointed to help a junior in his studies" is recorded from 1680s....

 seneschal 

 senechal, title of a high administrative court officer, from Frankish Latin siniscalcus, from Proto-Germanic *sini-skalk "senior...

 adult 

 1530s (but not common until mid-17c.) "grown, mature," from Latin adultus "grown up, mature, adult, ripe," past participle of adolescere "grow up, come to maturity, ripen," from ad "to" (see ad-) + alescere "be nourished," hence, "increase, grow up," inchoative of alere "to nouri

 Dane 

 "native or inhabitant of Denmark," early 14c. (in plural, Danes), from Danish Daner, (Medieval Latin Dani), which is perhaps ultimately from a source related to Old High German tanar "sand bank," in reference to their homeland, or from Proto-Germanic *den- "low ground," for the s

 dean 

 early 14c., an ecclesiastical title, etymologically "head of a group of ten," from Old French deien (12c., Modern French doyen), from Late Latin decanus "head of a group of 10 monks in a monastery," from earlier secular meaning "commander of 10 soldiers" (which was extended to ci

 Share senior 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/senior Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/senior">Etymology of senior by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of senior. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/senior Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of senior," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/senior. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of senior." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/senior. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of senior." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/senior (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near senior 
 senescent 
 seneschal 
 senicide 
 senile 
 senility 
 senior 
 seniority 
 senna 
 sennight 
 senor 
 senora 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix