URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/clinic
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:00:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Clinic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Clinic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of clinic 

 clinic (n.) 

 1620s, "bedridden person, one confined to his bed by sickness," from French clinique (17c.), from Latin clinicus "physician that visits patients in their beds," from Greek klinike (techne) "(practice) at the sickbed," from klinikos "of the bed," from kline "bed, couch, that on which one lies," from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- "to lean."

 Also "one who defers baptism until the death-bed" (1660s). Sense of "private hospital" is from 1884, from German Klinik in this sense, itself from French clinique , via the notion of "bedside medical education, examination of a patient by an instructor in the presence of students." The modern sense thus reverses the classical one, in which the "clinic" came to the patient. General sense of "conference for group instruction in something" is from 1919.
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to clinic 

 clinical (adj.) 

 1780, "pertaining to hospital patients or hospital care," from clinic + -al (2). Meaning "coldly dispassionate" (like a medical report) is recorded from 1928. The earlier adjective was clinic "of or pertaining to the sick-bed" (1620s). Related: Clinically .

 clinician (n.) 

 "one who makes a practical study of disease or sick persons," 1844, from French clinicien , which is formed from Latin clinicus (see clinic ) on the model of physicien . Native clinicist is attested from 1860.

 policlinic 
 polyclinic 
 *klei- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 heroin 

 A new hypnotic, to which the name of 'heroin' has been given, has been tried in the medical clinic of Professor Gerhardt...

 dispensary 

 "place for weighing out medicines, room or shop in which medicines are dispensed," 1690s, from Medieval Latin dispensarius, as a noun, "one who dispenses," from Latin dispensare "disburse, administer, distribute (by weight);"  frequentative of dispendere "pay out," from dis-

 session 

 late 14c., sessioun, "periodical sitting of a court," from Old French session "act or state of sitting; assembly," from Latin sessionem (nominative sessio) "act of sitting; a seat; loitering; a session," noun of action from past-participle stem of sedere "to sit" (from PIE root *

 hospital 

 mid-13c., "shelter for the needy," from Old French hospital, ospital "hostel, shelter, lodging" (Modern French hôpital), from Late Latin hospitale "guest-house, inn," noun use of neuter of Latin adjective hospitalis "of a guest or host" (as a noun, "a guest; the duties of hospita

 strike 

 Middle English striken, from Old English strican (past tense strac, past participle stricen) "pass lightly over, stroke, smooth, rub" (senses now obsolete), also "go, move, proceed, make one's way," from Proto-Germanic *strikanan (source also of Old Norse strykva "to stroke," Old

 loyalty 

 c. 1400, from Old French loialte, leaute "loyalty, fidelity; legitimacy; honesty; good quality" (Modern French loyauté), from loial (see loyal). The Medieval Latin word was legalitas. The earlier Middle English form was leaute (mid-13c.), from the older French form. Loyalty oath 

 mayhem 

 late 15c., "the violent doing of a bodily hurt to another person," from Anglo-French maihem (13c.), from Old French mahaigne "injury, wrong, a hurt, harm, damage;" related to mahaignier "to injure, wound, mutilate, cripple" (see maim). Originally, in law, the crime of maiming a p

 body 

 Middle English bodi, from Old English bodig "trunk of a man or beast; the whole physical structure of a human or animal; material frame, material existence of a human; main or principal part of anything," related to Old High German botah, but otherwise of unknown origin. Not else

 experiment 

 mid-14c., "action of observing or testing; an observation, test, or trial;" also "piece of evidence or empirical proof; feat of magic or sorcery," from Old French esperment "practical knowledge, cunning; enchantment, magic spell; trial, proof, example; lesson, sign, indication," 

 emblem 

 1580s, "relief, raised ornament on vessels, etc.," from Latin emblema "inlaid ornamental work," from Greek emblema (genitive emblematos) "an insertion," from emballein "to insert," literally "to throw in," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + ballein "to throw" (from 

 Share clinic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/clinic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/clinic">Etymology of clinic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of clinic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/clinic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of clinic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/clinic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of clinic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/clinic. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of clinic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/clinic (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near clinic 
 clincher 
 cline 
 cling 
 clingstone 
 clingy 
 clinic 
 clinical 
 clinician 
 clink 
 clinker 
 clino- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix