URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/now
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:37:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Now - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Now - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of now 

 now (adv.) 

 Middle English nou , from Old English nu "at the present time, at this moment, immediately; now that," also used as an interjection and as an introductory word; from Proto-Germanic *nu (source also of Old Norse nu , Dutch nu , Old Frisian nu , German nun , Gothic nu "now"), from PIE *nu "now" (source also of Sanskrit and Avestan nu , Old Persian nuram , Hittite nuwa , Greek nu , nun , Latin nunc , Old Church Slavonic nyne , Lithuanian nū , Old Irish nu- ). Perhaps originally "newly, recently," and related to the root of new .

 Since Old English it has been often merely emphatic, without any temporal sense (as in the emphatic use of now then , though that phrase originally meant "at the present time," also "at once" early 13c.; in early Middle English it often was written as one word).

 As a noun, "the present time," from late 14c. The adjective meaning "up to date" was revived by 1967, but the word was used also as an adjective with the sense of "current" from late 14c. through 18c. Now and then "occasionally, at one time and another" is from mid-15c.; now or never is attested from early 13c. ( nu oþer neure ).

 Entries linking to now 

 new (adj.) 

 Middle English neue , from Old English neowe , niowe , earlier niwe "made or established for the first time, fresh, recently made or grown; novel, unheard-of, different from the old; untried, inexperienced, unused," from Proto-Germanic *neuja- (source also of Old Saxon niuwi , Old Frisian nie , Middle Dutch nieuwe , Dutch nieuw , Old High German niuwl , German neu , Danish and Swedish ny , Gothic niujis "new").

 This is from PIE *newo- "new" (source also of Sanskrit navah , Persian nau , Hittite newash , Greek neos , Lithuanian naujas , Old Church Slavonic novu , Russian novyi , Latin novus , Old Irish nue , Welsh newydd "new").

 From mid-14c. as "novel, modern" (Gower, 1393, has go the new foot "dance the latest style"). In the names of cities and countries named for some other place, c. 1500. Meaning "not habituated, unfamiliar, unaccustomed," 1590s. Of the moon from late Old English. The adverb, "newly, for the first time," is Old English niwe , from the adjective. As a noun, "that which is new," also in Old English. There was a verb form in Old English ( niwian, neowian ) and Middle English ( neuen ) "make, invent, create; bring forth, produce, bear fruit; begin or resume (an activity); resupply; substitute," but it seems to have fallen from use.

 New Testament is from late 14c. New math in reference to a system of teaching mathematics based on investigation and discovery is from 1958. New World (adj.) to designate phenomena of the Western Hemisphere first attested 1823, in Lord Byron; the noun phrase is recorded from 1550s. New Deal in the FDR sense is attested by 1932. New school in reference to the more advanced or liberal faction of something is from 1806. New Left (1960) was a coinage of U.S. political sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916-1962). New light in reference to religions is from 1640s. New frontier , in U.S. politics, "reform and social betterment," is from 1934 (Henry Wallace) but associated with John F. Kennedy's use of it in 1960.

 hic et nunc 

 Latin, literally "here and now," from demonstrative pronominal adjective of place hic "this, here" + nunc "now" (see now ).

 nowadays 
 quidnunc 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 today 

 Old English todæge, to dæge "on (this) day," from to "at, on" (see to) + dæge, dative of dæg "day" (see day). Meaning "in modern times" is from c. 1300. As a noun from 1530s. Generally written as two words until 16c., after which it usually was written to-day until early 20c. Sim

 coo 

 What are you doing now,    Oh Thomas Moore?...What are you doing now,    Oh Thomas Moore?...Sighing or suing now, Rhyming or wooing now, Billing or cooing now,    Which, Thomas Moore?...

 current 

 c. 1300, curraunt, "running, flowing, moving along" (a sense now archaic), from Old French corant "running, lively, eager..."prevalent, generally reported or known" is from 1560s; that of "established by common consent" is from 1590s; that of "now...passing, present now, in progress" is from c. 1600....

 treat 

 What treat can we have now?...If we were to treat ourselves now—that is, to have dainties a little above our means, it would be selfish and wicked....But now—what I mean by the word—we never do make much of ourselves. None but the poor can do it....

 overview 

 As a verb, 1540s as "look (something) over or through;" 1560s as "view from a superior position;" both now rare or obsolete...The modern word seems to be a new formation; it was mentioned in "American Speech" (1934) as "now being worked as hard by...

 redoubtable 

 late 14c., of persons, "worthy of honor, venerable" (a sense now obsolete); late 15c., "that is to be dreaded or feared,...dread; stand in awe or apprehension of; honor" (late 14c., from Old French) and was used through 19c., though OED marks it "now...

 ago 

 "gone, gone by; gone away," early 14c., a shortened form of agon "departed, passed away," past participle of a now-obsolete...The form agone is now obsolete except as a dialectal variant....

 present 

 c. 1300, "being in the same place as someone or something;" early 14c., "existing at the time," from Old French present "evident, at hand, within reach;" as a noun, "the present time" (11c., Modern French présent) and directly from Latin praesentem (nominative praesens) "present,

 nun 

 Old English nunne "woman devoted to religious life under vows of celibacy, poverty, and obedience to a superior," also "vestal, pagan priestess," from Late Latin nonna "nun, tutor," originally (along with masc. nonnus) a term of address to elderly persons, perhaps from children's

 Share now 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/now Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/now">Etymology of now by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of now. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/now Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of now," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/now. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of now." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/now. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of now." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/now (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near now 
 Novial 
 novice 
 novitiate 
 novocain 
 Novus Ordo Seclorum 
 now 
 nowadays 
 nowhere 
 nowhither 
 no-win 
 no-wise 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix