URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/marrow
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:46:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Marrow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Marrow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of marrow 

 marrow (n.) 

 "soft tissue found in the interior of bones," late 14c., from Old English mearg "marrow," earlier mærh , from Proto-Germanic *mazga- , reconstructed to be from PIE *mozgo- "marrow" (source also of Sanskrit majjan- , Avestan mazga- "marrow," Old Church Slavonic mozgu , Lithuanian smagenės "brain"). Germanic cognates include Old Norse mergr , Old Saxon marg , Old Frisian merg , Middle Dutch march , Dutch merg , Old High German marg , German Mark "marrow."

 The figurative sense of "inmost or central part, inner substance, essence" is attested from mid-14c.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to marrow 

 marrowbone (n.) 

 late 14c., marybones (late 13c. as a surname), "bone containing fat or marrow," from marrow + bone (n.). A poetic Old English word for "bone" was mearhcofa "marrow-chamber." Later generally of any large bone. The conjecture that it is a corruption of Mary-bones , in allusion to the reverence paid to the Virgin Mary by kneeling "is absurd" [Century Dictionary]; nonetheless, marrowbones is used especially to mean "the bones of the knees" (1530s). To ride in the marrow-bone coach was one of many terms in old slang for "to go on foot."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kernel 

 "edible substance in a nut or the stone of a fruit," Old English cyrnel "seed, kernel, pip," from Proto-Germanic *kurnilo- (source also of Middle High German kornel "a grain," Middle Dutch cornel "coarse meal"), from the root of corn "seed, grain" (from PIE root *gre-no- "grain")

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 core 

 early 14c., "heart or inmost part of anything" (especially an apple, pear, etc.), of uncertain origin, probably from Old French cor, coeur "core of fruit, heart of lettuce," literally "heart," from Latin cor "heart," from PIE root *kerd- "heart." Meaning "a central portion cut an

 mast 

 moist, wet," also used of various qualities of food (source also of Sanskrit madati "it bubbles, gladdens," medah "fat, marrow...

 ossifrage 

 World vulture that swallows and digests bones and was believed also to drop them from aloft to break them and get at the marrow...

 poliomyelitis 

 coined by German physician Adolph Kussmaul (1822-1902) from Greek polios "grey" (from PIE root *pel- (1) "pale") + myelos "marrow...

 bones 

 Formerly also "pieces of bone or ivory struck or rattled to accompany music" (1590s; compare marrow-bones and cleavers under...

 essence 

 late 14c., essencia (respelled late 15c. on French model), from Latin essentia "being, essence," abstract noun formed (to translate Greek ousia "being, essence") from essent-, present participle stem of esse "to be," from PIE root *es- "to be." Originally "substance of the Trinit

 sum 

 c. 1300, somme, summe, "a quantity or amount of money," from Anglo-French and Old French summe, somme "amount, total; collection; essential point; summing up, conclusion" (13c., Modern French somme), from Latin summa "the top, summit; chief place, highest rank; main thing, chief 

 quintessence 

 early 15c., quint-essence, in ancient philosophy and medieval alchemy, "a pure essence latent in all things, and the substance of which the heavenly bodies are composed," literally "fifth essence," from Old French quinte essence (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin quinta esse

 Share marrow 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/marrow Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/marrow">Etymology of marrow by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of marrow. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/marrow Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of marrow," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/marrow. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of marrow." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/marrow. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of marrow." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/marrow (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near marrow 
 marquis 
 Marrano 
 marriage 
 marriageable 
 married 
 marrow 
 marrowbone 
 marrowsky 
 marry 
 Mars 
 Marsala 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix