URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/camphor
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:56:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Camphor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Camphor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of camphor 

 camphor (n.) 

 whitish, translucent, volatile substance with a penetrating odor, the product of trees in east Asia and Indonesia, extensively used in medicine, early 14c., caumfre , from Old French camphre , from Medieval Latin camfora , from Arabic kafur , perhaps via Sanskrit karpuram , from Malay (Austronesian) kapur "camphor tree." Related: Camphorated .
 also from early 14c. 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 celluloid 

 transparent plastic made from nitro-celluloses and camphor, 1871, trademark name (reg....

 wanton 

 early 14c., wan-towen, "resistant to control; willful," from Middle English privative word-forming element wan- "wanting, lacking, deficient," from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with un- (1), and is cognate with Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur "misgovernment," wan

 protocol 

 mid-15c., prothogol, "prologue;" 1540s, prothogall, "draft of a document, minutes of a transaction or negotiation, original of any writing" (senses now obsolete), from French prothocole (c. 1200, Modern French protocole), from Medieval Latin protocollum "draft," literally "the fi

 autumn 

 season after summer and before winter, late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus "increase"), which is of unknown origin. Perhaps it is from Etruscan, but Tucker suggest

 qualitative 

 early 15c., qualitatif, "that produces a (physical) quality," from Medieval Latin qualitativus "relating to quality," from stem of Latin qualitas "a quality, property, nature" (see quality). Meaning "concerned with quality, relating to the possession of qualities without referenc

 memoir 

 early 15c., "written record," from Anglo-French memorie "note, memorandum, something written to be kept in mind" (early 15c., Old French memoire), from Latin memoria (from PIE root *(s)mer- (1) "to remember"). The more specific sense of "a notice or essay relating to something wi

 like 

 "having the same characteristics or qualities" (as another), c. 1200, lik, shortening of y-lik, from Old English gelic "like, similar," from Proto-Germanic *(ga)leika- "having the same form," literally "with a corresponding body" (source also of Old Saxon gilik, Dutch gelijk, Ger

 disappoint 

 mid-15c., disappointen, "dispossess of appointed office," from dis- "reverse, opposite of" + appoint, or else from Old French desapointer "undo the appointment, remove from office" (14c., Modern French from désappointer). Modern sense of "to frustrate the expectations or desires 

 raven 

 Late Old English ræfen, refen, earlier hræfn (Mercian), hrefn, hræfn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *khrabanaz (source also of Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban, German Rabe "raven," Old English hroc "rook"), from a PIE root imitati

 diversity 

 mid-14c., diversite, "variety, diverseness;" late 14c., "quality of being diverse, fact of difference between two or more things or kinds; variety; separateness; that in which two or more things differ," mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversete "difference, diversity,

 Share camphor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/camphor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/camphor">Etymology of camphor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of camphor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/camphor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of camphor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/camphor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of camphor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/camphor. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of camphor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/camphor (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near camphor 
 Campbell 
 Campbellite 
 camper 
 campfire 
 camp-ground 
 camphor 
 campus 
 can 
 can't 
 Canaan 
 Canada 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix