URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/zenith
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:00:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Zenith - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Zenith - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of zenith 

 zenith (n.) 

 "point of the heavens directly overhead at any place," late 14c., zineth , from Old French cenith (Anglo-French zenith , Modern French zénith ) and directly from Medieval Latin zyneth , zymeth , cenit , senit , bungled scribal transliterations of Arabic samt "road, path," abbreviation of samt ar-ras , literally "the way over the head." Letter -m- misread as -ni- .

 The Medieval Latin word could as well be influenced by the rough agreement of the Arabic term with classical Latin semita "sidetrack, side path" (notion of "thing going off to the side"), from se- "apart" + *mi-ta- , a suffixed form of PIE root *mei- (1) "to change, go, move."

 The figurative sense of "highest point or state" of anything capable of having one is from c. 1600. Related: Zenithal .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to zenith 

 azimuth (n.) 

 "arc marking the distance of a star from the north or south point of the meridian," late 14c., from Old French azimut , from Arabic as-sumut "the ways," plural of as-samt "the way, direction" (see zenith ). Related: Azimuthal .

 nadir (n.) 

 late 14c., in astronomy, "imaginary point of the celestial sphere vertically opposite to the zenith of the sun; the inferior pole of the horizon," from Medieval Latin nadir , from Arabic nazir "opposite to," in nazir as-samt , literally "opposite direction," from nazir "opposite" + as-samt "road, path" (see zenith ). Transferred sense of "lowest point" of anything is recorded by 1793.

 *mei- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to change, go, move," "with derivatives referring to the exchange of goods and services within a society as regulated by custom or law" [Watkins].

 It might form all or part of: amiss ; amoeba ; azimuth ; common ; commune ; communicate ; communication ; communism ; commute ; congee ; demean ; emigrate ; emigration ; excommunicate ; excommunication ; immune ; immutable ; incommunicado ; mad ; mean (adj.1) "low-quality;" mew (n.2) "cage;" mews ; migrate ; migration ; mis- (1) "bad, wrong;" mistake ; Mithras ; molt ; Mstislav ; municipal ; munificent ; mutable ; mutant ; mutate ; mutation ; mutatis mutandis ; mutual ; permeable ; permeate ; permutation ; permute ; remunerate ; remuneration ; transmutation ; transmute ; zenith .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit methati "changes, alternates, joins, meets;" Avestan mitho "perverted, false;" Hittite mutai- "be changed into;" Latin mutare "to change," meare "to go, pass," migrare "to move from one place to another," mutuus "done in exchange;" Old Church Slavonic mite "alternately;" Czech mijim "to go by, pass by," Polish mijać "avoid;" Gothic maidjan "to change."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Ascians 

 So called because they "haue the Sunne twice euery yeere in their zenith, and then they make no shaddowes at all" [Nathanael...

 north 

 .; north pole in astronomy for "the fixed zenith of the celestial sphere" is from late 14c.)....

 herpes 

 late 14c., "any inflammatory, spreading skin condition" (used of shingles, gangrene, etc.), from Latin herpes "a spreading skin eruption," from Greek herpes, the name for the disease shingles, literally "creeping," from herpein "to creep, move slowly" (cognate with Latin serpere 

 sphere 

 a re-Latinized spelling, attested beginning mid-15c., of Middle English spere (c. 1300) "cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow globe about the world," from Anglo-French espiere, Old French espere (13c., Modern French sphère), from Latin sphaera "globe, ball, celestial sphere" (Med

 empyrean 

 "empyreal," mid-14c. (as empyre), probably via Medieval Latin empyreus, from Greek empyros "fiery," from assimilated form of en (see en- (2)) + pyr "fire" (from PIE root *paewr- "fire"). As an adjective in English from early 15c. The etymological sense is "formed of pure fire or 

 firmament 

 mid-13c., "expanse of space above the earth where the heavenly bodies move," hence "the arch or vault of the heavens, the visible sky" (c. 1300), from Old French firmament or directly from Latin firmamentum "firmament," literally "a support, a strengthening," from firmus "strong,

 drain 

 Middle English dreinen, from Old English dreahnian "to draw off gradually, as a liquid; remove by degrees; strain out," from Proto-Germanic *dreug-, source of drought, dry, giving the English word originally a sense of "to make dry." Figurative meaning of "exhaust" is attested fr

 welkin 

 "sky" (poetic), Old English wolcen "cloud," also "sky, heavens," from Proto-Germanic *wulk- (source also of Old Saxon wolkan, Old Frisian wolken, Middle Dutch wolke, Dutch wolk, Old High German wolka, German Wolke "cloud"), perhaps from PIE *welg- "wet" (source also of Lithuanian

 republic 

 "state in which supreme or executive power rests in the people via representatives chosen by citizens entitled to vote," c. 1600, from French république (15c.), from Latin respublica (ablative republica) "the common weal, a commonwealth, state, republic," literally res publica "p

 pyramid 

 1550s "massive monumental stone structure of polygonl plan, the sides of which slope in planes to a common apex," also a geometrical solid resembling this, (earlier in Latin form piramis, late 14c., or nativized in Middle English as piram), from French pyramide (Old French pirami

 Share zenith 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/zenith Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/zenith">Etymology of zenith by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of zenith. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/zenith Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of zenith," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zenith. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of zenith." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zenith. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of zenith." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/zenith (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near zenith 
 Zeiss 
 zeitgeist 
 zek 
 Zen 
 Zend 
 zenith 
 zeno- 
 Zenobia 
 Zenonian 
 zep 
 Zephaniah 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix