URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/atmosphere
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:30:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Atmosphere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Atmosphere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of atmosphere 

 atmosphere (n.) 

 1630s, atmosphaera (modern form from 1670s), "gaseous envelop surrounding the earth," from Modern Latin atmosphaera , from Greek atmos "vapor, steam" (see atmo- ) + sphaira "sphere" (see sphere ). In old science, "vaporous air," which was considered a part of the earth and a contamination of the lower part of the air (n.1).

 Þe ouer partye of þe eyr is pure and clene, clere, esy & softe, ffor mevynge of stormys, of wynde and of wedir may nat reche þerto; and so it perteyneþ to heuenlych kynde. And þe neþir partye is nyʒe to þe spere of watir and of erþe, and is troubly, greet and þicke, corpulent and ful of moyst erþy vapoures, as longiþ to erþy partyes. Þe eyr strecchiþ hym kyndely al aboute fro þe ouer partye of þe erþe and of watir anon to þe spere of fire. [John of Trevisa, translation (late 14c.) of Bartholomew Glanville's  
 "De proprietatibus rerum" ] 

 First used in English in connection with the Moon, which, as it turns out, has practically none.

 'Tis Observed, in the Solary Eclipses, that there is some times a great Trepidation about the Body of the Moon, from which we may likewise argue an Atmo-sphaera, since we cannot well conceive what so probable a cause there should be of such an appearance as this, 
 Quod radii Solares a vaporibus Lunam ambientibus fuerint intercisi , that the Sun-beams were broken and refracted by the Vapours that encompassed the Moon. [Rev. John Wilkins, "Discovery of New World or Discourse tending to prove that it probable there may be another World in the Moon," 1638] 

 The figurative sense of "surrounding influence, mental or moral environment" is by c. 1800.
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to atmosphere 

 air (n.1) 

 c. 1300, "invisible gases that surround the earth," from Old French air "atmosphere, breeze, weather" (12c.), from Latin aer "air, lower atmosphere, sky," from Greek aēr (genitive aeros ) "mist, haze, clouds," later "atmosphere" (perhaps related to aenai "to blow, breathe"), which is of unknown origin. It is possibly from a PIE *awer- and thus related to aeirein "to raise" and arteria "windpipe, artery" (see aorta ) on notion of "lifting, suspended, that which rises," but this has phonetic difficulties.

 In Homer mostly "thick air, mist;" later "air" as one of the four elements. Words for "air" in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air replaced native lyft , luft (see loft (n.)). In old chemistry, air (with a qualifying adjective) was used of any gas.

 To be in the air "in general awareness" is from 1875; up in the air "uncertain, doubtful" is from 1752. To build castles in the air "entertain visionary schemes that have no practical foundation" is from 1590s (also towers in the air ; in 17c. English had airmonger "one preoccupied with visionary projects"). Broadcasting sense (as in on the air , airplay ) is by 1927. To give (someone) the air "dismiss" is from 1900. Air pollution is attested by 1870. Air guitar is by 1983. Air traffic controller is from 1956.

 sphere (n.) 

 a re-Latinized spelling, attested beginning mid-15c., of Middle English spere (c. 1300) "cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow globe about the world," from Anglo-French espiere , Old French espere (13c., Modern French sphère ), from Latin sphaera "globe, ball, celestial sphere" (Medieval Latin spera ), from Greek sphaira "globe, ball, playing ball, terrestrial globe," a word of unknown origin.

 According to Beekes there are no certain cognates outside Greek, but the Greek word also has been borrowed into Syrian ( espero ), Ethiopian ( spir ), Armenian ( sp'er ), and (non-Indo-European) Georgian ( spero ).

 From late 14c. in reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos believed to revolve around the earth and contain the planets and the fixed stars; the supposed harmonious sound they made rubbing against one another was the music of the spheres (late 14c.), Milton's sphery chime .

 Also from late 14c. in the general sense of "a globe; object of spherical form, a ball," and in the geometric sense of "solid figure with all points equidistant from the center." The meaning "range of something, place or scene" of activity, knowledge, etc. is recorded c. 1600 (as in sphere of influence , 1885, originally in reference to Anglo-German colonial rivalry in Africa).

 atmospheric 
 biosphere 
 chromosphere 
 geosphere 
 hydrosphere 
 ionosphere 
 mesosphere 
 thermosphere 
 atmo- 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ambience 

 1797, "environmental surroundings," used as a term in art for the arrangements that support the main effect of the piece, from French ambiance "atmosphere, mood, character, quality, tone," from Latin ambiens "a going around," present participle of ambire "to go around," from amb-

 aura 

 1870 in spiritualism, "subtle emanation around living beings;" earlier "characteristic impression" made by a personality (1859), earlier still "an aroma or subtle emanation" (1732). Also used in some mystical sense in Swedenborgian writings (by 1847). All from Latin aura "breeze,

 pestilence 

 epidemic," from Old French pestilence "plague, epidemic" (12c.) and directly from Latin pestilentia "a plague, an unwholesome atmosphere...

 outer 

 Outer space "region beyond the earth's atmosphere" is attested from 1845....

 air-space 

 By 1910 as "portion of the atmosphere controlled by a country above its territory."...

 aloft 

 Scandinavian source such as Old Norse a lopt "up above," literally "up in the air," from a "in, on" (see on) + lopt "sky, air, atmosphere...

 nitrogen 

 It forms about 78% of the weight of the Earth's atmosphere. Related: Nitrogenic; nitrogenous....

 flavor 

 c. 1300, "a smell, odor" (usually a pleasing one), from Old French flaor "smell, odor; action of smelling, sense of smell," probably from Vulgar Latin flator "odor," literally "that which blows," in classical Latin "blower," from flare "to blow, puff," which according to Watkins 

 look 

 Old English locian "use the eyes for seeing, gaze, look, behold, spy," from West Germanic *lokjan (source also of Old Saxon lokon "see, look, spy," Middle Dutch loeken "to look," Old High German luogen, German dialectal lugen "to look out"), a word of unknown origin. Breton lagud

 stratosphere 

 1908, from French stratosphère, literally "sphere of layers," coined by French meteorologist Léon-Philippe Teisserenc de Bort (1855-1913) from Latin stratus "a spreading out" (from past-participle stem of sternere "to spread out," from PIE root *stere- "to spread") + French -sphè

 Share atmosphere 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/atmosphere Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/atmosphere">Etymology of atmosphere by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of atmosphere. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/atmosphere Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of atmosphere," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/atmosphere. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of atmosphere." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/atmosphere. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of atmosphere." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/atmosphere (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near atmosphere 
 Atlas 
 atlatl 
 ATM 
 atman 
 atmo- 
 atmosphere 
 atmospheric 
 atoll 
 atom 
 atomic 
 atomies 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix