URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/escalator
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:05:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Escalator - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Escalator - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of escalator 

 escalator (n.) 

 1900, American English, trade name of an Otis Elevator Co. moving staircase, coined from escalade + -ator in elevator . Figurative use is from 1927 (in advertising).
 also from 1900 

 Entries linking to escalator 

 elevator (n.) 

 1640s, originally of muscles which raise a part of the body, from Latin elevator "one who raises up," agent noun from past participle stem of elevare (see elevate ). As a name for a mechanical lift (originally for grain) attested from 1787. Elevator music for bland, low-volume background music meant to relax listeners is attested by 1963. Elevator as a lift for shoes is from 1940.

 escalade (n.) 

 1590s, "action of using ladders to scale the walls of a fortified place," from French escalade (16c.) "an assault with ladders on a fortification," from Italian scalata , fem. past participle of scalare "to climb by means of a ladder," from scala "ladder," related to Latin scandere "to climb" (see scale (v.1)).

 For initial e- , see e- . Also in early use in English in Spanish form escalada , later corrupted to escalado . As the name of a brand of luxury SUV by Cadillac, from 1999.

 escalate (v.) 

 1922, "to use an escalator," back-formation from escalator , replacing earlier verb escalade (1801), from the noun escalade . Escalate came into general use with a figurative sense of "raise" from 1959 (intrans.), originally in reference to scenarios for possible nuclear war. Related: Escalated ; escalating . Transitive figurative sense is by 1962.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 clause 

 c. 1200, "a sentence, a brief passage of a written composition," from Old French clause "stipulation" (in a legal document), 12c., from Medieval Latin clausa "conclusion," used in the sense of classical Latin clausula "the end, a closing, termination," also "end of a sentence or 

 article 

 c. 1200, "separate parts of anything written" (such as the statements in the Apostles' Creed, the clauses of a statute or contract), from Old French article (13c.), from Latin articulus "a part, a member," also "a knuckle; the article in grammar," diminutive of artus "a joint" (f

 moving 

 late 14c., "that moves," present-participle adjective from move (v.). From 1650s as "that causes motion;" 1590s as "that touches the feelings." Moving picture in the cinematographic sense is by 1896 (earlier in reference to the zoetrope, 1709). Moving Day is by 1832, American Eng

 remote 

 mid-15c., "distant in place, apart, removed, not near," from Latin remotus "afar off, remote, distant in place," past participle of removere "move back or away, take away, put out of view, subtract," from re- "back, away" (see re-) + movere "to move" (from PIE root *meue- "to pus

 costume 

 1715, "style of dress," but also more broadly "custom or usage with respect to place and time, as represented in art or literature; distinctive action, appearance, arms, furniture, etc.," from French costume (17c.), from Italian costume "fashion, habit," from Latin consuetudinem 

 apprehension 

 late 14c., "perception, comprehension," from Old French apreension "comprehension, something learned" or directly from Latin apprehensionem (nominative apprehensio) "a seizing upon, laying hold of; understanding," noun of action from past-participle stem of apprehendere "take hol

 ease 

 c. 1200, "physical comfort, undisturbed state of the body; tranquility, peace of mind," from Old French aise "comfort, pleasure, well-being; opportunity," which is of uncertain origin. According to Watkins is ultimately from Latin adiacens "lying at," present participle of adiace

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 obvious 

 1580s, "frequently met with" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin obvius "that is in the way, presenting itself readily, open, exposed, commonplace," from obviam (adv.) "in the way," from ob "in front of, against" (see ob-) + viam, accusative of via "way" (from PIE root *wegh- "to 

 Share escalator 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/escalator Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/escalator">Etymology of escalator by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of escalator. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/escalator Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of escalator," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/escalator. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of escalator." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/escalator. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of escalator." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/escalator (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near escalator 
 Esau 
 escadrille 
 escalade 
 escalate 
 escalation 
 escalator 
 escalatory 
 escallop 
 escapable 
 escapade 
 escape 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix