URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Slav
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:57:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Slav - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Slav - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Slav 

 Slav (n.) 

 "one of the people who inhabit most of Eastern Europe," late 14c., Sclave , from Medieval Latin Sclavus (c. 800), from Byzantine Greek Sklabos (c. 580), from a shortening of Proto-Slavic *sloveninu "a Slav," which is probably related to *slovo "word, speech," which suggests the name originally identified a member of a speech community (compare Old Church Slavonic Nemici "Germans," related to nemu "dumb;" Greek heterophonos "foreign," literally "of different voice;" and Old English þeode , which meant both "race" and "language").

 Max Vasmer, the authority for Slavic etymologies, rejects a connection to * slava "glory, fame," which, however, influenced Slav via folk etymology. This word is the -slav in personal names (such as Russian Miroslav , literally "peaceful fame;" Mstislav "vengeful fame;" Jaroslav "famed for fury;" Czech Bohuslav "God's glory;" Latinized Wenceslas "having greater glory"), and is perhaps from PIE root *kleu- "to hear."

 The reduction of scl- to sl- is regular in English (compare slate ). In late 18c. and early 19c. The spelling Slav is by 1866; in English it also was spelled Slave , influenced by French and German Slave . As an adjective, belonging to or characteristics of Slavs, from 1872.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to Slav 

 Mstislav 

 Slavic masc. proper name, literally "vengeful fame," from Russian mstit' "to take revenge," from Proto-Slavic *misti "revenge," *mistiti "to take revenge," from PIE *mit-ti- , extended form of root *mei- (1) "to change, go, move;" for second element, see Slav .

 slate (n.) 

 mid-14c. (c. 1300 in Anglo-Latin), sclate , "tile or slate used principally in roofing," from Old French esclate , fem. of esclat "split piece, splinter" (Modern French éclat ; see slat ). So called because the rock splits easily into thin plates.

 As an adjective, 1510s. As a color, by 1813 ( slate-gray is from 1791 in dyeing, later in bird descriptions; slate-colour is from 1743, slate-blue from 1792).

 The sense of "a writing tablet" (made of slate), is recorded by late 14c. and led to that of "list of preliminary candidates prepared by party managers," attested from 1842, from notion of being chalked on a slate and thus easily altered or erased. Clean slate "fresh beginning of a state of affairs" (1856) is an image from customer accounts chalked up in a tavern.

 Wenceslas 
 slave 
 Slavic 
 Slavonic 
 Slovene 
 Yugoslav 
 *kleu- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Croat 

 "native or inhabitant of Croatia," 1702, from Serbo-Croatian Hrvat "a Croat," from Old Church Slavonic Churvatinu "Croat," literally "mountaineer, highlander," from churva "mountain" (compare Russian khrebet "mountain chain"). Croatian is attested from 1550s as a noun, "a Croat;"

 actor 

 late 14c., "an overseer, guardian, steward," from Latin actor "an agent or doer; a driver (of sheep, etc.)," in law, "accuser, plaintiff," also "theatrical player, orator," from past-participle stem of agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform," also "

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 cassock 

 1540s, "long loose gown or outer cloak," from French casaque "long coat" (16c.), corresponding to Spanish casaca, Italian casacca, probably ultimately from Turkish quzzak "nomad, adventurer," (the source of Cossack), from their typical riding coat. Or perhaps from Arabic kazagand

 person 

 c. 1200, persoun, "an individual, a human being," from Old French persone "human being, anyone, person" (12c., Modern French personne) and directly from Latin persona "human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character," originally "a mask, a false face," such a

 soul 

 "A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks, and wills" [Century Dictionary], Middle English soule, from Old English sawol "spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence; life, living being," from Proto-Germanic *saiwalō (sour

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 somebody 

 c. 1300 as two words, from 16c. as one word, "indeterminate person, person unnamed or unknown," from some + body. Used in place of the name of a person whose name is to be unspoken, by c. 1600. The meaning "important person, person of consequence" is from 1560s. Related: Somebodi

 metaphysics 

 "the science of the inward and essential nature of things," 1560s, plural of Middle English metaphisik, methaphesik (late 14c.), "branch of speculation which deals with the first causes of things," from Medieval Latin metaphysica, neuter plural of Medieval Greek (ta) metaphysika,

 rap 

 early 14c., rappe, "a quick, light blow; a resounding stroke," also "a fart" (late 15c.), native or borrowed from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish rap, Swedish rapp "light blow"); either way probably of imitative origin (compare slap, clap). Slang meaning "a rebuke, the blam

 Share Slav 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Slav Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Slav">Etymology of Slav by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Slav. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Slav Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Slav," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Slav. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Slav." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Slav. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Slav." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Slav (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Slav 
 slatternly 
 slaty 
 slaught 
 slaughter 
 slaughterhouse 
 Slav 
 slave 
 slave-driver 
 slaveholder 
 slaver 
 slavery 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix