URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nostril
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:25:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nostril - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nostril - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nostril 

 nostril (n.) 

 "one of the external openings of the nose, a nasal orifice," late 14c., nostrille , from Old English nosþyrl , nosðirl , literally "the hole of the nose," from nosu "nose" (from PIE root *nas- "nose") + þyrel "hole" (from PIE root *tere- (2) "cross over, pass through, overcome"). For metathesis of -r- and vowel, see wright . After the second element became obsolete as an independent, its form was corrupted in the compound.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to nostril 

 wright (n.) 

 "an artificer;" Middle English, "a carpenter," also "a builder, architect;" from Old English wryhta , wrihta (Northumbrian wyrchta , Kentish werhta ) "worker," a variant of earlier wyhrta "maker," from wyrcan "to work" (see work (v.)).

 A common West Germanic word (Old Saxon wurhito , Old Frisian wrichta , Old High German wurhto ), in Modern English preserved mostly in combinations ( wheelwright, playwright, etc.) or surnames ( Wright , Wainwright , Cartwright , all 13c.).

 The metathesis of an -r- and a vowel in words from Old English also can be seen in thrash , thresh , third , thirty , bird , wrought , and nostril .

 Smith was the general term for a worker in metals, and wright for one who worked in wood, and other materials. Hence, in the later English period, smith (which, in Anglo-Saxon, when used without any characteristic addition, was understood as applying more particularly to the worker in iron,) became the particular name of a blacksmith, and wright of a carpenter, as it is still in Scotland. [Thomas Wright, "Anglo-Saxon and Old English Vocabularies," 1884]

 Related: Wrightry "carpentry; business of a carpenter" (mid-15c.). Middle English combinations also included battle-wright "warrior," bread-wright "baker," leth-wright "professional poet" (Old English leoþ-wyrhta ).

 arsehole (n.) 

 c. 1400, arce-hoole ; see arse + hole (n.). In Old English, Latin anus was glossed with earsðerl , literally "arse-thrill," with thrill (n.) in its original sense of "hole" (compare nostril ).

 *nas- 
 *tere- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 thrill 

 pierce, penetrate," metathesis of Old English þyrlian "to perforate, pierce," from þyrel "hole" (in Middle English, also "nostril...

 frown 

 one's nose" (preserved in Modern French refrogner), related to froigne "scowling look," probably from Gaulish *frogna "nostril...

 match 

 Greek myxa "lamp wick," originally "mucus," based on notion of wick dangling from the spout of a lamp like snot from a nostril...

 nose 

 Middle English nose, from Old English nosu "the nose of the human head, the special organ of breathing and smelling," from Proto-Germanic *nuso- (source also of Old Norse nös, Old Frisian nose, Dutch neus, Old High German nasa, German Nase), from PIE root *nas- "nose." Used of be

 inimical 

 1640s, from Late Latin inimicalis "hostile," from Latin inimicus "unfriendly; an enemy" (see enemy). Inimical expresses both feeling and action, generally in private affairs. Hostile also expresses both feeling and action, but applies especially to public affairs: where it appli

 blackmail 

 1550s, "tribute paid to men allied with criminals as protection against pillage, etc.," from black (adj.) + Middle English male "rent, tribute." This is from Old English mal "lawsuit, terms, bargaining, agreement," from Old Norse mal "speech, agreement;" related to Old English mæ

 Islam 

 "religious system revealed by Muhammad," 1816, from Arabic islam, literally "submission" (to the will of God), from root of aslama "he resigned, he surrendered, he submitted," causative conjunction of salima "he was safe," and related to salam "peace." ... Islam is the only majo

 repent 

 c. 1300, repenten, "be grieved over one's past and seek forgiveness; feel such regret for sins, crimes, or omissions as produces amendment of life," from Old French repentir (11c.), from re-, here perhaps used as an intensive prefix, "very much" (see re-), + Vulgar Latin *penitir

 chlamydia 

 type of genital infection, 1984, from the name of the bacteria that causes it (1966), which is formed from a Latinized combining form of Greek khlamys (genitive khlamydos) "short mantle, upper garment for men, military cloak," which is of unknown origin, + abstract noun ending -i

 trust 

 c. 1200, "reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious faith," from Old Norse traust "help, confidence, protection, support," from Proto-Germanic abstract noun *traustam (source also of Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost "comfort, consolat

 Share nostril 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nostril Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nostril">Etymology of nostril by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nostril. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nostril Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nostril," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nostril. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nostril." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nostril. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nostril." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nostril (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nostril 
 nosology 
 nostalgia 
 nostalgic 
 Nostradamus 
 Nostratic 
 nostril 
 nostrum 
 nosy 
 not 
 nota bene 
 notabilia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix