URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mathematics
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:28:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mathematics - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mathematics - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mathematics 

 mathematics (n.) 

 "the science of quantity; the abstract science which investigates the concepts of numerical and spatial relations," 1580s; see mathematic (the older form of the word in English, attested from late 14c.) + -ics . Originally one of three branches of Aristotelian theoretical science, along with first philosophy (or metaphysics) and physics (or natural philosophy).

 Mystical doctrines as to the relation of time to eternity are also reinforced by pure mathematics, for mathematical objects, such as numbers, if real at all, are eternal and not in time. Such eternal objects can be conceived as God's thoughts. [Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy"]
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to mathematics 

 mathematic (n.) 

 "mathematical science," late 14c. as singular noun, mathematik (replaced since early 17c. by mathematics , q.v.), from Old French mathematique and directly from Latin mathematica (plural), from Greek mathēmatike tekhnē "mathematical science," feminine singular of mathēmatikos (adj.) "relating to mathematics, scientific, astronomical; pertaining to learning, disposed to learn," from mathēma (genitive mathēmatos ) "science, knowledge, mathematical knowledge; a lesson," literally "that which is learnt;" from manthanein "to learn," from PIE root *mendh- "to learn."

 As an adjective, "pertaining to mathematics," from c. 1400, from French mathématique or directly from Latin mathematicus .

 math (n.1) 

 American English shortening of mathematics , 1890; the British preference, maths , is attested from 1911. " Math. is used as an abbreviation in written English in the U.K. but not in speech, the normal form being Maths " [OED].

 maths 
 metamathematics 
 -ics 
 *mendh- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mathematical 

 "of, pertaining to, or of the nature of mathematics," early 15c., from Medieval Latin mathematicus "of or belonging to mathematics...

 googol 

 number represented by 1 followed by 100 zeroes, 1940, in "Mathematics and the Imagination," a layman's book on mathematics...

 lemma 

 1560s, in mathematics, from Greek lemma (plural lemmata) "something received or taken; an argument; something taken for granted...

 denominator 

 1540s, in mathematics, "that term of a fraction which indicates the value of the fractional unit" (commonly the number written...

 quadratic 

 In mathematics by 1660s; the algebraic quadratic equations (1680s) are so called because they involve the square and no higher...

 quotient 

 in mathematics, "the result of the process of division, quantity resulting from the division of one number by another, number...

 quadrivium 

 "arithmetic, music, geometry, astronomy" (the four branches of mathematics, according to the Pythagoreans), by 1751, from...

 science 

 mid-14c., "state or fact of knowing; what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information;" also "assurance of knowledge, certitude, certainty," from Old French science "knowledge, learning, application; corpus of human knowledge" (12c.), from Latin scientia "kn

 first 

 Old English fyrst "foremost, going before all others; chief, principal," also (though rarely) as an adverb, "at first, originally," superlative of fore; from Proto-Germanic *furista- "foremost" (source also of Old Saxon fuirst "first," Old High German furist, Old Norse fyrstr, Da

 philosophy 

 c. 1300, philosophie, "knowledge, learning, scholarship, scholarly works, body of knowledge," from Old French filosofie "philosophy, knowledge" (12c., Modern French philosophie) and directly from Latin philosophia, from Greek philosophia "love of knowledge, pursuit of wisdom; sys

 Share mathematics 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mathematics Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mathematics">Etymology of mathematics by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mathematics. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mathematics Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mathematics," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mathematics. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mathematics." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mathematics. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mathematics." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mathematics (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mathematics 
 matey 
 math 
 mathematic 
 mathematical 
 mathematician 
 mathematics 
 maths 
 Matilda 
 matin 
 matinee 
 matins 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix