URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cage
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:40:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cage 

 cage (n.) 

 "box-like receptacle or enclosure, with open spaces, made of wires, reeds, etc.," typically for confining domesticated birds or wild beasts, c. 1200, from Old French cage "cage, prison; retreat, hideout" (12c.), from Latin cavea "hollow place, enclosure for animals, coop, hive, stall, dungeon, spectators' seats in the theater" (source also of Italian gabbia "basket for fowls, coop;" see cave (n.)). From c. 1300 in English as "a cage for prisoners, jail, prison, a cell."
 also from c. 1200 

 cage (v.) 

 "to confine in a cage, to shut up or confine," 1570s, from cage (n.). Related: Caged ; caging .
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to cage 

 cave (n.) 

 "a hollow place in the earth, a natural cavity of considerable size and extending more or less horizontally," early 13c., from Old French cave "a cave, vault, cellar" (12c.), from Latin cavea "hollow" (place), noun use of neuter plural of adjective cavus "hollow" (from PIE root *keue- "to swell," also "vault, hole"). It displaced Old English eorðscrafu .

 bird-cage (n.) 

 also birdcage , "portable enclosure for birds," late 15c., from bird (n.1) + cage (n.).

 uncage (v.) 

 "set free from confinement; let or take out of a cage," 1610s, from un- (2) "opposite of" + cage (v.). Related: Uncaged .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bower 

 English bur "room, hut, dwelling, chamber," from Proto-Germanic *bowan (source also of Old Norse bur "chamber," Swedish bur "cage...," Old Danish both "dwelling, stall," Old Saxon bur "a house; a cage," Old High German bur "dwelling, chamber," buan "to...dwell," German Vogelbauer "cage" for a bird), from PIE root *bheue- "to be, exist, grow."...

 jail 

 The form in j- is from Middle English jaile, from Old French jaiole "a cage; a prison," from Medieval Latin gabiola "a cage...," from Late Latin caveola, diminutive of Latin cavea "a cage, enclosure, stall, coop; a hollow place, a cavity" (see cave...The form in g- was the more usual in Middle English manuscripts (gaile, also gaiole), from Old French gaiole "a cage; a prison...

 decoy 

 a snare;" 1660s, "a lure employed in enticing game into a snare or within range of a weapon;" perhaps from Dutch kooi "cage...of a pond surrounded by nets, into which wildfowl were lured for capture, from West Germanic *kaiwa, from Latin cavea "cage...

 fantods 

 which nothing will satisfy—which allows of no beginning, and no ending—which wheels round the mind like the squirrel in its cage...

 mockingbird 

 [I]t is the most famous songster of America, and is much prized as a cage-bird....

 Taser 

 A word that threatens to escape the cage of its trademark, despite the strenuous efforts of the owners, who are within their...

 seraglio 

 The Italian word probably reflects folk etymology influence of serraglio "enclosure, cage," from Medieval Latin serraculum...

 constraint 

 late 14c., constreinte, "distress, oppression," a sense now obsolete, from Old French constreinte "binding, constraint, compulsion" (Modern French contrainte), fem. noun from constreint, past participle of constreindre, from Vulgar Latin *constrinctus, from Latin constrictus, pas

 restraint 

 "action of holding back (action or motion); that which restrains, a check, hindrance," early 15c., restreinte, from Old French restreinte, noun use of fem. past participle of restraindre (see restrain). Specifically in reference to refractory prisoners or dangerous lunatics by 18

 net 

 Old English net "open textile fabric tied or woven with a mesh for catching fish, birds, or wild animals alive; network; spider web," also figuratively, "moral or mental snare or trap," from Proto-Germanic *natjo- (source also of Old Saxon net, Old Frisian nette, Old Norse, Dutch

 Share cage 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cage Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cage">Etymology of cage by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cage. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cage Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cage," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cage. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cage." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cage. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cage." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cage (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cage 
 cafeteria 
 caffeic 
 caffeine 
 caffeinism 
 caftan 
 cage 
 cagey 
 cahier 
 cahoot 
 cahoots 
 caiman 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix