URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorine
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:09:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chlorine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chlorine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chlorine 

 chlorine (n.) 

 nonmetallic element, the name coined 1810 by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy from Latinized form of Greek khlōros "pale green" (from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives denoting "green" and "yellow") + chemical suffix -ine (2). Named for its color. Discovered 1774, but known at first as oxymuriatic acid gas , or dephlogisticated marine acid .
 also from 1810 

 Entries linking to chlorine 

 chloral (n.) 

 "colorless liquid formed by the action of chlorine on alcohol," apparently coined by German chemist Justus von Liebig in 1833 from elements from chlorine + alcohol . Later chiefly in chloral hydrate (1874).

 chlorate (n.) 

 "salt of chloric acid," 1823; see chlorine + -ate (3)

 chloric 
 chloride 
 chlorinate 
 chloroform 
 hydrochloric 
 iodine 
 *ghel- 
 -ine 
 chloro- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 chloroform 

 "trichloromethane," a volatile, colorless liquid used as an anaesthetic, 1835, from French chloroforme, a hybrid coined 1834 by French chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1800-1884) from chloro-, a combining form meaning "chlorine" (see chlorine), + formique "formic (acid)" (see formic 

 iodine 

 non-metallic element, 1814, formed by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy from French iode "iodine," which was coined 1812 by French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac from Greek iōeidēs "violet-colored" (from ion "the violet; dark blue flower;" see violet) + eidos "appearance" (see -o

 halogen 

 general name for elements of the chlorine family, 1842, from Swedish, coined by Swedish chemist Baron Jöns Jakob Berzelius (1779-1848), literally "salt-producer," from Greek hals "salt" (from PIE root *sal- "salt") + -gen "giving birth to" (see -gen); so called because a salt is 

 gas 

 1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos "empty space" (see chaos). The sound of Dutch "g" is roughly equivalent to that of Greek "kh." First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644), probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of "pro

 sag 

 late 14c., saggen, "hang down unevenly," also in Middle English "sink, be mired, sink down," possibly from a Scandinavian source related to Old Norse sokkva "to sink," or from Middle Low German sacken "to settle, sink" (as dregs in wine), from denasalized derivative of Proto-Germ

 element 

 c. 1300, "earth, air, fire, or water; one of the four things regarded by the ancients as the constituents of all things," from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementum "rudiment, first principle, matter in its most basic form" (translating Greek stoikheion), origin and ori

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 guild 

 also gild, early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi "guild, brotherhood"), a semantic fusion of Old English gegield "guild, brotherhood," and gield "service, offering; payment, tribute; compensation," from Proto-Germanic *geldja- "payment, contribution" (so

 conscience 

 c. 1200, "faculty of knowing what is right," originally especially to Christian ethics, later "awareness that the acts for which one feels responsible do or do not conform to one's ideal of right," later (late 14c.) more generally, "sense of fairness or justice, moral sense." Thi

 Share chlorine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorine">Etymology of chlorine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chlorine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chlorine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chlorine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorine. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chlorine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorine (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chlorine 
 chlorate 
 chloric 
 chloride 
 chlorinate 
 chlorination 
 chlorine 
 chloro- 
 chlorofluorocarbon 
 chloroform 
 chlorophyll 
 chloroplast 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix