URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ear
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:26:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ear - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ear - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ear 

 ear (n.1) 

 "organ of hearing," Old English eare "ear," from Proto-Germanic *auzon , from PIE *ous- "ear."

 þe harde harte of man, þat lat in godis word atte ton ere & vt atte toþir. [sermon, c. 1250]

 In music, "capability to learn and reproduce by hearing," 1520s, hence play by ear (1670s).

 The belief that itching or burning ears means someone is talking about you is mentioned in Pliny's "Natural History" (77 C.E.). Until at least the 1880s, even some medical men still believed piercing the ear lobes improved one's eyesight.

 The meaning "handle of a pitcher" is mid-15c. (but compare Old English earde "having a handle," and the image also was in ancient Greek).

 To be wet behind the ears "naive" is from 1902, American English. The warning phrase walls have ears is attested from 1610s.

 IE cognates include Greek ous , Latin auris , Lithuanian ausis , Old Church Slavonic ucho , Old Irish au "ear," Avestan usi "the two ears." The Germanic cognates include Old Norse eyra , Danish øre , Old Frisian are , Old Saxon ore , Middle Dutch ore , Dutch oor , Old High German ora , German Ohr , Gothic auso . French orielle , Spanish oreja are from Latin auricula (Medieval Latin oricula ), diminutive of auris .

 ear (n.2) 

 "grain part of corn," from Old English ear (West Saxon), æher (Northumbrian) "spike, ear of grain," from Proto-Germanic *akhuz (source also of Dutch aar , Old High German ehir , German Ähre , Old Norse ax , Gothic ahs "ear of corn"), from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce" (source of Latin acus "chaff, husk of corn," Greek akoste "barley").

 Entries linking to ear 

 aural (adj.) 

 1844, "pertaining to the ear," from Latin auris "the ear as the organ of hearing" (see ear (n.1)) + -al (1). The meaning "received or perceived by ear" is attested by 1860. Related: Aurally .

 auricle (n.) 

 "external part of the human ear," 1650s, from Latin auricula "ear," diminutive of auris "the ear" (see ear (n.1)). As a chamber of the heart, early 15c., from Latin, so called from a perceived similarity in shape to an animal's ear.

 auricular 
 auscultate 
 earache 
 ear-drum 
 earful 
 earlobe 
 earmark 
 ear-muff 
 ear-plug 
 ear-ring 
 earshot 
 earwax 
 earwig 
 ear-worm 
 microtia 
 otalgia 
 otic 
 parotid 
 See All Related Words (22) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ear-ring 

 also earring, Old English earhring, "a ring or other ornament, with or without precious stones, worn at the ear," from ear (n.1) + hring (see ring (n.)). Another Old English word was earspinl. Now including any sort of ornament in the ear; the pendant sort originally were ear-dro

 earwig 

 type of insect (Forficula auricularia), Old English earwicga "earwig," from eare (see ear (n.1)) + wicga "beetle, worm, insect," probably from the same Germanic source as wiggle, on the notion of "quick movement," and ultimately from PIE root *wegh- "to go, move." So called from 

 spike 

 "large nail," usually of iron, mid-14c., perhaps from or related to a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse spik "splinter," Middle Swedish spijk "nail," from Proto-Germanic *spikaz (source also of Middle Dutch spicher, Dutch spijker "nail," Old English spicing "large nail," Old E

 spigot 

 and Middle English Compendium probably from Old French *espigot (compare Gascony dialect espigot "core of a fruit, small ear...of grain"), diminutive of Old Provençal espiga "spike, ear of grain," from Latin spica "ear of grain" (see spike (n.2))....

 leer 

 from Middle English noun ler "cheek," from Old English hleor "the cheek, the face," from Proto-Germanic *hleuza- "near the ear...," from *hleuso- "ear," from PIE root *kleu- "to hear."...

 lug 

 From 1620s as "handle of a pitcher," this sense probably from Scottish lugge "earflap of a cap; ear" (late 15c. and according...to OED still the common word for "ear" in 19c....

 discordant 

 Of sounds, "inharmonious, dissonant, disagreeable to the ear," c. 1400. Related: Discordantly....

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 attention 

 late 14c., attencioun, "a giving heed, active direction of the mind upon some object or topic," from Old French attencion and directly from Latin attentionem (nominative attentio) "attention, attentiveness," noun of action from past-participle stem of attendere "give heed to," li

 fruit 

 late 12c., "any vegetable product useful to humans or animals," from Old French fruit "fruit, fruit eaten as dessert; harvest; virtuous action" (12c.), from Latin fructus "an enjoyment, delight, satisfaction; proceeds, produce, fruit, crops," from frug-, stem of frui "to use, enj

 Share ear 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ear Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ear">Etymology of ear by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ear. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ear Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ear," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ear. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ear." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ear. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ear." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ear (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ear 
 eager 
 eagle 
 eaglet 
 Eames 
 -ean 
 ear 
 earache 
 ear-drum 
 earful 
 earl 
 earldom 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix