URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stream
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:01:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stream - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stream - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stream 

 stream (n.) 

 Middle English strem "course of water, current of a stream, body of water flowing in a natural channel," from Old English stream , from Proto-Germanic *strauma- (source also of Old Saxon strom , Old Norse straumr , Danish strøm , Swedish ström , Norwegian straum , Old Frisian stram , Dutch stroom , Old High German stroum , German Strom "current, river"), from PIE root *sreu- "to flow."

 Boutkan writes, "The Gmc. insertion of the -t- in the cluster *sr is automatic," and compares Old English swester "sister" from PIE  *swesr- .

 From early 12c. as "anything issuing from a source and flowing continuously." Also sometimes in Old English and Middle English "the ocean, the sea," or a navigable channel of it; the meaning "steady current in the sea" (as in Gulf Stream ) is recorded from late 14c., as is the sense of "steady current in a river."

 The general sense of "continued course or current (of anything) moving in the same direction" is by 1580s. Stream of thought is from 1890 in psychology. Stream of consciousness in literary criticism is recorded by 1930, earlier in psychology (1855).

 stream (v.) 

 early 13c., stremen , of water, blood, sweat, etc., "flow copiously, move or run in a continuous current," from stream (n.). The transitive sense of "pour out or discharge in a stream, cause to flow as a liquid" is from late 14c. Related: Streamed ; streaming . Compare German strömen , Dutch stroomen , Danish strömme , all verbs from nouns. Of air, c. 1300; of light from late 14c.; of flags, 1550s, of hair, 1731.
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to stream 

 blood-stream (n.) 

 also bloodstream , "the blood circulating through the body," 1847, from blood (n.) + stream (n.).

 downstream (adv.) 

 "with or in the direction of the current of a stream," 1706, from the prepositional phrase; see down (adv.) + stream (n.). As an adjective by 1842. Middle English had the prepositional phrase down the water (c. 1400).

 instreaming 
 mainstream 
 midstream 
 millstream 
 restream 
 slipstream 
 streamer 
 streamlet 
 streamline 
 upstream 
 *sreu- 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 streamline 

 1868, "line drawn from point to point, so that its direction is everywhere that of the motion of the fluid" [Lamb, "Hydrodynamics," 1906], from stream (n.) + line (n.) as in line of flow. Extended to aeronautics by 1909. The adjective is attested from 1898, "free from turbulence;

 pour 

 "to cause (liquid or granular substance) to flow or stream either out of a vessel or into one," c. 1300, of unknown origin. Not in Old English; perhaps from Old French (Flanders dialect) purer "to sift (grain), pour out (water)," from Latin purare "to purify," from purus "pure" (

 pelt 

 "to strike repeatedly" (with something), c. 1500, a word of unknown origin; according to one old theory it is perhaps from early 13c. pelten "to strike," a variant of pilten "to thrust, strike," from an unrecorded Old English *pyltan, from Medieval Latin *pultiare, from Latin pul

 bourn 

 also bourne, "small stream," especially of the winter torrents of the chalk downs, Old English brunna, burna "brook, stream...

 beach 

 1530s, "loose, water-worn pebbles of the seashore," probably from a dialectal survival of Old English bece, bece "stream,..." from Proto-Germanic *bakiz (source also of Dutch beek, German Bach, Swedish bäck "stream, brook, creek"), perhaps from...

 derive 

 descend from," from Old French deriver "to flow, pour out; derive, originate," from Latin derivare "to lead or draw off (a stream...of water) from its source" (in Late Latin also "to derive"), from phrase de rivo (de "from" + rivus "stream," from PIE root...

 jet 

 1690s, "stream of water," from French jet "a throw, a cast; a gush, spurt (of water); a shoot (of a plant)," from jeter "...The atmospheric jet stream is from 1947....

 motion 

 late 14c., mocioun, "process of moving; change of place, continuous variation of position;" also "suggestion, proposal or proposition formally made," from Old French mocion "movement, motion; change, alteration" (13c., Modern French motion) and directly from Latin motionem (nomin

 urn 

 late 14c., "large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead," from Latin urna "a jar, vessel of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead" (also used as a ballot box and for drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus "pitcher, jug," and 

 run 

 Old English, "move swiftly by using the legs, go on legs more rapidly than walking," also "make haste, hurry; be active, pursue or follow a course," and, of inanimate things, "to move over a course." The modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which t

 Share stream 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stream Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stream">Etymology of stream by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stream. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stream Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stream," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stream. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stream." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stream. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stream." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stream (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stream 
 strawberry 
 stray 
 streak 
 streaking 
 streaky 
 stream 
 streamer 
 streamlet 
 streamline 
 *streb(h)- 
 street 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix