URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mile
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mile 

 mile (n.) 

 unit of linear measure in Great Britain, the U.S., and a few other countries, formerly used in most European countries before the metric system; Old English mil , from West Germanic *milja (source also of Middle Dutch mile , Dutch mijl , Old High German mila , German Meile ), from Latin milia "thousands," plural of mille "a thousand" (neuter plural was mistaken in Germanic as a fem. singular), which is of unknown origin.

 The Latin word also is the source of French mille , Italian miglio , Spanish milla . The Scandinavian words (Old Norse mila , etc.) are from English. An ancient Roman mile was 1,000 double paces (one step with each foot), for about 4,860 feet, but many local variants developed, in part in an attempt to reconcile the mile with the agricultural system of measurements. Consequently, old European miles were of various lengths. The medieval English mile was 6,610 feet; the old London mile was 5,000 feet. In Germany, Holland, and Scandinavia in the Middle Ages, the Latin word was applied arbitrarily to the ancient Germanic rasta , a measure of from 3.25 to 6 English miles. In England the ordinary mile was set by legal act at 320 perches (5,280 feet) by statute in Elizabeth's reign.

 In Middle English the word also was a unit of time, "about 20 minutes," roughly what was required to walk a mile. The word has been used generically since 1580s for "a great distance." Mile-a-minute (adj.) "very fast" is attested from 1957 in railroad publications (automobiles had attained 60 mph by 1903).

 Entries linking to mile 

 banlieue (n.) 

 French word for "suburbs, outskirts, outlying precincts of a town or city," 13c., from Vulgar Latin *banleuca , from Germanic *ban (see ban (n.1)) + leuca "a league" (of distance, in Medieval Latin, "indefinite extent of territory;" see league (n.2)). So, originally, "area around a town within which the bans — rules and proclamations of that place — were in force; territory outside the walls but within the legal jurisdiction." German had a similar formation, bann-meile (see mile (n.)), in the same sense; and compare Middle English bane cruces "crosses marking the boundary of territory subject to the edicts or laws of a certain ruler."

 mileage (n.) 

 formerly also milage , 1754, "allowance or compensation for travel or conveyance reckoned by the mile," originally in reference to American political representatives, from mile + -age . From 1837 as "fixed rate per mile," originally for use of railroad cars. Meaning "a total number of miles" (of a way made, used, or traversed) is from 1861; the figurative use in this sense, "usefulness, derived benefit" is by 1860. Of a motor vehicle, "miles driven per gallon of gasoline," by 1912.

 milepost 
 milestone 
 milliary 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 furlong 

 Used from 9c. to translate Latin stadium (625 feet), one-eighth of a Roman mile, and so the English word came to be used...for "one-eighth of an English mile," though this led to a different measure for the English mile than the Roman one....Furlong being so important in land deed records (where mile hardly figures) it was thought best to redefine the mile rather...

 welterweight 

 "beat severely" (c. 1400). ... but at the end of the first German mile, Nature gave way, and this excellent mare was obliged...

 haul 

 reference to the relative length of transportation, which determined the rate paid for it (long hauls = lower rate per mile...

 knot 

 The distance between the knots on the log-line should contain 1/120 of a mile, supposing the glass to run exactly half a...Antonio de Ulloa, "A Voyage to South America" 1760] Hence the word knot came also to be used as the equivalent of a nautical mile...

 frontier 

 In the census reports it is treated as the margin of that settlement which has a density of two or more to the square mile...

 away 

 The meaning "at such a distance" (a mile away) is by 1712....

 verge 

 "subject to the Lord High Steward's authority" (as symbolized by the rod of office), originally a 12-mile radius round the...

 league 

 "alliance," mid-15c., ligg, from French ligue "confederacy, league" (15c.), from Italian lega, from legare "to tie, to bind," from Latin ligare "to bind" (from PIE root *leig- "to tie, bind"). Originally among nations, subsequently extended to political associations (1846) and sp

 statute 

 c. 1300, "a law of the land, a ruler's decree," from Old French statut, estatut, estatu "(royal) promulgation, (legal) statute," from Late Latin statutum "a law, decree," noun use of neuter past participle of Latin statuere "enact, establish," from status "condition, position," f

 land 

 Old English lond, land, "ground, soil," also "definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries," from Proto-Germanic *landja- (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, Gothic land, German Land), perhaps fro

 Share mile 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mile Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mile">Etymology of mile by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mile. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mile Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mile," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mile. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mile." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mile. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mile." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mile (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mile 
 mild 
 mildew 
 mildly 
 mildness 
 Mildred 
 mile 
 mileage 
 milepost 
 Milesian 
 milestone 
 MILF 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix