URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sketch
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:28:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sketch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sketch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sketch 

 sketch (n.) 

 1660s, scetch , "rough drawing intended to serve as the basis for a finished picture," from Dutch schets or Low German skizze , both apparently being 17c. artists' borrowings from Italian schizzo "sketch, drawing."

 This is commonly said to be from Latin *schedius (OED compares schedia "raft," schedium "an extemporaneous poem"), which is from or related to Greek skhedios "temporary, extemporaneous, done or made off-hand," related to skhema "form, shape, appearance" (see scheme (n.)). But according to Barnhart Italian schizzo is a special use of schizzo "a splash, squirt," from schizzare "to splash or squirt," a word of uncertain origin. German Skizze , French esquisse , Spanish esquicio are said to be likewise from Italian schizzo .

 The extended sense of "brief account" is from 1660s. The meaning "short and slightly constructed play or performance, usually comic" is from 1789; in music, "short composition of a single movement," 1840. Sketch-book "book with blank leaves of drawing paper" is recorded from 1820; it also was used of printed books composed of literary sketches.

 In old slang, a hot sketch (simple sketch for short) was "amusing, ridiculous person" (1909). It turns up first in descriptions of stage entertainment, and a theatrical help-wanted ad from 1906 seeks "a good hot sketch team" for "all circus and vaudeville lines."

 Miss Cora Martini, the Cuban dancer, might be termed a hot sketch. When Girard announced her, the crowd asked her age. Girard said he didn't know as he never liked to ask ladies personal questions. The house told him it was just as well, seeing she wouldn't tell him anyhow. ["Amateur Night at the Gotham," Brooklyn Weekly Chat, Nov. 30, 1907]
 also from 1660s 

 sketch (v.) 

 1690s (Dryden), "present briefly the essential facts of, omitting detail," from sketch (n.). The pictorial peaning "draw, portray in outline and partial shading" is from 1725. The intransitive sense of "make a sketch" is by 1874. Related: Sketched ; sketcher ; sketching .
 also from 1690s 

 Entries linking to sketch 

 scheme (n.) 

 1550s, "figure of speech" (a sense now obsolete), from Medieval Latin schema "a shape, a figure, a form, appearance; figure of speech; posture in dancing," from Greek skhēma (genitive skhematos ) "figure, appearance, the nature of a thing," which is related to skhein "to get," and ekhein "to have, hold; be in a given state or condition" (from PIE root *segh- "to hold").

 It is attested by 1610s as "linear representation showing relative positions of the parts or elements of a system" (especially in astrology). The sense of "program of action" is by 1640s, also "outline, draft of a book, etc."

 The meaning "plan of action devised to attain some end" is by 1718, and unfavorable overtones (selfishness, deviousness) began to creep in to the word after that time. The meaning "complex unity of coordinated component elements, a connected and orderly arrangement" is from 1736. In prosody by 1838. Color scheme is by 1890 (in Milton Bradley Co.'s "Color in the School-Room"); earlier scheme of colour (by 1877).

 sketchy (adj.) 

 1805, "having the form or character of a sketch, giving only a slight or rough outline," from sketch (n.) + -y (2). The colloquial sense of "unsubstantial, imperfect, flimsy" is from 1878, perhaps via the notion of "unfinished." Related: Sketchily ; sketchiness .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 study 

 early 12c., studien, "to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate" (virtue, vice, wisdom, art, etc., sometimes translating Latin occupare), from Old French estudiier "to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine" (13c., Modern French étudier). This is from Medieval Latin st

 adumbrate 

 1580s, "to outline, to sketch," from Latin adumbratus "sketched, shadowed in outline," also "feigned, unreal, sham, fictitious," past participle of adumbrare "cast a shadow over;" in painting, "to represent (a thing) in outline," from ad "to" (see ad-) + umbrare "to cast in shado

 survey 

 c. 1400, surveien, "consider, contemplate," from Anglo-French surveier, Old French sorveoir "look (down) at, look upon, notice; guard, watch," from Medieval Latin supervidere "oversee, inspect," from Latin super "over" (see super-) + videre "to see" (from PIE root *weid- "to see"

 description 

 representation, description, copy," noun of action from past-participle stem of describere "write down, transcribe, copy, sketch...

 itinerary 

 By early 15c. it meant "record of a journey;" extended sense "sketch of a proposed route, list of places to be included in...

 vignette 

 Meaning "literary sketch" is first recorded 1880, probably from the photographic sense....

 scarification 

 past-participle stem of scarificare, altered from Latin scarifare "scratch open," from Greek skariphasthai "to scratch an outline, sketch...

 cartoon 

 1670s, "a drawing on strong paper" (used as a model for another work), from French carton or directly from Italian cartone "strong, heavy paper, pasteboard," thus "preliminary sketches made by artists on such paper" (see carton). The extension to drawings in newspapers and magazi

 wit 

 "mental capacity," Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit "understanding, intellect, sense; knowledge, consciousness, conscience," from Proto-Germanic *wit- (source also of Old Saxon wit, Old Norse vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi "knowled

 humor 

 mid-14c., "fluid or juice of an animal or plant," from Old North French humour "liquid, dampness; (medical) humor" (Old French humor, umor; Modern French humeur), from Latin umor "body fluid" (also humor, by false association with humus "earth"); related to umere "be wet, moist,"

 Share sketch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sketch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sketch">Etymology of sketch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sketch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sketch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sketch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sketch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sketch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sketch. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sketch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sketch (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sketch 
 skeptic 
 skeptical 
 skepticism 
 *sker- 
 skerry 
 sketch 
 sketchy 
 *skeud- 
 skew 
 skewbald 
 skewed 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix