URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/amnesty
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:28:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Amnesty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Amnesty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of amnesty 

 amnesty (n.) 

 1570s, "a ruling authority's pardon of past offenses," from French amnistie "intentional overlooking" (16c.), from Latin amnestia , from Greek amnestia "forgetfulness (especially of wrong); an amnesty," from amnestos "forgotten; forgetful," from a- "not" (see a- (3)) + mnestis "remembrance," which is related to mnaomai "I remember" (from PIE root *men- (1) "to think").

 Usually specifically of pardons or offers of pardon for a class of offenses against a government. As a verb from 1809. Related: Amnestied . The non-governmental organization Amnesty International was founded 1961 to call attention to the plight of prisoners of conscience, as Appeal for Amnesty ; the name was changed 1963.
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to amnesty 

 amnesia (n.) 

 "loss of memory," 1786 (as a Greek word in English from 1670s), Modern Latin, from Greek amnesia "forgetfulness," from a- "not" (see a- (3)) + mnesi- "remembering" (found only in compounds), from stem of mnasthai "to recall, remember," which is related to mnemnon "mindful," mneme "memory" (from PIE root *men- (1) "to think"). The usual compound in Greek was amnestia , but this had a specialized sense of "forgetfulness of wrong" (see amnesty ).

 a- (3) 

 prefix meaning "not, without," from Greek a- , an- "not" (the "alpha privative"), from PIE root *ne- "not" (source also of English un- ).

 In words from Greek, such as abysmal , adamant , amethyst ; also partly nativized as a prefix of negation ( asexual , amoral , agnostic ). The ancient alpha privatum , denoting want or absence.

 Greek also had an alpha copulativum , a- or ha- , expressing union or likeness, which is the a- expressing "together" in acolyte , acoustic , Adelphi , etc. It is from PIE root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with."

 *men- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to think," with derivatives referring to qualities and states of mind or thought.

 It might form all or part of: admonish ; Ahura Mazda ; ament ; amentia ; amnesia ; amnesty ; anamnesis ; anamnestic ; automatic ; automaton ; balletomane ; comment ; compos mentis ; dement ; demonstrate ; Eumenides ; idiomatic ; maenad ; -mancy ; mandarin ; mania ; maniac ; manic ; mantic ; mantis ; mantra ; memento ; mens rea ; mental ; mention ; mentor ; mind ; Minerva ; minnesinger ; mnemonic ; Mnemosyne ; money ; monition ; monitor ; monster ; monument ; mosaic ; Muse ; museum ; music ; muster ; premonition ; reminiscence ; reminiscent ; summon .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit manas- "mind, spirit," matih "thought," munih "sage, seer;" Avestan manah- "mind, spirit;" Greek memona "I yearn," mania "madness," mantis "one who divines, prophet, seer;" Latin mens "mind, understanding, reason," memini "I remember," mentio "remembrance;" Lithuanian mintis "thought, idea," Old Church Slavonic mineti "to believe, think," Russian pamjat "memory;" Gothic gamunds , Old English gemynd "memory, remembrance; conscious mind, intellect."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pardon 

 c. 1300, pardoun, "papal indulgence, forgiveness of sins or wrongdoing," from Old French pardon, from pardoner "to grant; forgive" (11c., Modern French pardonner), "to grant, forgive," and directly from Medieval Latin perdonum, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare "to give wholeheartedly

 exemption 

 c. 1400, exempcioun, "immunity from a law or statute, state of being free from some undesirable requirement," from Old French exemption, exencion or directly from Latin exemptionem (nominative exemptio) "a taking out, removing," noun of action from past-participle stem of eximere

 mercy 

 late 12c., "God's forgiveness of his creatures' offenses," from Old French mercit, merci (9c.) "reward, gift; kindness, grace, pity," from Latin mercedem (nominative merces) "reward, wages, pay, hire" (in Vulgar Latin "favor, pity;" in Medieval Latin "thanks; grace"), from merx (

 clemency 

 1550s, "mildness or gentleness shown in exercise of authority," from Latin clementia "calmness, gentleness," from clemens "calm, mild," related to clinare "to lean," often said to be from PIE root *klei- "to lean" + participial suffix -menos (also in alumnus). For sense evolution

 warrant 

 c. 1200, "protector, defender," from Old North French warant "defender; surety, pledge; justifying evidence" (Old French garant), from Frankish *warand, from Proto-Germanic *war- "to warn, guard, protect" (source also of Old High German werento "guarantor," noun use of present pa

 freedom 

 Old English freodom "power of self-determination, state of free will; emancipation from slavery, deliverance;" see free (adj.) + -dom. Meaning "exemption from arbitrary or despotic control, civil liberty" is from late 14c. Meaning "possession of particular privileges" is from 157

 for 

 Old English for "before, in the sight of, in the presence of; as far as; during, before; on account of, for the sake of; in place of, instead of," from Proto-Germanic *fur "before; in" (source also of Old Saxon furi "before," Old Frisian for, Middle Dutch vore, Dutch voor "for, b

 free 

 Old English freo "exempt from; not in bondage, acting of one's own will," also "noble; joyful," from Proto-Germanic *friaz "beloved; not in bondage" (source also of Old Frisian fri, Old Saxon vri, Old High German vri, German frei, Dutch vrij, Gothic freis "free"), from PIE *priy-

 cause 

 c. 1200, "reason or motive for a decision, grounds for action; motive," from Old French cause "cause, reason; lawsuit, case in law" (12c.), and directly from Latin causa "a cause; a reason; interest; judicial process, lawsuit," which is of unknown origin. From mid-14c. as "cause 

 Share amnesty 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/amnesty Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/amnesty">Etymology of amnesty by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of amnesty. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/amnesty Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of amnesty," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amnesty. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of amnesty." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amnesty. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of amnesty." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/amnesty (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near amnesty 
 amnemonic 
 amnesia 
 amnesiac 
 amnesic 
 amnestic 
 amnesty 
 amniocentesis 
 amnion 
 amniotic 
 amoeba 
 amoebae 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix