URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/elbow
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:33:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Elbow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Elbow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of elbow 

 elbow (n.) 

 "bend of the arm," c. 1200, elbowe , from a contraction of Old English elnboga "elbow," from Proto-Germanic *elino-bugon , literally "bend of the forearm" (source also of Middle Dutch ellenboghe , Dutch elleboog , Old High German elinbogo , German Ellenboge , Old Norse ölnbogi ).

 First element is from PIE *elina "arm," from root *el- "elbow, forearm." Second element is from Proto-Germanic *bugon- , from PIE root *bheug- "to bend." To be out at elbows (1620s) was literally to have holes in one's coat. Phrase elbow grease "hard rubbing" is attested from 1670s, from jocular sense of "the best substance for polishing furniture." Elbow-room "room to extend one's elbows," hence, "ample room for activity," is attested from 1530s.
 also from c. 1200 

 elbow (v.) 

 "thrust with the elbow," c. 1600, from elbow (n.). Figurative sense is from 1863. Related: Elbowed ; elbowing .
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to elbow 

 *bheug- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to bend," with derivatives referring to bent, pliable, or curved objects.

 It might form all or part of: akimbo ; bagel ; bight ; bog ; bow (v.) "to bend the body;" bow (n.1) "weapon for shooting arrows;" bow (n.2) "front of a ship;" bowsprit ; buxom ; elbow .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit bhujati "bends, thrusts aside;" Old English bugan , German biegen , Gothic biugan "to bend;" Old High German boug , Old English beag "a ring."

 *el- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "elbow, forearm." It might form all or part of: elbow ; ell (n.1) unit of measure; uilleann ; ulna .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit anih "part of the leg above the knee;" Greek ōlenē "elbow;" Latin ulna , Armenian uln "shoulder;" Lithuanian alkūnė "elbow;" Old English eln "forearm."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cubit 

 ancient unit of measure (usually from 18 to 22 inches) based on the forearm from elbow to fingertip, early 14c., from Latin...cubitum, cubitus "the elbow, the forearm," generally regarded as a derivative of PIE *keu(b)- "to bend," but de Vaan finds...People lie down on their elbow if they sleep on their side, and the Romans even reclined when dining....It matters little whether the original meaning was 'forearm' or 'the elbow joint'....

 funny 

 Funny bone "elbow end of the humerus" (where the ulnar nerve passes relatively unprotected) is from 1826, so called for the...

 ell 

 originally "forearm, length of the arm" (as a measure, anywhere from a foot and a half to two feet), from PIE root *el- "elbow...

 not 

 [Century Dictionary, 1895] To not know X from Y (one's ass from one's elbow, shit from Shinola, etc.) was a construction...

 pygmy 

 etymologically "of the length of a pygmē; a pygmē tall," from pygmē "a cubit" (literally "a fist"), the measure of length from the elbow...

 tennis 

 .; tennis court from 1560s; tennis elbow from 1883; tennis shoes from 1887....

 hook 

 Boxing sense of "short, swinging blow with the elbow bent" is from 1898....

 articulation 

 early 15c., articulacioun (Chauliac), "a joint or joining; setting of bones," from Old French articulation, from Medieval Latin articulationem (nominative articulatio) "separation into joints," noun of action from past-participle stem of articulare "to separate (meat) into joints

 prod 

 1530s, "to poke with a stick," of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart, Century Dictionary] a variant of brod, from Middle English brodden "to goad," from Old Norse broddr "shaft, spike" (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED]. Compare dialectal prog "pointed instrument for poking

 drop 

 Middle English drope, from Old English dropa "a small, spherical mass of liquid," from Proto-Germanic *drupon (source also of Old Saxon dropo, Old Norse dropi, Dutch drop, Old High German tropfo, German Tropfen (n.)); see drop (v.). Sense of "minute quantity of anything, least po

 Share elbow 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/elbow Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/elbow">Etymology of elbow by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of elbow. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/elbow Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of elbow," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/elbow. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of elbow." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/elbow. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of elbow." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/elbow (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near elbow 
 elastic 
 elasticity 
 elate 
 elated 
 elation 
 elbow 
 eld 
 elder 
 elderly 
 eldest 
 eldorado 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix