URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Scythian
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:29:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Scythian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Scythian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Scythian 

 Scythian (n.) 

 one of an ancient nomadic race living on the steppes of southern Russia, 1540s, from Latin Scythia , from Greek Skythia , name anciently given to the region along the north coast of the Black Sea and extending in definitely north, from Skythes "a Scythian," said to be from an Indo-European root meaning "shepherd" [Room]. The earlier noun was Scyth (late 14c.). As an adjective from 1560s, "pertaining to Scythia or the Scythians." Herodotus is responsible for Scythian disease or Scythian insanity .
 also from 1540s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hemp 

 Saxon hanap, Old Norse hampr, Old High German hanaf, German Hanf), probably a very early Germanic borrowing of the same Scythian...

 canvas 

 hempen," noun use of Vulgar Latin adjective *cannapaceus "made of hemp," from Latin cannabis, from Greek kannabis "hemp," a Scythian...

 toxic 

 from toxikon, neuter of toxikos "pertaining to arrows or archery," and thus to a bow, from toxon "bow," probably from a Scythian...

 Dionysian 

 Scythian monk who invented the Anno Domini era (see A.D.)....

 cobweb 

 Scythian-born philosopher in Athens, the statement, variously given, that laws were like cobwebs that entangled the little...

 rosemary 

 Old Church Slavonic rosa "dew," Sanskrit rasah "sap, juice, fluid, essence," Hittite arszi "flows," and perhaps also Rha, Scythian...

 butter 

 root *gwou- "ox, bull, cow") + tyros "cheese" (from PIE root *teue- "to swell"); but this might be a folk etymology of a Scythian...

 nomad 

 "a wanderer, one of a tribe of people who have no fixed abode," 1550s (in plural, nomades), from French nomade (16c.), from Latin Nomas (genitive Nomadis) "wandering groups in Arabia," from Greek nomas (genitive nomados, plural nomades) "roaming, roving, wandering" (from place to

 monad 

 1610s, "unity, arithmetical unit," 1610s, from Late Latin monas (genitive monadis), from Greek monas "unit," from monos "alone" (from PIE root *men- (4) "small, isolated"). In Leibnitz's philosophy, "an ultimate unit of being, a unit of the universal substance" (1748); he apparen

 disease 

 early 14c., "discomfort, inconvenience, distress, trouble," from Old French desaise "lack, want; discomfort, distress; trouble, misfortune; disease, sickness," from des- "without, away" (see dis-) + aise "ease" (see ease (n.)). Restricted pathological sense of "sickness, illness"

 Share Scythian 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Scythian Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Scythian">Etymology of Scythian by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Scythian. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Scythian Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Scythian," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Scythian. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Scythian." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Scythian. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Scythian." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Scythian (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Scythian 
 scuttlebutt 
 Scutum 
 scuzzy 
 Scylla 
 scythe 
 Scythian 
 se- 
 sea 
 sea monkey 
 sea-anemone 
 Seabee 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix