URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightingale
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:28:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nightingale - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nightingale - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nightingale 

 nightingale (n.) 

 "small migratory bird of the Old World, noted for the male's melodious song, heard by night as well as day," Middle English nighte-gale , from Old English næctigalæ , in late Old English nihtegale , a compound formed in Proto-Germanic (compare Dutch nachtegaal , German Nachtigall ) from *nakht- "night" (see night ) + *galon "to sing," related to Old English giellan "to yell" (from PIE root *ghel- (1) "to call"). With parasitic -n- that began to appear mid-13c. Dutch nightingale "frog" is attested from 1769. In Japanese, "nightingale floor" is said to be the term for boards that creak when you walk on them.

 French rossignol (Old French lousseignol ) is, with Spanish ruiseñor , Portuguese rouxinol , Italian rosignuolo , from Vulgar Latin *rosciniola , a dissimilation of Latin lusciniola "nightingale," diminutive of luscinia "nightingale," which, according to de Vaan, "might be explained with haplology from *lusci-cania 'singing in the night' or 'blind singer', but this is speculative."

 Entries linking to nightingale 

 night (n.) 

 late Old English niht (West Saxon neaht , Anglian næht , neht ) "the dark part of a day; the night as a unit of time; darkness," also "absence of spiritual illumination, moral darkness, ignorance," from Proto-Germanic *nahts (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German naht , Old Frisian and Dutch nacht , German Nacht , Old Norse natt , Gothic nahts ).

 The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- "night" (source also of Greek nyx "a night," Latin nox , Old Irish nochd , Sanskrit naktam "at night," Lithuanian naktis "night," Old Church Slavonic nosti , Russian noch' , Welsh henoid "tonight"), according to Watkins, probably from a verbal root *neg- "to be dark, be night." For spelling with -gh- see fight . The vowel indicates that the modern English word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte , dative niht ).

 The fact that the Aryans have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by nights. [Weekley]

 Thus in Old English combinations night was "the night before (a certain day or feast day);" compare German Weihnachten "Christmas," literally "holy night." In early times, the day was held to begin at sunset, so Old English monanniht "Monday night" was the night before Monday, or what we would call Sunday night ; so saeterniht "Friday night." Thomas à Becket's Wednes-night (Old English Wodnes-niht ) would be our Tuesday night. The Greeks, by contrast, counted their days by mornings.

 To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night soil "excrement" (1770) is so called because it was removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train is attested from 1838; night-school from 1520s; night-life "habitual nocturnal carousing" is attested from 1852.

 superstition (n.) 

 early 13c., supersticioun , "false religious belief or system, worship of pagan gods; ignorant fear of the unknown and mysterious, irrational faith in supernatural powers," from Latin superstitionem (nominative superstitio ) "prophecy, soothsaying; dread of the supernatural, excessive fear of the gods, religious belief based on fear or ignorance and considered incompatible with truth or reason." This is, etymologically, "a standing over." It is noun of action from the past-participle stem of superstare "stand on or over; survive," from super "above" (see super- ) + stare "to stand" (from PIE root *sta- "to stand, make or be firm").

 There are many theories to explain the Latin sense development, but none has yet been generally accepted; de Vaan suggests the sense is "cause to remain in existence." Buck thinks it "perhaps best" interpreted as standing stiff or stunned in awe.

 The Greek word ( deisidaimonia ) means "fear of supernatural power," from an adjective meaning both "pious" and "superstitious" (ancient pagans as well distinguished "religion" from "superstition"). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by æfgælþ , from af- "off" (see off ; used here with pejorative or negative force) + a derivative of galan "sing, chant" (see yell (v.) and compare second element in nightingale ; also compare Old English  afgod , "idol; false god," literally "off-god").

 The weakened sense of "tenaciously held unreasonable notion" is by 1794.

 yell 
 *ghel- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 yell 

 Old English giellan (West Saxon), gellan (Mercian) "to yell, sound, shout," class III strong verb (past tense geal, past participle gollen), from Proto-Germanic *gel- (source also of Old Norse gjalla "to resound," Middle Dutch ghellen, Dutch gillen, Old High German gellan, German

 philomel 

 "a nightingale," 1570s, from Greek Philomēla, the poetic name of the nightingale; probably literally "lover of song," from...In mythology, the name of the daughter of Athenian king Pandion who was transformed into a nightingale (Ovid)....

 enchantment 

 English galdor "song," also "spell, enchantment," from galan "to sing," which also is the source of the second element in nightingale...

 fade 

 [Keats, from "Ode to a Nightingale"]...

 swallow 

 High German swalawa, German Schwalbe), from PIE *swol-wi- (source also of Russian solowej, Slovak slavik, Polish słowik "nightingale...

 beaker 

 drink, and leave the world unseen,   And with thee fade away into the forest dim: [Keats, from "Ode to a Nightingale...

 thrush 

 type of songbird, Old English þræsce, variant of þrysce, from Proto-Germanic *thruskjon (source also of Old Norse þröstr, Norwegian trost, Old High German drosca), from PIE *trozdo- (source also of Latin turdus, Lithuanian strazdas "thrush," Middle Irish truid, Welsh drudwy "star

 with 

 Old English wið "against, opposite, from, toward, by, near," a shortened form related to wiðer, from Proto-Germanic *withro- "against" (source also of Old Saxon withar "against," Old Norse viðr "against, with, toward, at," Middle Dutch, Dutch weder, Dutch weer "again," Gothic wiþ

 the 

 definite article, late Old English þe, nominative masculine form of the demonstrative pronoun and adjective. After c.950, it replaced earlier se (masc.), seo (fem.), þæt (neuter), and probably represents se altered by the th- form which was used in all the masculine oblique cases

 mystery 

 early 14c., misterie, in a theological sense, "religious truth via divine revelation, hidden spiritual significance, mystical truth," from Anglo-French *misterie, Old French mistere "secret, mystery, hidden meaning" (Modern French mystère) and directly from Latin mysterium "secre

 Share nightingale 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightingale Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightingale">Etymology of nightingale by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nightingale. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightingale Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nightingale," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightingale. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nightingale." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightingale. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nightingale." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightingale (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nightingale 
 night-crawler 
 nightfall 
 nightgown 
 night-hawk 
 nightie 
 nightingale 
 nightjar 
 night-light 
 nightlong 
 nightly 
 nightmare 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix