URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/discuss
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:38:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Discuss - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Discuss - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of discuss 

 discuss (v.) 

 late 14c., discussen , "to examine, investigate," from Latin discuss- , past participle stem of discutere "to dash to pieces, agitate, strike or shake apart," in Late Latin and Medieval Latin also "to discuss, examine, investigate," from dis- "apart" (see dis- ) + quatere "to shake" (see quash ).

 Meaning "examine by argument, debate," the usual modern sense, is from mid-15c. (implied in discussing ). Sense evolution in Latin appears to have been from "smash apart" to "scatter, disperse," then in post-classical times (via the mental process involved) to "investigate, examine," then to "debate." Related: Discussed .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to discuss 

 quash (v.) 

 the modern English word is a merger of two words, both in Middle English as quashen , from two unrelated Latin verbs.

 1. "to suppress, overcome" (mid-13c.); "to make void, annul, nullify, veto" (mid-14c.), from Old French quasser , quassier , casser "to annul, declare void," and directly from Medieval Latin quassare , alteration of Late Latin cassare , from cassus "null, void, empty" (according to Watkins from extended form of PIE root *kes- "to cut"). The meaning "subdue, put down summarily" is from c. 1600.

 2. "to break, crush, beat to pieces" early 14c., from Old French quasser , casser "to break, smash, destroy; maltreat, injure, harm, weaken," from Latin quassare "to shatter, shake or toss violently," frequentative of quatere (past participle quassus ) "to shake." According to Watkins this is from PIE root *kwet- "to shake" (source also of Greek passein "to sprinkle," Lithuanian kutėti "to shake up," Old Saxon skuddian "to move violently," German schütteln "to shake," Old English scudan "to hasten").

 In Medieval Latin, quassare often was used for cassare , and in later French the form of both words is casser . The words in English now are somewhat, or entirely, fused. Related: Quashed ; quashing .

 dis- 

 word-forming element of Latin origin meaning 1. "lack of, not" (as in dishonest ); 2. "opposite of, do the opposite of" (as in disallow ); 3. "apart, away" (as in discard ), from Old French des- or directly from Latin dis- "apart, asunder, in a different direction, between," figuratively "not, un-," also "exceedingly, utterly." Assimilated as dif- before -f- and to di- before most voiced consonants.

 The Latin prefix is from PIE *dis- "apart, asunder" (source also of Old English te- , Old Saxon ti- , Old High German ze- , German zer- ). The PIE root is a secondary form of *dwis- and thus is related to Latin bis "twice" (originally *dvis ) and to duo , on notion of "two ways, in twain" (hence "apart, asunder").

 In classical Latin, dis- paralleled de- and had much the same meaning, but in Late Latin dis- came to be the favored form and this passed into Old French as des- , the form used for compound words formed in Old French, where it increasingly had a privative sense ("not"). In English, many of these words eventually were altered back to dis- , while in French many have been altered back to de- . The usual confusion prevails.

 As a living prefix in English, it reverses or negatives what it is affixed to. Sometimes, as in Italian, it is reduced to s- (as in spend , splay , sport , sdain for disdain , and the surnames Spencer and Spence ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 discourse 

 late 14c., "process of understanding, reasoning, thought," from French discours, from Latin discursus "a running about," in Late Latin "conversation," in Medieval Latin "reasoning," noun use of past participle of discurrere "to run about, run to and fro, hasten," in Late Latin "t

 dispute 

 "dispute, fight over, contend for, discuss" and directly from Latin disputare "weigh, examine, discuss, argue, explain,"...

 entreat 

 c. 1400, "to enter into negotiations," especially "discuss or arrange peace terms;" also "to treat (someone) in a certain...

 reason 

 c. 1400, resounen, "to question (someone)," also "to challenge," from Old French resoner, raisoner "speak, discuss; argue...

 moot 

 early 12c., shortened from Old English gemot "meeting, formal assembly" (especially of freemen, to discuss community affairs...

 powwow 

 Verb sense of "to confer, discuss, hold a consultation, deliberate over events" is attested from 1780....

 agitate 

 The meaning "to discuss, debate" is from 1640s, that of "keep (a political or social question) constantly in public view"...

 disk 

 1660s, "round, approximately flat surface," from Latin discus "quoit, discus, disk," from Greek diskos "disk, quoit, platter," related to dikein "to throw" (see discus). The American English preferred spelling; also see disc. From 1803 as "thin, circular plate;" sense of "phonogr

 skid 

 c. 1600, "beam, log, or plank on which something rests," especially on which something heavy can be rolled from place to place (1782), of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse skið "stick of wood" (see ski (n.)). As "a sliding along" from 1890; s

 dale 

 level or gently sloping ground between low hills with a stream flowing through it, Old English dæl "vale, valley, gorge," from Proto-Germanic *dalaz "valley" (source also of Old Saxon, Dutch, Gothic dal, Old Norse dalr, Old High German tal, German Tal "valley"), perhaps from PIE 

 Share discuss 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/discuss Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/discuss">Etymology of discuss by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of discuss. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/discuss Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of discuss," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/discuss. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of discuss." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/discuss. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of discuss." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/discuss (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near discuss 
 discriminating 
 discrimination 
 discriminatory 
 discursive 
 discus 
 discuss 
 discussion 
 disdain 
 disdainful 
 disease 
 diseased 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix