URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ebony
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:14:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ebony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ebony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ebony 

 ebony (n.) 

 dark, hard wood favored for carving, musical instruments, etc., 1590s, perhaps an extended form of Middle English ebon , or from hebenyf (late 14c.), perhaps a Middle English misreading of Latin hebeninus "of ebony," from Greek ebeninos , from ebenos "ebony," probably from Egyptian hbnj or another Semitic source. Figurative use to suggest intense blackness is from 1620s. As an adjective, "of ebony, made of ebony," from 1590s; in reference to skin color of Africans, by 1813. French ébène , Old High German ebenus (German Ebenholz ) are from Latin ebenus .
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to ebony 

 ebon (n.) 

 early 15c., "ebony wood, ebony tree," from Old French ebene or directly from Latin ebenus (see ebony ). As an adjective, "made of ebony," from 1590s. Figurative sense of "dark, black" is from 1590s; in some cases a poetic shortening of ebony .

 Ebonics (n.) 

 "African-American vernacular English," 1975, as title of a book edited by U.S. professor Robert L. Williams (1930-2020), who is said to have coined the word as a blend of ebony and phonics .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sable 

 early 15c., "fur or pelt of the European sable" (Martes zibellina), from Old French sable (also martre sable "sable martin"), in reference to the carnivorous arctic mammal or its highly prized fur, borrowed in French from Germanic (compare Middle Dutch sabel, Middle Low German sa

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic *widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu- "tree, wood" (source als

 bone 

 Middle English bon, from Old English ban "bone, tusk, hard animal tissue forming the substance of the skeleton; one of the parts which make up the skeleton," from Proto-Germanic *bainan (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon ben, Old Norse bein, Danish ben, German Bein). Absen

 tree 

 Old English treo, treow "tree" (also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake"), from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o-, suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with speci

 coal 

 Old English col "charcoal; live coal, piece of wood or other combustible substance, either burning or having been burned," from Proto-Germanic *kula(n) (source also of Old Frisian kole, Middle Dutch cole, Dutch kool, Old High German chol, German Kohle, Old Norse kol), from PIE ro

 jet 

 1690s, "to sprout or spurt forth, shoot out," from French jeter "to throw, thrust," from Late Latin iectare (abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc.), in place of Latin iactare "to toss about," frequentative of iacere "to throw, cast," from PIE root *ye- "to throw, impel." Mi

 pitch 

 "thick, tenacious, resinous substance obtained from tar or turpentine, wood tar," late 12c., pich, piche, from Old English pic "pitch," from a Germanic borrowing (compare Old Saxon and Old Frisian pik, Middle Dutch pik, Dutch pek, Old High German pek, German Pech, Old Norse bik) 

 soot 

 "black substance or deposit formed by burning fuel and rising or falling in fine particles," Old English sõt "soot," from Proto-Germanic *sotam "soot" (source also of Old Norse sot, Old Dutch soet, North Frisian sutt), literally "what settles," from PIE *sodo- (source also of Old

 retrieve 

 early 15c., retreven, "find or discover again," originally in reference to dogs finding lost game, from retruev-, stem of Old French retreuver (Modern French retrouver) "find again, recover, meet again, recognize," from re- "again" (see re-) + trouver "to find," probably from Vul

 aloof 

 1530s, "to windward," from a- (1) "on" + Middle English loof "windward direction," which is probably from Dutch loef (Middle Dutch lof) "the weather side of a ship" (see luff (n.)). Originally in nautical orders to keep the ship's head to the wind, and thus stay clear of a lee-sh

 Share ebony 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ebony Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ebony">Etymology of ebony by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ebony. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ebony Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ebony," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ebony. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ebony." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ebony. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ebony." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ebony (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ebony 
 Eblis 
 ebola 
 ebon 
 Ebonics 
 ebonite 
 ebony 
 ebriety 
 ebullience 
 ebullient 
 ec- 
 ecarte 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix