URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gondola
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:00:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gondola - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gondola - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gondola 

 gondola (n.) 

 1540s, "long, narrow flat-bottomed boat used in Venice," from Italian (Venetian) gondola , earlier in English as goundel , from Old Italian gondula , of unknown origin; according to Barnhart, perhaps a diminutive of gonda , a name of a kind of boat. Used of flat, open railway cars by 1871. Meaning "cabin of an airship" is from 1896, though it was used hypothetically in 1881 in a futurism piece titled "300 Years Hence." Of ski-lifts from 1957.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to gondola 

 gondolier (n.) 

 "man who rows a gondola," c. 1600, from French gondolier and directly from Italian gondoliere , agent noun from gondola (see gondola ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 car 

 c. 1300, "wheeled vehicle," from Anglo-French carre, Old North French carre, from Vulgar Latin *carra, related to Latin carrum, carrus (plural carra), originally "two-wheeled Celtic war chariot," from Gaulish karros, a Celtic word (compare Old Irish and Welsh carr "cart, wagon," 

 nacelle 

 Modern meaning "gondola of an airship" is from 1901, a borrowing from French; extended to "cockpit of an aircraft" by 1914...

 tunnel 

 this and similar devices, couples are allowed to drift through dark or semi-dark underground caverns, usually in a boat or gondola...

 arc 

 late 14c., "part of a curved line," originally in reference to the sun's apparent motion across the sky, from Old French arc "bow, arch, vault" (12c.), from Latin arcus "a bow, arch," from Proto-Italic *arkwo- "bow." This has Germanic cognates in Gothic arhvazna, Old English earh

 compartment 

 a part separated from adjoining parts by a partition," "1560s, from French compartiment "part partitioned off" (16c.), through Italian compartimento, from Late Latin compartiri "to divide," from com-, here probably as an intensive prefix (see com-), + partis, genitive of pars "a 

 boat 

 "small open vessel (smaller than a ship) used to cross waters, propelled by oars, a sail, or (later) an engine," Middle English bot, from Old English bat, from Proto-Germanic *bait- (source also of Old Norse batr, Dutch boot, German Boot), which is possibly from PIE root *bheid- 

 contrast 

 1690s, "to set in opposition with a view to show the differences; to stand in opposition or contrast; to set off (each other) by contrast," from French contraster (Old French contrester), modified by or from Italian contrastare "stand out against, strive, contend," from Vulgar La

 language 

 late 13c., langage "words, what is said, conversation, talk," from Old French langage "speech, words, oratory; a tribe, people, nation" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *linguaticum, from Latin lingua "tongue," also "speech, language," from PIE root *dnghu- "tongue." The -u- is an Anglo

 reckon 

 c. 1200, recenen, rekenen, "enumerate, count up; name one by one; relate, recount; make calculations," from Old English gerecenian "to explain, relate, recount; arrange in order," from Proto-Germanic *(ga)rakinaz "ready, straightforward" (source also of Old Frisian rekenia, Middl

 period 

 early 15c., periode, "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle of the Greek games," from Greek perio

 Share gondola 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gondola Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gondola">Etymology of gondola by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gondola. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gondola Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gondola," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gondola. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gondola." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gondola. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gondola." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gondola (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gondola 
 golly 
 Gomorrah 
 -gon 
 gonad 
 Gondal 
 gondola 
 gondolier 
 Gondwana 
 gone 
 goner 
 gonfalon 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix