URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bench
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:25:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bench - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bench - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bench 

 bench (n.) 

 Middle English bench , from Old English benc "long seat," especially one without a back, from Proto-Germanic *bankon (source also of Old Frisian bank "bench," Old Norse bekkr , Danish bænk , Middle Dutch banc , Old High German banch ). The group is cognate with bank (n.2) "natural earthen incline beside a body of water," and perhaps the original notion is "man-made earthwork used as a seat."

 Used from late 14c. of a merchant's table. It is attested from c. 1300 in reference to the seat where judges sits in court, hence, by metonymy, "judges collectively, office of a judge." Hence also bencher "senior member of an inn of court" (1580s). A bench-warrant (1690s) is one issued by a judge, as opposed to one issued by an ordinary justice or magistrate.

 The sporting sense "reserve of players" (in baseball, North American football, etc.) is by 1909, from a literal sense in reference to where players sit when not in action (attested by 1889).

 bench (v.) 

 "to take out of a (baseball) game," 1902, from bench (n.) in the sporting sense. Earlier it meant "to display (a dog) in a dog show" (1863). Related: Benched ; benching . Old English had a verb bencian , but it meant "to make benches."
 also from 1902 

 Entries linking to bench 

 bank (n.2) 

 "natural earthen incline bordering a body of water," c. 1200, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse *banki , Old Danish banke "sandbank," from Proto-Germanic *bankon "slope," cognate with *bankiz "shelf" (see bench (n.)). As "rising ground in a sea or rover, shoal," from c. 1600. As "bench for rowers in an ancient galley," 1590s.

 There probably was an Old English cognate but it is not attested in surviving documents. The nasalized form likely is a variant of Old Norse bakki "(river) bank, ridge, mound; cloud bank," cognate with Swedish backe , Danish bakke "hill, rising ground."

 backbencher (n.) 

 "member of Parliament who does not hold office in the government or opposition," 1897 in a parliamentary context (originally Canadian), from back bench (1874 in this sense), from back (adj.) + bench (n.); occupants of the rear seats being the least-prominent politicians.

 banquet 
 benchmark 
 bench-warmer 
 charabanc 
 mountebank 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 banquet 

 late 15c., "feast, sumptuous entertainment," from Old French banquet "feast," earlier simply "small bench," from Old Italian banchetto, diminutive of banco "bench," variant of banca "bench," which is from a Germanic source (see bench (n.)). Apparently, etymologically, "a snack ea

 mountebank 

 "peripatetic quack; one who sells nostrums at fairs, etc.," in Johnson's words, "a doctor that mounts a bench in the market, and boasts his infallible remedies and cures;" 1570s, from Italian montambanco, contraction of monta in banco "quack, juggler," literally "mount on bench" 

 terrace 

 1510s, "gallery, portico, balcony," later "flat, raised place for walking" (1570s), from French terrace (Modern French terasse), from Old French terrasse (12c.) "platform (built on or supported by a mound of earth)," from Vulgar Latin *terracea, fem. of *terraceus "earthen, earth

 shamble 

 "table, bench" (see shambles), perhaps on the notion of the splayed legs of bench, or the way a worker sits astride it....Compare French bancal "bow-legged, wobbly" (of furniture), properly "bench-legged," from banc "bench."...

 bankrupt 

 in the state of one unable to pay just debts or meet obligations," 1560s, from Italian banca rotta, literally "a broken bench...," from banca "moneylender's shop," literally "bench" (see bank (n.1)) + rotta "broken, defeated, interrupted" from (and...Said to have been so called from an old custom of breaking the bench of bankrupts, but the allusion probably is figurative...

 shambles 

 from schamil "table, stall for vending" (c. 1300), from Old English scamol, scomul "stool, footstool" (also figurative); "bench...All these represent an early Proto-Germanic borrowing from Latin scamillus "low stool, a little bench," which is ultimately...a diminutive of scamnum "stool, bench," from a PIE root *skmbh- "to prop up, support."...

 pew 

 late 14c., peue, "raised, bench-like seat for certain worshipers" (ladies, important men, etc.), frequently enclosed, from...Meaning "fixed bench with a back, for a number of worshipers" is attested from 1630s. Related: Pewholder; pew-rent....

 establishment 

 late 15c., "settled arrangement," also "income, property," from establish + -ment. Meaning "established church" is from 1731; Sense of "place of business" is from 1832. Meaning "social matrix of ruling people and institutions" is attested occasionally from 1923, consistently from

 court 

 late 12c., "formal assembly held by a sovereign," from Old French cort "king's court; princely residence" (11c., Modern French cour), from Latin cortem, accusative of cors (earlier cohors) "enclosed yard," and by extension (and perhaps by association with curia "sovereign's assem

 settle 

 Middle English setlen, "become set or fixed, stable or permanent; seat, place in a seat; sink down, come down," from Old English setlan "place in a fixed or permanent position; cause to sit, place in a seat," from setl "a seat" (see settle (n.)). Compare German siedeln "to settle

 Share bench 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bench Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bench">Etymology of bench by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bench. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bench Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bench," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bench. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bench." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bench. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bench." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bench (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bench 
 bemoan 
 bemuse 
 bemused 
 bemusement 
 ben 
 bench 
 benchmark 
 bench-warmer 
 bend 
 bendable 
 benday 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix