URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/talisman
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:13:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Talisman - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Talisman - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of talisman 

 talisman (n.) 

 1630s, "magical figure cut or engraved on stone or metal under certain observances," from French talisman , in part via Arabic tilsam (plural tilsaman ), from Byzantine Greek telesma "talisman, religious rite, payment," earlier "consecration, ceremony," originally in ancient Greek "completion," from telein "perform (religious rites), pay (tax), fulfill," from telos "end, fulfillment, completion" (see telos ).

 The figurative sense of "any means of attainment of extraordinary results" is by 1784. The Arabic word also was borrowed into Turkish, Persian, Hindi. Related: Talismanic ; talismanical .
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to talisman 

 telos (n.) 

 "ultimate object or aim," 1904, in biology, from Greek telos "the end, limit, goal, fulfillment, completion," from PIE *kwel-es- , suffixed form of root *kwel- (1) "revolve, move round; sojourn, dwell," perhaps via the notion of "turning point (of a race-course, a field)."

 *kwel- (1) 

 also *kwelə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "revolve, move round; sojourn, dwell."

 It might form all or part of: accolade ; ancillary ; atelo- ; bazaar ; bicycle ; bucolic ; chakra ; chukker ; collar ; collet ; colonial ; colony ; cult ; cultivate ; culture ; cyclamen ; cycle ; cyclo- ; cyclone ; Cyclops ; decollete ; encyclical ; encyclopedia ; entelechy ; epicycle ; hauberk ; hawse ; inquiline ; kultur ; lapidocolous ; nidicolous ; palimpsest ; palindrome ; palinode ; pole (n.2) "ends of Earth's axis;" pulley ; rickshaw ; talisman ; teleology ; telic ; telophase ; telos ; torticollis ; wheel .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit cakram "circle, wheel," carati "he moves, wanders;" Avestan caraiti "applies himself," c'axra "chariot, wagon;" Greek kyklos "circle, wheel, any circular body, circular motion, cycle of events," polos "a round axis" (PIE *kw- becomes Greek p- before some vowels), polein "move around;" Latin colere "to frequent, dwell in, to cultivate, move around," cultus "tended, cultivated," hence also "polished," colonus "husbandman, tenant farmer, settler, colonist;" Lithuanian kelias "a road, a way;" Old Norse hvel , Old English hweol "wheel;" Old Church Slavonic kolo , Old Russian kolo , Polish koło , Russian koleso "a wheel."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mascot 

 "a talisman, charm, thing supposed to bring good luck to its possessor," also "person whose presence is supposed to be a...

 porcelain 

 Thompson ["A Glossary of Greek Fishes"] writes, "According to a widespread belief the cowries were a charm or talisman against...

 charm 

 c. 1300, "incantation, magic charm," from Old French charme (12c.) "magic charm, magic spell incantation; song, lamentation," from Latin carmen "song, verse, enchantment, religious formula," from canere "to sing" (from PIE root *kan- "to sing"), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- b

 march 

 "to walk with measured steps or a regular tread," either individually or as a body, early 15c., from Old French marcher "to stride, march, walk," originally "to trample, tread underfoot," a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Frankish *markon or some other Germanic source rela

 communication 

 early 15c., communicacioun, "act of communicating, act of imparting, discussing, debating, or conferring," from Old French comunicacion (14c., Modern French communication) and directly from Latin communicationem (nominative communicatio) "a making common, imparting, communicating

 politics 

 1520s, "science and art of government," from politic (n.) "the political state of a country or government (early 15c.), from Old French politique and Medieval Latin politica; see politic (adj.). The plural form probably was modeled on Aristotle's ta politika "affairs of state" (p

 election 

 c. 1300, eleccioun, "act of choosing" someone to occupy a position, elevation to office" (whether by one person or a body of electors); also "the holding of a vote by a body of electors by established procedure; the time and place of such a vote," from Anglo-French eleccioun, Old

 compensate 

 1640s, "to be equivalent;" 1650s, "to counterbalance, make up for, give a substitute of equal value to," from Latin compensatus, past participle of compensare "to weigh one thing (against another)," thus, "to counterbalance," etymologically "to weigh together," from com "with, to

 entrepreneur 

 1828, "manager or promoter of a theatrical production," reborrowing of French entrepreneur "one who undertakes or manages," agent noun from Old French entreprendre "undertake" (see enterprise). The word first crossed the Channel late 15c. (Middle English entreprenour) but did not

 category 

 1580s, in Aristotle's logic, "a highest notion," from French catégorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek katēgoria "accusation, prediction, category," verbal noun from katēgorein "speak against; to accuse, assert, predicate," from kata "down to" (or perhaps "against;" see ca

 Share talisman 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/talisman Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/talisman">Etymology of talisman by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of talisman. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/talisman Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of talisman," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/talisman. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of talisman." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/talisman. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of talisman." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/talisman (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near talisman 
 talent 
 talented 
 talesman 
 Taliban 
 talipes 
 talisman 
 talk 
 talk turkey 
 talkative 
 talker 
 talkie 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix