URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/aquarium
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:23:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Aquarium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Aquarium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of aquarium 

 aquarium (n.) 

 1830, "artificial pond in a garden or elsewhere for growing aquatic plants," noun use of neuter of Latin aquarius "pertaining to water" (also, as a noun, "water-carrier"), genitive of aqua "water" (from PIE root *akwa- "water"). Also see -ary .

 The noun aquarium in Latin meant "drinking place for cattle." In English, the meaning "vessel of glass filled with water in which living aquatic animals are kept indoors" is by 1853. The Victorian mania for indoor aquariums began with the book "The Aquarium," published 1854 by English naturalist Philip Henry Gosse. An earlier attempt at a name for "fish tank" was marine vivarium .
 also from 1830 

 Entries linking to aquarium 

 Aquarius 

 faint constellation and 11th zodiac sign, late Old English, from Latin aquarius , literally "water carrier," properly an adjective, "pertaining to water" (see aquarium ); a loan-translation of Greek Hydrokhoos "the water-pourer," the old Greek name of this constellation.

 The Aquarians (1580s) were a former Christian sect; its adherents used water instead of wine at the Lord's Supper. Aquarian Age (alluded to from 1913) is an astrological epoch (based on precession of the equinoxes) supposed to have begun in the 20th century (though in one estimate, 1848), it would be characterized by the traits of this sign, usher in world peace and human brotherhood, and last approximately 2,160 years. The term and the concept probably got a boost in popular use from the rock song "Age of Aquarius" (1967) and when An Aquarian Exposition was used as the sub-title of the Woodstock Music & Art Fair (1969).

 ewer (n.) 

 "water pitcher with a wide spout," early 14c., from Anglo-French *ewiere , Old French eviere "water pitcher," parallel form of aiguiere (Modern French aiguière ), from fem. of Latin aquarius "of or for water," as a noun, "water-carrier" (see aquarium ).

 insectarium 
 seaquarium 
 terrarium 
 *akwa- 
 -ary 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 guppy 

 1918, so called about the time they became popular as aquarium fish, from the scientific name (Girardinus guppii), which...

 tank 

 1610s, "pool or lake for irrigation or drinking water," a word originally brought by the Portuguese from India, from a Hindi source, such as Gujarati tankh "cistern, underground reservoir for water," Marathi tanken, or tanka "reservoir of water, tank." Perhaps it is ultimately fr

 aqua 

 "water," late 14c., from Latin aqua "water; the sea; rain," from PIE root *akwa- "water." The Latin word was used in late Middle English in combinations in old chemistry and alchemy in the sense of "decoction, solution" (as in aqua regia, a mix of concentrated acids, literally "r

 marine 

 mid-15c., "found in or pertaining to the sea," from Old French marin "of the sea, maritime," and directly from Latin marinus "of the sea," from mare "sea, the sea, seawater," from PIE root *mori- "body of water." The Old English word was sælic....late 14c., "seacoast;" see marine

 fish 

 "a vertebrate which has gills and fins adapting it for living in the water," Old English fisc "fish," from Proto-Germanic *fiskaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German fisc, Old Norse fiskr, Middle Dutch visc, Dutch vis, German Fisch, Gothic fisks), perhaps from

 museum 

 1610s, "the university building in Alexandria," from Latin museum "library, study," from Greek mouseion "place of study, library or museum, school of art or poetry," originally "a temple or shrine of the Muses," from Mousa "Muse" (see muse (n.)). The earliest use in reference to 

 blasphemy 

 "impious or profane speaking of God or sacred things," early 13c., from Old French blasfemie "blasphemy," from Late Latin blasphemia, from Greek blasphēmia "a speaking ill, impious speech, slander," from blasphēmein "to speak evil of." The second element of that is phēmē "utteran

 cereal 

 1832, "grass yielding edible grain and cultivated for food," originally an adjective (1818) "having to do with edible grain," from French céréale (16c., "of Ceres;" 18c. in grain sense), from Latin Cerealis "of grain," originally "of Ceres," from Ceres, Italic goddess of agricult

 higgledy-piggledy 

 "confusedly, hurriedly," 1590s, a "vocal gesture" [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky, hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c. 160

 stamp 

 Middle English stampen "pound, mash, beat, crush," from Old English stempan "to pound, crush, or bruise in or as in a mortar," from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (source also of Old Norse stappa, Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen "to stamp wi

 Share aquarium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/aquarium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/aquarium">Etymology of aquarium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of aquarium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/aquarium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of aquarium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aquarium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of aquarium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aquarium. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of aquarium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/aquarium (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near aquarium 
 aqualung 
 aquamarine 
 aquanaut 
 aquarelle 
 Aquarian 
 aquarium 
 Aquarius 
 aquatic 
 aquatint 
 aqueduct 
 aqueous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix