URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dream
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:18:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dream - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dream - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dream 

 dream (n.) 

 "sequence of sensations or images passing through the mind of a sleeping person," mid-13c., probably related to Old Norse draumr , Danish drøm , Swedish dröm , Old Saxon drom "merriment, noise," Old Frisian dram "dream," Dutch droom , Old High German troum , German Traum "dream." These all are perhaps from a Proto-Germanic *draugmas "deception, illusion, phantasm" (source also of Old Saxon bidriogan , Old High German triogan , German trügen "to deceive, delude," Old Norse draugr "ghost, apparition"). Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- "seek to harm, injure," Avestan druz- "lie, deceive."

 Old English dream meant "joy, mirth, noisy merriment," also "music." Much study has failed to prove that Old English dream is the source of the modern word for "sleeping vision," despite being identical in form. Perhaps the meaning of the word changed dramatically, or "vision" was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream , or there are two words here.

 OED (1989) offers this theory for the absence of dream in the modern sense in the record of Old English: "It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream 'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn , lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ...."

 The dream that meant "joy, mirth, music" faded out of use after early Middle English. According to Middle English Compendium, the replacement of swefn (Middle English swevn ) by dream in the sense "sleeping vision" occurs earliest and is most frequent in the East Midlands and the North of England, where Scandinavian influence was strongest.

 Dream in the sense of "that which is presented to the mind by the imaginative faculty, though not in sleep" is from 1580s. The meaning "ideal or aspiration" is from 1931, from the earlier sense of "something of dream-like beauty or charm" (1888). The notion of "ideal" is behind dream girl (1850), etc.

 Before it meant "sleeping vision" Old English swefn meant "sleep," as did a great many Indo-European "dream" nouns originally, such as Lithuanian sapnas , Old Church Slavonic sunu , and the Romanic words (French songe , Spanish sueño , Italian sogno all from Latin somnium ). All of these (including Old English swefn ) are from PIE *swep-no- , which also is the source of Greek hypnos (from PIE root *swep- "to sleep"). Old English also had mæting in the "sleeping vision" sense.

 You are not wrong, who deem

 That my days have been a dream;

 Yet if hope has flown away

 In a night, or in a day,

 In a vision, or in none,

 Is it therefore the less gone ? 

 All that we see or seem

 Is but a dream within a dream.

 [Poe, from "A Dream Within a Dream"]

 also from mid-13c. 

 dream (v.) 

 mid-13c., dremen , "to have a dream or dreams, be partly and confusedly aware of images and thoughts during sleep," from dream (n.). Transitive sense of "see in a dream" is from c. 1300. Sense of "think about idly, vainly, or fancifully; give way to visionary expectation" is from late 14c. Related: Dreamed ; dreaming . To dream up "picture (something) in one's mind" is by 1941.

 In the older sense of "sing, rejoice, play music," it is from Old English drēman (Anglian); dryman (West Saxon), from the Old English noun. This was obsolete from c. 1300.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to dream 

 day-dream (n.) 

 also daydream , "a reverie, pleasant and visionary fancy indulged in when awake," 1680s, from day + dream (n.). As a verb, attested from 1820. Related: Day-dreamer ; day-dreaming . Daymare "feeling resembling a nightmare experienced while awake" is from 1737.

 dreamboat (n.) 

 "romantically desirable person," 1947, from dream (n.) + boat (n.). The phrase was in use about two decades before that. "When My Dream Boat Comes Home" was the title of a 1936 song credited to Guy Lombardo and "Dream Boat" was the title of a 1929 book.

 It is rare indeed that a designer ever has the opportunity to build his dream boat. Chris Smith, all his life, had held in mind a boat of about fifty feet overall which would be the last word in yacht design and performance. [Motor Boating, December 1929]

 dreamer 
 dreamland 
 dreamless 
 dreamscape 
 dreamt 
 dream-world 
 dreamy 
 pipe dream 
 undreamed 
 *swep- 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ambition 

 mid-14c., ambicioun, "eager or inordinate desire for honor or preferment," from Old French ambicion (13c.), or directly from Latin ambitionem (nominative ambitio) "a going around," especially to solicit votes, hence "a striving for favor, courting, flattery; a desire for honor, t

 aspiration 

 late 14c., aspiracioun, "a spirant;" 1530s as "action of breathing into," from Latin aspirationem (nominative aspiratio) "a breathing on, a blowing upon; rough breathing; influence," noun of action from past-participle stem of aspirare "strive for, seek to reach," literally "brea

 significance 

 c. 1400, significaunce, "meaning" (of an omen, dream, etc.), from Old French significance or directly from Latin significantia...

 vision 

 imagination or in the supernatural," from Anglo-French visioun, Old French vision "presence, sight; view, look, appearance; dream...

 Puck 

 name of the mischievous fairy in "A Midsummer Night's Dream," in 16c. the name of a fairy of high repute (his disguised name...

 powwow 

 language (probably Narragansett) powwaw "shaman, medicine man, Indian priest," from a verb meaning "to use divination, to dream...

 rave 

 early 14c., raven, "to show signs of madness or delirium, to rage in speech," from Old French raver, variant of resver "to dream...

 sleep 

 Middle English slepen, from Old English slæpan "to be or fall asleep; lie or remain dormant or inactive" (class VII strong verb; past tense slep, past participle slæpen), from Proto-Germanic *slēpanan (source also of Old Saxon slapan, Old Frisian slepa, Middle Dutch slapen, Dutch

 imagination 

 "faculty of the mind which forms and manipulates images," mid-14c., ymaginacion, from Old French imaginacion "concept, mental picture; hallucination," from Latin imaginationem (nominative imaginatio) "imagination, a fancy," noun of action from past participle stem of imaginari "t

 comprehend 

 mid-14c., "to understand, take into the mind, grasp by understanding," late 14c., "to take in, include;" from Latin comprehendere "to take together, to unite; include; seize" (of catching fire or the arrest of criminals); also "to comprehend, perceive" (to seize or take in the mi

 Share dream 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dream Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dream">Etymology of dream by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dream. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dream Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dream," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dream. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dream." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dream. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dream." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dream (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dream 
 dread 
 dreadful 
 dreadlocks 
 dreadnought 
 dreads 
 dream 
 dreamboat 
 dreamer 
 dreamland 
 dreamless 
 dreamscape 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix