URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/autobahn
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:45:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Autobahn - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Autobahn - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of autobahn 

 autobahn (n.) 

 "German expressway," 1937, from German Autobahn (1930s), from auto "motor car, automobile" (short for automobil ; see auto ) + bahn "path, road," from Middle High German ban , bane "way, road," literally "strike" (as a swath cut through), from PIE *gwhen- "to strike, kill" (see bane ).
 also from 1937 

 Entries linking to autobahn 

 auto (n.) 

 1899 as shortened form of automobile (q.v.). Similar evolution yielded French, German auto .

 bane (n.) 

 Middle English bane , from Old English bana "killer, slayer, murderer, a worker of death" (human, animal, or object), also "the devil," from Proto-Germanic *banon , cognate with *banja- "wound" (source also of Old Frisian bona "murderer," Old Norse bani "death; that which causes death," Old High German bana "death, destruction," Old English benn "wound," Gothic banja "stroke, wound"), a word of no certain IE etymology. The sense of "that which causes ruin or woe" is attested from 1570s. Related: Baneful .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pike 

 "highway," 1812 shortening of turnpike...."weapon with a long shaft and a pointed metal head," 1510s, from French pique "a spear; pikeman," from piquer "to pick, puncture, pierce," from Old French pic "sharp point or spike," a general continental term (Spanish pica, Italian picca

 ban 

 Old English bannan "to summon, command, proclaim," from Proto-Germanic *bannan "to speak publicly" (used in reference to various sorts of proclamations), "command; summon; outlaw, forbid" (source also of Old Frisian bonna "to order, command, proclaim," Old High German bannan "to 

 cross 

 Old English cros "instrument of Christ's crucifixion; symbol of Christianity" (mid-10c.), probably from Old Norse or another Scandinavian source, picked up by the Norse from Old Irish cros, from Latin crux (accusative crucem, genitive crucis) "stake, cross" on which criminals wer

 jersey 

 1580s as a type of knitted cloth; 1842 as a breed of cattle; both from Jersey, one of the Channel Islands. Its name is said to be a corruption of Latin Caesarea, the Roman name for the island (or another near it), influenced by Old English ey "island" (see island); but it is perh

 Aryan 

 c. 1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. 

 whiskey 

 1715, from Gaelic uisge beatha "whisky," literally "water of life," from Old Irish uisce "water" (from PIE *ud-skio-, suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet") + bethu "life" (from PIE *gwi-wo-tut-, suffixed form of *gwi-wo-, from root *gwei- "to live"). According to Barnhart

 austere 

 early 14c., of persons, manner, etc., "harsh, severe; grim, fierce," from Old French austere "strict, severe, harsh, cruel" (13c., Modern French austère) and directly from Latin austerus "dry, harsh, sour, tart," from Greek austeros "bitter, harsh," especially "making the tongue 

 fantastic 

 late 14c., "existing only in imagination, produced by (mental) fantasy," from Old French fantastique (14c.), from Medieval Latin fantasticus, from Late Latin phantasticus "imaginary," from Greek phantastikos "able to imagine," from phantazein "make visible" (middle voice phantaze

 plot 

 late Old English plot "small piece of ground of defined shape," a word of unknown origin. The sense of "ground plan," and thus "map, chart, survey of a field, farm, etc." is from 1550s. Plat is a Middle English collateral form. The meaning "a secret, plan, fully formulated scheme

 virgin 

 c. 1200, "unmarried or chaste woman noted for religious piety and having a position of reverence in the Church," from Anglo-French and Old French virgine "virgin; Virgin Mary," from Latin virginem (nominative virgo) "maiden, unwedded girl or woman," also an adjective, "fresh, unu

 Share autobahn 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/autobahn Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/autobahn">Etymology of autobahn by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of autobahn. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/autobahn Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of autobahn," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/autobahn. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of autobahn." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/autobahn. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of autobahn." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/autobahn (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near autobahn 
 authorship 
 autism 
 autistic 
 auto 
 auto- 
 autobahn 
 autobiography 
 autocade 
 autocar 
 autochthon 
 autochthonic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix