URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chloroform
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chloroform - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chloroform - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chloroform 

 chloroform (n.) 

 "trichloromethane," a volatile, colorless liquid used as an anaesthetic, 1835, from French chloroforme , a hybrid coined 1834 by French chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1800-1884) from chloro- , a combining form meaning "chlorine" (see chlorine ), + formique "formic (acid)" (see formic (adj.)).

 As a verb, "to subject to the influence of chloroform," from 1848, which is the year its anaesthetic properties were discovered. Related: Chloroformed .
 also from 1835 

 Entries linking to chloroform 

 chlorine (n.) 

 nonmetallic element, the name coined 1810 by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy from Latinized form of Greek khlōros "pale green" (from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives denoting "green" and "yellow") + chemical suffix -ine (2). Named for its color. Discovered 1774, but known at first as oxymuriatic acid gas , or dephlogisticated marine acid .

 formic (adj.) 

 1791 (in formic acid ), literally "from ants," coined from Latin formica "ant" (see Formica (n.2)). The acid first was obtained in a fairly pure form in 1749 by German chemist Andreas Sigismund Marggraf (1709-1782), who prepared it by distilling red ants. It also is found in nettles and bee stings.

 *ghel- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine;" it forms words for "gold" (the "bright" metal), words denoting colors, especially "yellow" and "green," also "bile, gall," for its color, and a large group of Germanic gl- words having to do with shining and glittering and, perhaps, sliding. Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is "perhaps because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to yellow."

 It might form all or part of: arsenic ; Chloe ; chloral ; chloride ; chlorinate ; chlorine ; chloro- ; chloroform ; chlorophyll ; chloroplast ; cholecyst ; choler ; cholera ; choleric ; cholesterol ; cholinergic ; Cloris ; gall (n.1) "bile, liver secretion;" gild ; glad ; glance ; glare ; glass ; glaze ; glazier ; gleam ; glee ; glib ; glide ; glimmer ; glimpse ; glint ; glissade ; glisten ; glister ; glitch ; glitter ; glitzy ; gloaming ; gloat ; gloss (n.1) "glistening smoothness, luster;" glow ; glower ; gold ; guilder ; jaundice ; melancholic ; melancholy ; yellow ; zloty .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit harih "yellow, tawny yellow," hiranyam "gold;" Avestan zari "yellow;" Old Persian daraniya- , Avestan zaranya- "gold;" Greek khlōros "greenish-yellow color," kholos "bile, gall, wrath;" Latin helvus "yellowish, bay," Gallo-Latin gilvus "light bay;" Lithuanian geltonas "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlutu , Polish żółty , Russian zeltyj "yellow;" Latin galbus "greenish-yellow," fellis "bile, gall;" Lithuanian žalias "green," želvas "greenish," tulžis "bile;" Old Church Slavonic zelenu , Polish zielony , Russian zelenyj "green;" Old Irish glass , Welsh and Breton glas "green," also "gray, blue;" Old English galla "gall, bile," geolu , geolwe , German gelb , Old Norse gulr "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlato , Russian zoloto , Old English gold , Gothic gulþ "gold;" Old English glæs "glass; a glass vessel."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 put-out 

 "offended, angry, upset," by 1887, from the verbal phrase in the sense of "offend," attested by 1822; see put (v.) + out (adv.). Perhaps via the earlier sense of "cause to lose self-possession, disconcert" (1580s). The verbal phrase is from mid-14c. as "drive out, banish, exile;"

 scarf 

 [band of silk, strip of cloth], 1550s, "a band worn across the body or over the shoulders," probably from Old North French escarpe "sash, sling," which probably is identical with Old French escherpe "pilgrim's purse suspended from the neck," perhaps from Frankish *skirpja or some

 plantation 

 mid-15c., plantacioun, "action of planting (seeds, etc.)," a sense now obsolete, from Latin plantationem (nominative plantatio) "a planting," noun of action from past-participle stem of *plantare "to plant" (see plant (n.)). From c. 1600 as "introduction, establishment." From 158

 random 

 1650s, "having no definite aim or purpose, haphazard, not sent in a special direction," from phrase at random (1560s), "at great speed" (thus, "carelessly, haphazardly"), from an alteration of the Middle English noun randon, randoun "impetuosity; speed" (c. 1300). This is from Ol

 inspiration 

 c. 1300, "immediate influence of God or a god," especially that under which the holy books were written, from Old French inspiracion "inhaling, breathing in; inspiration" (13c.), from Late Latin inspirationem (nominative inspiratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of La

 procrastination 

 "a putting off to a future time; dilatoriness," 1540s, from French procrastination (16c.) and directly from Latin procrastinationem (nominative procrastinatio) "a putting off from day to day," noun of action from past-participle stem of procrastinare "put off till tomorrow, defer

 Dago 

 1823, from Spanish Diego "James" (see James). Said to have been originally American English slang for "one born of Spanish parents," especially in New Orleans; it was also used of Spanish or Portuguese sailors on English or American ships. By 1900 it had broadened to include non-

 gravity 

 c. 1500, "weight, dignity, seriousness, solemnity of deportment or character, importance," from Old French gravité "seriousness, thoughtfulness" (13c.) and directly from Latin gravitatem (nominative gravitas) "weight, heaviness, pressure," from gravis "heavy" (from PIE root *gwer

 log 

 unshaped large piece of tree, early 14c., of unknown origin. Old Norse had lag "felled tree" (from stem of liggja "to lie," hence "a tree that lies prostrate"), but many etymologists deny on phonological grounds that this can be the root of English log. Instead, they suggest an i

 mug 

 "small, cylindrical drinking vessel, often with a handle," 1560s, "bowl, pot, jug," a word of unknown origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish mugg "earthen cup, jug," Norwegian mugge "pitcher, open can for warm drinks"), or Low German mokke, mukke "mug," also of unknow

 Share chloroform 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chloroform Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chloroform">Etymology of chloroform by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chloroform. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chloroform Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chloroform," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chloroform. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chloroform." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chloroform. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chloroform." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chloroform (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chloroform 
 chlorinate 
 chlorination 
 chlorine 
 chloro- 
 chlorofluorocarbon 
 chloroform 
 chlorophyll 
 chloroplast 
 choad 
 choate 
 chock 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix