URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/authentic
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:45:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Authentic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Authentic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of authentic 

 authentic (adj.) 

 mid-14c., autentik , "authoritative, duly authorized" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French autentique "authentic; canonical" (13c., Modern French authentique ) and directly from Medieval Latin authenticus , from Greek authentikos "original, genuine, principal," from authent ē s "one acting on one's own authority," from autos "self" (see auto- ) + hent ē s "doer, being" (from PIE root *sene- (2) "to accomplish, achieve"). The sense of "real, entitled to acceptance as factual" is recorded from mid-14c.

 Traditionally in modern use, authentic implies that the contents of the thing in question correspond to the facts and are not fictitious (hence "trustworthy, reliable"); while genuine implies that the reputed author is the real one and that we have it as it left the author's hand (hence "unadulterated"); but this is not always maintained: "The distinction which the 18th c. apologists attempted to establish between genuine and authentic ... does not agree well with the etymology of the latter word, and is not now recognized" [OED, 2nd ed. print, 1989].

 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to authentic 

 genuine (adj.) 

 1590s, "natural, not acquired," from Latin genuinus "native, natural, innate," from root of gignere "to beget, produce" (from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget"), perhaps influenced in form by contrasting adulterinus "spurious." [An alternative etymology is from Latin genu "knee," from a supposed ancient custom of a father acknowledging paternity of a newborn by placing it on his knee.] The meaning "really proceeding from its reputed source" is from 1660s; compare authentic . Related: Genuinely ; genuineness .

 authenticate (v.) 

 "verify, establish the credibility of," 1650s, from Medieval Latin authenticatus , past participle of authenticare , from Late Latin authenticus (see authentic ). Also "render authentic" (1650s). Related: Authenticated ; authenticating .

 authenticity 
 author 
 authority 
 effendi 
 inauthentic 
 auto- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 author 

 mid-14c., auctor, autour, autor "father, creator, one who brings about, one who makes or creates" someone or something, from Old French auctor, acteor "author, originator, creator, instigator" (12c., Modern French auteur) and directly from Latin auctor "promoter, producer, father

 authority 

 c. 1200, autorite, auctorite "authoritative passage or statement, book or quotation that settles an argument, passage from Scripture," from Old French autorité, auctorité "authority, prestige, right, permission, dignity, gravity; the Scriptures" (12c.; Modern French autorité), fr

 reliable 

 1560s, raliabill, "that may be relied on, fit to be depended on, trustworthy," originally Scottish; see rely + -able. Not common before 1850, and often execrated thereafter in Britain as an Americanism because it involves a use of -able different from its use in provable, etc., a

 compile 

 "to collect and present information from authentic sources, to make or form by putting together in some order written or...

 simon-pure 

 "genuine, pure, authentic, true," 1815, colloquial, from the true Simon Pure "the genuine person or thing" (1795), from the...

 authorize 

 late 14c., auctorisen, autorisen, "give formal approval or sanction to," also "confirm as authentic or true; regard (a book...

 historic 

 historial (late 14c., from Late Latin historialis), which meant "belonging to history; dealing with history; literal, factual, authentic...

 year 

 Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) "year," from Proto-Germanic *jēr "year" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr, Gothic jer "year"), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- "year, season" (source al

 war 

 late Old English wyrre, werre "large-scale military conflict," from Old North French werre "war" (Old French guerre "difficulty, dispute; hostility; fight, combat, war;" Modern French guerre), from Frankish *werra, from Proto-Germanic *werz-a- (source also of Old Saxon werran, Ol

 hilarity 

 mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) "cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment," from hilaris "cheerful, merry," from Greek hilaros "cheerful, merry, joyous," related to hilaos "graceful, kindly," hilaskomai "to propitiate, appease, reconcile,"and probably from a suffix

 Share authentic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/authentic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/authentic">Etymology of authentic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of authentic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/authentic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of authentic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/authentic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of authentic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/authentic. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of authentic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/authentic (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near authentic 
 Austria 
 Austro- 
 autarchy 
 autarky 
 auteur 
 authentic 
 authenticate 
 authentication 
 authenticity 
 author 
 authoress 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix