URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lever
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:04:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lever - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lever - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lever 

 lever (n.) 

 "simple machine consisting of a rigid piece acted upon at different points by two forces," c. 1300, from Old French levier (12c.) "a lifter, a lever, crowbar," agent noun from lever "to raise" (10c.), from Latin levare "to raise," from levis "light" in weight, "not heavy," also, of motion, "quick, rapid, nimble;" of food, "easy to digest;" figuratively "slight, trifling, unimportant; fickle, inconsistent;" of punishments, etc., "not severe," from PIE root *legwh- "not heavy, having little weight." As a verb, 1856, from the noun.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to lever 

 cantilever (n.) 

 "projecting block or bracket from a building supporting a molding, balcony, etc.," 1660s, probably from cant (n.2) + lever , but earliest form (c. 1610) was cantlapper . First element also might be Spanish can "dog" as an architect's term for an end of timber jutting out of a wall, on which beams rested. Related: Cantilevered .

 leverage (n.) 

 1724, "action of a lever," from lever (n.) + -age . Meaning "power or force of a lever" is from 1827; figurative sense "advantage for accomplishing a purpose" is from 1858. The financial sense is attested by 1933, American English; as a verb in the financial sense by 1956. Related: Leveraged ; leverages ; leveraging .

 *legwh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "not heavy, having little weight."

 It might form all or part of: alleviate ; alleviation ; alto-rilievo ; carnival ; elevate ; elevation ; elevator ; leaven ; legerdemain ; leprechaun ; Levant ; levator ; levee ; lever ; levity ; levy (v.) "to raise or collect;" light (adj.1) "not heavy, having little weight;" lighter (n.1) "type of barge used in unloading;" lung ; relevance ; relevant ; releve ; relief ; relieve .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit laghuh "quick, small;" Greek elakhys "small," elaphros "light;" Latin levare "to raise," levis "light in weight, not heavy;" Old Church Slavonic liguku , Russian lëgkij , Polish lekki , Lithuanian lengvas "light in weight;" Old Irish lu "small," laigiu "smaller, worse;" Gothic leihts , Old English leoht "not heavy, light in weight."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 prize 

 "that which is obtained or offered as the reward of exertion or contest; reward or symbol of victory," spelling alteration of Middle English prise (c. 1300 in this sense), from Old French pris "price, value, worth; reward" (see price (n.)). Figuratively, "anything worth striving 

 levee 

 a lifting; an embankment," from French levée, literally "a rising" (as of the sun), noun use of fem. past participle of lever...

 dishpan 

 In 1922, Lever Brothers began to advertise Lux in this country to "rid your hands of that dishpan look."...

 drive 

 As a motor engine transmission lever position, by 1963....

 liver 

 English lifer, from Proto-Germanic *librn (source also of Old Norse lifr, Old Frisian livere, Middle Dutch levere, Dutch lever...

 oar 

 "long wooden lever for propelling a boat," Middle English or, from Old English ar, from Proto-Germanic *airo (source also...

 open 

 Old English open "not closed down, raised up" (of gates, eyelids, etc.), also "exposed, evident, well-known, public," often in a bad sense, "notorious, shameless;" from Proto-Germanic *upana-, literally "put or set up" (source also of Old Norse opinn, Swedish öppen, Danish aaben,

 peon 

 in Spanish America, "unskilled worker," formerly in Mexico especially "a type of serf held in servitude by his creditor until his debts are worked off,"  1826, from Mexican Spanish peon "agricultural laborer" (especially a debtor held in servitude by his creditor), from Span

 pone 

 1630s, "American Indian bread," earlier appone, ponap (1610s), from Powhatan (Algonquian) apan "something baked," from apen "she bakes." Later used in Southern U.S. for any type of cornbread, "especially coarse kinds used by the negroes and poorer whites, commonly called corn-pon

 Share lever 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lever Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lever">Etymology of lever by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lever. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lever Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lever," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lever. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lever." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lever. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lever." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lever (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lever 
 levator 
 levee 
 level 
 level-headed 
 leveller 
 lever 
 leverage 
 leveret 
 Levi 
 leviathan 
 levirate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix