URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragoman
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:16:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dragoman - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dragoman - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dragoman 

 dragoman (n.) 

 "an interpreter, a guide for travelers," c. 1300, drugeman , from Old French drugemen and directly from Medieval Latin dragumanus , from late Greek dragoumanos , from Arabic targuman "interpreter," from targama "interpret." Treated in English as a compound from man (n.), with plural -men .
 also from c. 1300 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 man 

 "a featherless plantigrade biped mammal of the genus Homo" [Century Dictionary], Old English man, mann "human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero;" also "servant, vassal, adult male considered as under the control of another person," from Proto-Germanic *mann- (source

 epitome 

 1520s, "an abstract; brief statement of the chief points of some writing," from French épitomé (16c.), from Latin epitome "an abridgment," from Greek epitome "an abridgment, a cutting on the surface; brief summary," from epitemnein "cut short, abridge," from epi "into" (see epi-)

 recalcitrant 

 "refusing to submit, not submissive or compliant," 1823, from French récalcitrant, literally "kicking back" (17c.-18c.), from Late Latin recalcitrantem (nominative recalcitrans), present participle of recalcitrare "to kick back" (of horses), also "be inaccessible," in Late Latin 

 asthma 

 "respiratory disorder characterized by paroxysms of labored breathing and a feeling of contraction in the chest," late 14c., asma, asma, from Latin asthma, from Greek asthma "shortness of breath, a panting," from azein "breathe hard," probably related to anemos "wind" (from PIE r

 endeavor 

 early 15c., "pains taken to attain an object," literally "in duty," from phrase put (oneself) in dever "make it one's duty" (a partial translation of Old French mettre en deveir "put in duty"), from Old French dever "duty," from Latin debere "to owe," originally, "keep something 

 virus 

 late 14c., "poisonous substance" (a sense now archaic), from Latin virus "poison, sap of plants, slimy liquid, a potent juice," from Proto-Italic *weis-o-(s-) "poison," which is probably from a PIE root *ueis-, perhaps originally meaning "to melt away, to flow," used of foul or m

 discrimination 

 1640s, "the making of distinctions, act of observing or marking a difference," from Late Latin discriminationem (nominative discriminatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of discriminare "to divide, separate" (see discriminate (v.)). Sense of "making invidious distincti

 skate 

 "type of flat, cartilaginous fish, a kind of ray," mid-14c., scate, in reference to the common European skate, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skata "skate," Danish skade, Faeroese skøta, a word of unknown origin. All skates are rays, but all rays are not called ska

 secular 

 c. 1300, seculer, in reference to clergy, "living in the world, not belonging to a religious order," also generally, "belonging to the state" (as opposed to the Church), from Old French seculer, seculare (Modern French séculier) and directly from Late Latin saecularis "worldly, s

 missionary 

 "one who is sent on a mission, person sent by ecclesiastical authority to labor for the propagation of the faith in a place where it has no indigenous organization," 1650s, from missionary (adj.). The phrase missionary position for "sexual intercourse arrangement in which the cou

 Share dragoman 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragoman Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragoman">Etymology of dragoman by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dragoman. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragoman Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dragoman," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragoman. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dragoman." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragoman. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dragoman." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dragoman (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dragoman 
 draftsman 
 drafty 
 drag 
 draggle 
 dragnet 
 dragoman 
 dragon 
 dragonfly 
 dragoon 
 dragster 
 drain 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix