URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tree
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:19:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tree - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tree - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tree 

 tree (n.) 

 "perennial plant growing from the ground with a self-supporting stem or trunk from which branches grow," Middle English tre , from Old English treo , treow "tree," also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake;" from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre , Old Saxon trio , Old Norse tre , Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o- , suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with specialized senses "wood, tree" and derivatives referring to objects made of wood.

 Not found in High German except as the derived word for "tar." For Dutch boom , German Baum , the usual words for "tree," see beam (n.). Middle English also had plural treen , adjective treen (Old English treowen "of a tree, wooden").

 The line which divides trees from shrubs is largely arbitrary, and dependent upon habit rather than size, the tree having a single trunk usually unbranched for some distance above the ground, while a shrub has usually several stems from the same root and each without a proper trunk. [Century Dictionary] 

 In early figurative use often of the trees in the Garden of Eden or the Tree of Life. In Old English and Middle English also mechanically, "thing made of pieces or frames of wood," especially the cross of the Crucifixion and later a gallows (such as Tyburn tree , the famous gallows outside London). The meaning "framework of a saddle" is from 1530s. A tree-nail (Middle English) was a wooden peg or pin used in ship-building.

 The meaning "representation of familial relationships in the form of a tree" is from c. 1300. Tree-hugger , contemptuous for "environmentalist" is attested by 1989.

 Minc'd Pyes do not grow upon every tree, 

 But search the Ovens for them, and there they be. 

 ["Poor Robin," Almanack, 1669] 

 tree (v.) 

 "chase up a tree," by 1833, from tree (n.). The meaning "take or have a tree-like form or shape" is from 1884. Related: Treed ; treeing .

 When quadruped animals of the venery or hunting kind are at rest, the stag is said to be harboured, the buck lodged the fox kennelled, the badger earthed, the otter vented or watched, the wild boar couched, the squirrel is at dray, the hare formed, the rabbit set, the marten-cat treed. [John Mayer, "Sportsman's Directory," 1817] 
 also from 1833 

 Entries linking to tree 

 beam (n.) 

 Old English beam, "living tree," but by late 10c. also "rafter, post, ship's timber," from Proto-Germanic *baumaz "tree" (source also of Old Frisian bam "tree, gallows, beam," Middle Dutch boom , Old High German boum , German Baum "tree," and perhaps also (with unexplained sound changes) Old Norse baðmr , Gothic bagms ). This is of uncertain etymology (according to Boutkan probably a substrate word). The shift from *-au- to -ea- is regular in Old English.

 The meaning "ray of light" developed in Old English, probably because beam was used by Bede to render Latin columna (lucis) , the Biblical "pillar of fire." The meaning "directed flow of radiation" is from 1906. To be on the beam "going in the right direction" (1941) originally was an aviator's term for "to follow the course indicated by a radio beam."

 The nautical sense of "one of the horizontal transverse timbers holding a ship together" is from early 13c., hence "greatest breadth of a ship," and slang broad in the beam , by 1894 of ships; of persons, "wide-hipped," by 1938.

 apple-tree (n.) 

 Old English æpeltreow ; see apple + tree (n.). Another name for it was Old English apuldore , which survived into Middle English and is preserved in place names ( Appledore ).

 axle-tree 
 Coventry 
 gantry 
 oak 
 palm-tree 
 pine-tree 
 saddletree 
 shade-tree 
 swingletree 
 tree-frog 
 tree-house 
 treeless 
 tree-ring 
 tree-top 
 truth 
 *deru- 
 See All Related Words (18) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gantry 

 also gauntree, 1570s, "four-footed stand for a barrel," probably from Old North French gantier (Old French chantier, 13c., "store-room, stock-room"), from Latin cantherius "rafter, frame," also "a gelding," from Greek kanthelios "pack ass," which is related to kanthelion "rafter,

 oak 

 "tree or shrub of the genus Quercus," Middle English oke, from Old English ac "oak tree" and in part from cognate Old Norse eik, both from Proto-Germanic *aiks (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian ek, Middle Dutch eike, Dutch eik, Old High German eih, German Eiche, Swedish e

 truth 

 Middle English truþ, from Old English triewð (West Saxon), treowð (Mercian) "faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty; veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant," from Germanic abstract noun *treuwitho, from Proto-Germanic treuwaz "having or characterized by good faith." Th

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic...*widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu...- "tree, wood" (source also of Welsh gwydd "trees," Gaelic fiodh- "wood, timber," Old Irish fid "tree, wood")....

 sycamore 

 mid-14c., sicamour "mulberry-leaved fig tree," from Old French sicamor, sagremore, from Latin sycomorus, from Greek sykomoros..."African fig-tree," literally "fig-mulberry," from sykon "fig" (see fig) + moron (see mulberry)....Spelling apparently influenced by sycamine "black mulberry tree," which is from Greek sykcaminos, which also is mentioned...For the sake of clarity, some writers have used the more Hellenic sycomore in reference to the Biblical tree....

 olive 

 c. 1200, "olive tree," from Old French olive "olive, olive tree" (13c.) or directly from Latin oliva "olive, olive tree,"...from Greek elaia "olive tree, olive," probably from the same Aegean language (perhaps Cretan) as Armenian ewi "oil."...Applied to the fruit or berry of the tree in English from late 14c. As the color of the unripe olive from 17c....

 citrus 

 any tree of the genus Citrus, or its fruit, 1825, from the Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus "citron tree," the...name of an African tree with aromatic wood and lemon-like fruit, the first citrus fruit to become available in the West....The name, like the tree, is probably of Asiatic origin [OED] or from a lost non-IE Mediterranean language [de Vaan]....

 birch 

 "hardy, slender northern forest tree noted for its white bark," Old English berc, beorc (also the name of the rune for "b"), from Proto-Germanic *berkjon (source also of Old Saxon birka, Old Norse börk, Danish birk, Swedish and Icelandic björk (which is also a girl's given name),

 guide 

 late 14c., "to lead, direct, conduct," from Old French guider "to guide, lead, conduct" (14c.), earlier guier, from Frankish *witan "show the way" or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *witanan "to look after, guard, ascribe to, reproach" (source also of German weisen

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 Share tree 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tree Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tree">Etymology of tree by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tree. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tree Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tree," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tree. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tree." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tree. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tree." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tree (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tree 
 treatment 
 treaty 
 treble 
 trebuchet 
 trecento 
 tree 
 tree-frog 
 tree-house 
 treeless 
 tree-ring 
 tree-top 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix