URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hero
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:02:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hero - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hero - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hero 

 hero (n.1) 

 late 14c., "man of superhuman strength or physical courage," from Old French heroe (14c., Modern French héros ), from Latin heros (plural heroes ) "hero, demi-god, illustrious man," from Greek hērōs (plural hērōes ) "demi-god." This is of uncertain origin; according to an old theory perhaps originally "defender, protector" and (Pokorny, Watkins) from PIE root *ser- (1) "to protect," but Beekes writes that it is "Probably a Pre-Greek word."

 In Homer, of the Greeks before Troy, then a comprehensive term used of warriors generally, also of all free men in the Heroic Age. In classical mythology from at least the time of Hesiod (8c. B.C.E.) "man born from a god and a mortal," especially one who had done service to mankind; with the exception of Heracles limited to local deities and patrons of cities.

 In English the meaning "man who exhibits great bravery" in any course of action is from 1660s. The sense of "chief male character in a play, story, etc." is recorded by 1690s. Hero-worship is from 1713 in reference to ancient cults and mysteries; of living men by 1830s.
 also from late 14c. 

 hero (n.2) 

 1955, the New York City term for a sandwich elsewhere called submarine , grinder , poor boy (New Orleans), or hoagie (Philadelphia); origin unknown, perhaps so called for its great size (from hero (n.1)), or a folk-etymology alteration of Greek gyro as a type of sandwich.
 also from 1955 

 Entries linking to hero 

 grinder (n.) 

 Old English grindere "one who grinds (grain);" agent noun from grind (v.). Meaning "molar tooth" is late 14c. (Old English had grindetoð ). Meaning "machine for milling" is from 1660s; of persons, from late 15c. "Large sandwich" sense is from 1954, American English, though the exact signification is uncertain (perhaps from the amount of chewing required to eat one).

 gyro (n.) 

 sandwich made from roasted lamb, 1971, originally in reference to the meat itself, as roasted on a rotating spit, from Modern Greek gyros "a circle" (see gyre (n.)). Mistaken in English for a plural and shorn of its -s .

 hoagie 
 submarine 
 anti-hero 
 Hera 
 Herodian 
 heroic 
 heroin 
 heroine 
 heroism 
 superhero 
 *ser- 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hoagie 

 American English (originally Philadelphia) word for "hero sandwich, large sandwich made from a long, split roll;" originally hoggie (c. 1936), traditionally said to be named for Big Band songwriter Hoagland Howard "Hoagy" Carmichael (1899-1981), but the use of the word pre-dates 

 submarine 

 also sub-marine, "situated, acting, or living under the sea," 1640s, from sub- "under, beneath" + marine (adj.)...."vessel that can remain underwater and be propelled when entirely submerged," 1899, short for earlier submarine boat (1640s, as a possibility), submarine vessel (173

 heroic 

 1540s, "having or displaying the qualities of a hero," shortened from heroical (early 15c., also heroycus) "noble, magnanimous," from Latin heroicus "of a hero, heroic, mythical," from Greek hērōikos "of or for a hero, pertaining to heroes," from hērōs (see hero (n.1)). In some m

 Prince Charming 

 1837, from French Roi Charmant, name of the hero of Comtesse d'Aulnoy's "L'Oiseau Bleu" (1697)....shining armor, or a sighing troubadour, she does hope, if she is normal and has the normal dreams of a girl, to find her hero...

 Oedipal 

 Oedipus complex (1910), coined by Freud from Sophocles' play "Oedipus Tyrannus," in which the title character, the Theban hero...

 Nashville 

 Revolutionary War hero killed at the Battle of Germantown....

 Rafflesia 

 Raffles, hero of "The Amateur Cracksman" (1899) and later books by E.W. Hornung....

 champion 

 early 13c., "doughty fighting man, valorous combatant," also (c. 1300) "one who fights on behalf of another or others, one who undertakes to defend a cause," from Old French champion "combatant, champion in single combat" (12c.), from Late Latin campionem (nominative campio) "gla

 torpedo 

 1520s, "electric ray" (flat fish that produces an electric charge to stun prey or for defense), from Latin torpedo "electric ray," originally "numbness, sluggishness" (the fish so called from the effect of being jolted by the ray's electric discharges), from torpere "be numb" (fr

 persona 

 1917, "outward or social personality," a Jungian psychology term, from Latin persona "person" (see person). Used earlier (1909) by Ezra Pound in the sense "literary character representing voice of the author." Persona grata is Late Latin, literally "an acceptable person," origina

 Share hero 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hero Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hero">Etymology of hero by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hero. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hero Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hero," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hero. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hero." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hero. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hero." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hero (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hero 
 hermitage 
 hern 
 hernia 
 hernial 
 herniation 
 hero 
 Herodian 
 heroic 
 heroics 
 heroin 
 heroine 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix