URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mutton
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:21:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mutton - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mutton - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mutton 

 mutton (n.) 

 "flesh of sheep used as food," c. 1300, mouton (c. 1200 as a surname), from Old French moton "mutton; ram, wether, sheep" (12c., Modern French mouton ), from Medieval Latin multonem (8c.), probably [OED] from Gallo-Roman *multo-s , accusative of Celtic *multo "sheep" (source also of Old Irish molt "wether," Mid-Breton mout , Welsh mollt ), which is perhaps from PIE root *mel- (1) "soft."

 The same word also was borrowed into Italian as montone "a sheep," and mutton in Middle English also could mean "a sheep" (early 14c.). Transferred slang sense of "food for lust, loose women, prostitutes" (1510s) led to extensive British slang uses down to the present day for woman variously regarded as seeking lovers or as lust objects. Mutton chop "cut of mutton (usually containing a rib) for cooking" is from 1720; as a style of side whiskers from 1865, so called for the shape (narrow and prolonged at one end and rounded at the other). Shoulder of mutton as a common food figures largely in the 17c.-19c. English imagination and is the source of a number of images and proverbs; sails and land-parcels were named for the shape of it.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to mutton 

 mouton enrage (n.) 

 "A normally calm person who has become suddenly enraged or violent" [OED], 1932, from French mouton enragé , literally "angry sheep." See mutton + enrage .

 mutt (n.) 

 1901, "stupid or foolish person," probably a shortening of muttonhead (1803) in the same sense; see mutton and compare meathead , etc. Mutt was used by 1898 of a dog, especially a stupid one, and perhaps this is the same word formed independently ( muttonhead also was used of stupid animals), or else a separate word of unknown derivation. Wright's "English Dialect Dictionary" (1900) has " Mutton! used in scolding a dog, prob. in allusion to the offence of sheep-worrying."

 "That dog ain't no mutt," McManus would say as he stood behind the bar opening oysters; "no an he ain't no rube! Say! he's in it all the time when Charley trims the steaks." [Robert W. Chambers, "The Haunts of Men," 1898]

 Used by 1910 in dog fancier publications to refer to a non-purebred animal.

 Mutt and Jeff is by 1917 in reference to "a pair of stupid men, affable losers," or to one tall (Mutt) and one short (Jeff), from the comic strip characters from the heyday of the newspaper funny pages, Augustus Mutt and Jim Jeffries , in U.S. cartoonist Henry Conway ("Bud") Fisher's strip, which debuted in 1907.

 muttonhead 
 sheep 
 *mel- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sheep 

 ruminant mammal of the genus Ovis, as a domestic species, one of the animals most useful to humans, Old English sceap, scep, Northumbrian scap, from West Germanic *skæpan (source also of Old Saxon scap, Old Frisian skep, Middle Low German schap, Middle Dutch scaep, Dutch schaap, 

 cold shoulder 

 probably originally a literal figure (see cold (adj.)), but commonly used with a punning reference to "cold shoulder of mutton...poor knight, who, to avoid the snares of bribery and dependence, was found making a second dinner from a cold shoulder of mutton...

 stearin 

 glycerine of stearic acid, white crystalline compound found in animal and vegetable fats (it was derived from mutton fat,...

 lace 

 Laced mutton was "an old word for a whore" [Johnson]....

 filet 

 The 'Chateaubriand,' the 'entrecôte,' and the 'filet mignon' (of mutton), with other forms, are all due to the more enlarged...

 shepherd 

 Shepherd's pie is recorded from 1877; so called because the meat in it was typically mutton or lamb....

 tame 

 c. 1200, of persons, "in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior;" mid-13c., of animals, "domesticated, reclaimed from wildness," also, of persons, "meek, gentle-natured, compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities," from oblique forms of Old Engl

 team 

 Old English team "descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft animals yoked together," from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (source also of Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam "bridle; progeny, line of descent," Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, Germa

 meat 

 Middle English mēte, from Old English mete "food, nourishment, sustenance" (paired with drink), "item of food; animal food, fodder," also "a meal, repast," from Proto-Germanic *mati (source also of Old Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats

 grace 

 late 12c., "God's unmerited favor, love, or help," from Old French grace "pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks; elegance, virtue" (12c., Modern French grâce), from Latin gratia "favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will, gratitude" (source of Italian grazia, Spanis

 Share mutton 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mutton Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mutton">Etymology of mutton by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mutton. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mutton Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mutton," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mutton. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mutton." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mutton. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mutton." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mutton (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mutton 
 mutinous 
 mutiny 
 mutism 
 mutt 
 mutter 
 mutton 
 muttonhead 
 mutual 
 mutualism 
 mutualistic 
 mutuality 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix