URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/wide
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:28:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Wide - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Wide - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of wide 

 wide (adj.) 

 "having relatively great extension from side to side; having a certain or specified extension from side to side;" Old English wid , also "vast, long," also used of time; from Proto-Germanic *widaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian wid , Old Norse viðr , Dutch wijd , Old High German wit , German weit ), which is perhaps (Watkins) from PIE *wi-ito- , from root *wi- "apart, away, in half."

 The meaning "distended, expanded, spread apart" is attested by c. 1500; the sense of "embracing many subjects" is from 1530s. The meaning "missing the intended target" is from 1580s. Of a dialect, "characterized by a broad accent," by mid-15c.

 As a second element in compounds (such as nationwide , worldwide ) and meaning "extending through the whole of," it is from late Old English. Wide-screen in reference to cinema projection is by 1931.

 wide (adv.) 

 "to a distance; with a large space between," Old English wide ; see wide (adj.). By 1580s as "away from or to the side of a mark."

 Wide open "unguarded, exposed to attack" is by 1915, originally in pugilism. Late Old English and Middle English also had widewhere "far and wide, everywhere."

 Entries linking to wide 

 nationwide (adj.) 

 also nation-wide , "extending over or affecting a whole nation," 1895, from nation + wide .

 worldwide (adj.) 

 also world-wide , "as wide as the world, extending over the whole world," 1630s, from world (n.) + wide (adj.).

 broad 
 far 
 wide-awake 
 wide-eyed 
 widely 
 widen 
 wideness 
 widespread 
 width 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 broad 

 Old English brad "wide, not narrow," also "flat, open, extended," from Proto-Germanic *braidi- (source also of Old Frisian bred, Old Norse breiðr, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brouþs), which is of unknown origin. Not found outside Germanic languages. There is no clear distin

 narrow 

 Middle English narwe, from Old English nearu "of little width, not wide or broad; constricted, limited; petty; causing difficulty, oppressive; strict, severe," from West Germanic *narwaz "narrowness" (source also of Frisian nar, Old Saxon naru, Middle Dutch nare, Dutch naar) whic

 Eurydice 

 wife of Orpheus in Greek mythology, from Latinized form of Greek Eurydike, literally "wide justice," from eurys "wide" (see...

 lax 

 c. 1400, "loose" (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus "wide, spacious, roomy," figuratively "loose, free, wide" (also...

 straddle 

 1560s, "spread the legs wide, stand or walk with the legs wide apart," probably an alteration of striddle (mid-15c.), a frequentative...

 gap 

 , a breach," mid-13c. in place names, from Old Norse gap "chasm, empty space," related to gapa "to gape, open the mouth wide...Dutch, Dutch gapen, German gaffen "to gape, stare," Swedish gapa, Danish gabe), from PIE root *ghieh- "to yawn, gape, be wide...

 full 

 Old English full "containing all that can be received; having eaten or drunk to repletion; filled; perfect, entire, utter," from Proto-Germanic *fullaz "full" (source also of Old Saxon full, Old Frisian ful, Dutch vol, Old High German fol, German voll, Old Norse fullr, Gothic ful

 blanket 

 c. 1300, "coarse white woolen stuff," also "a large oblong piece of woolen cloth used for warmth as a bed-covering" (also as a cover for horses), from Old French blanchet "light wool or flannel cloth; an article made of this material," diminutive of blanc "white" (see blank (adj.

 board 

 "piece of timber sawn flat and thin, longer than it is wide, wider than it is thick, narrower than a plank;" Old English bord "a plank, flat surface," from Proto-Germanic *burdam (source also of Old Norse borð "plank," Dutch bord "board," Gothic fotu-baurd "foot-stool," German Br

 Share wide 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/wide Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/wide">Etymology of wide by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of wide. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/wide Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of wide," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/wide. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of wide." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/wide. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of wide." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/wide (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near wide 
 wickedness 
 wicker 
 wickerwork 
 wicket 
 widdershins 
 wide 
 wide-awake 
 wide-eyed 
 widely 
 widen 
 wideness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix