URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/raven
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:24:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Raven - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Raven - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of raven 

 raven (n.) 

 Late Old English ræfen , refen , earlier hræfn (Mercian), hrefn, hræfn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *khrabanaz (source also of Old Norse hrafn , Danish ravn , Dutch raaf , Old High German hraban , German Rabe "raven," Old English hroc "rook"), from a PIE root imitative of harsh sounds (compare Latin crepare "to creak, clatter," cornix "crow," corvus "raven;" Greek korax "raven," korōnē "crow;" Old Church Slavonic kruku "raven;" Lithuanian krauklys "crow"). Old English, by a normal alteration of -fn , also used hræmn , hremm .

 A larger species of crow common in Europe and Asia, noted for its lustrous black plumage and raucous voice; the raven is "popularly regarded as a bird of evil omen and mysterious character" [OED].

 Raven mythology shows considerable homogeneity throughout the whole area [northern regions of the northern hemisphere] in spite of differences in detail. The Raven peeps forth from the mists of time and the thickets of mythology, as a bird of slaughter, a storm bird, a sun and fire bird, a messenger, an oracular figure and a craftsman or culture hero. [Edward A. Armstrong, "The Folklore of Birds," 1958]

 The Quran connects the raven with Cain's murder of Abel, but in Christianity the bird plays a positive role in the stories of St. Benedict, St. Paul the Hermit, St. Vincent, etc. Poe's poem was published in 1845. It was anciently believed to live to a great age but also to be wanting in parental care. The raven standard was the flag of the Danish vikings. The vikings, like Noah, were said to have used the raven to find land when at sea. "When uncertain of their course they let one loose, and steered the vessel in his track, deeming that the land lay in the direction of his flight; if he returned to the ship, it was supposed to be at a distance" [Charles Swainson, "The Folk Lore and Provincial Names of British Birds," London, 1886]. As an English name for the constellation Corvus by late 14c.

 raven (adj.) 

 "black as a raven, lustrously black," 1630s, from raven (n.).
 also from 1630s 

 raven (v.) 

 "to prey, to plunder, devour greedily," mid-14c., also ravine , from Old French raviner , ravinier "to seize, pillage; to sweep down, cascade," from Latin rapina "an act of robbery, plundering," from rapere "seize, carry off, rob" (see rapid ). Related: Ravened ; ravening . Obsolete except as a past-participle adjective.
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to raven 

 rapid (adj.) 

 1630s, "moving or doing quickly, capable of great speed," from French rapide (17c.) and directly from Latin rapidus "hasty, swift; snatching; fierce, impetuous," from rapere "hurry away, carry off, seize, plunder," from PIE root *rep- "to snatch" (source also of Greek ereptomai "devour," harpazein "snatch away," Lithuanian raplės "tongs").

 Meaning "happening in a short time, coming quickly into existence" is from 1780. Related: Rapidly ; rapidness . Rapid-fire (adj.) 1890 in reference to guns, figurative or transferred use by 1900; the noun phrase is by 1836. Rapid-transit first attested 1852, in reference to street railways; rapid eye movement , associated with a certain phase of sleep, is from 1906.

 ravening (adj.) 

 "voracious, savage," late 14c., present-participle adjective from an extinct verb ravine , raven "to prey, to plunder, devour greedily" (mid-14c.), from Old French raviner , ravinier "to seize, pillage" (see raven (v.)). It is etymologically related to ravenous , but not to raven (n.). Related: Raveningly .

 corvine 
 craven 
 crepitation 
 crevice 
 crown 
 decrepit 
 decrepitation 
 decrepitude 
 discrepancy 
 increpation 
 ravine 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 corvine 

 "pertaining to or having the character of crows and ravens," 1650s, from Latin corvinus "of or pertaining to the raven," from corvus "a raven," related to corax (Greek korax), all imitative of its harsh sound (see raven (n.)). According to fable, originally white but changed to b

 craven 

 c. 1200, cravant "defeated, vanquished, overcome, conquered," apparently adapted from Old French cravent "defeated, beaten," past participle of cravanter "to strike down, to fall down," from Latin crepare "to crack, creak" (see raven). The sense, apparently affected by crave, shi

 crown 

 early 12c., coroune, croune, "royal crown, ornament for the head as a symbol of sovereignty," from Anglo-French coroune, Old French corone (13c., Modern French couronne) and directly from Latin corona "crown," originally "wreath, garland," related to Greek korōnē "anything curved

 wolfram 

 Or perhaps the word is originally a personal name, "wolf-raven."...

 rave 

 early 14c., raven, "to show signs of madness or delirium, to rage in speech," from Old French raver, variant of resver "to...

 rove 

 .); possibly a Midlands dialectal variant of northern English and Scottish rave "to wander, stray," from Middle English raven...

 eat 

 Middle English eten, from Old English etan (class V strong verb; past tense æt, past participle eten) "consume food; devour, consume," from Proto-Germanic *etan (source also of Old Frisian ita, Old Saxon etan, Middle Dutch eten, Dutch eten, Old High German ezzan, German essen, Ol

 tea 

 1650s, tay, also in early spellings thea, tey, tee and at first pronounced so as to rhyme with obey; the modern pronunciation predominates from mid-18c. But earlier in English as chaa (1590s), also cha, tcha, chia, cia. The two forms of the word reflect two paths of transmission:

 seize 

 mid-13c., seisen, "take possession, take possession of" (land, goods, etc.) by force or authority, from Old French seisir "to take possession of, take by force; put in possession of, bestow upon" (Modern French saisir), from Late Latin sacire (8c.), which generally is held to be 

 prey 

 mid-13c., preie, "animal hunted for food, that which is seized by any carnivorous animal to be devoured" (also, figuratively, of souls captured by Satan, etc.), also "goods taken in war," from Old French preie "booty, animal taken in the chase" (mid-12c., Modern French proie), fr

 Share raven 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/raven Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/raven">Etymology of raven by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of raven. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/raven Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of raven," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/raven. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of raven." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/raven. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of raven." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/raven (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near raven 
 raunch 
 raunchy 
 ravage 
 rave 
 ravel 
 raven 
 ravening 
 ravenous 
 raver 
 ravine 
 raving 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix