URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/elk
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:33:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Elk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Elk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of elk 

 elk (n.) 

 late Old English elch , from Old Norse elgr or from an alteration of Old English elh , eolh (perhaps via French scribes), or possibly from Middle High German elch (OED's suggestion), all from Proto-Germanic *elkh- (source also of Old High German elaho ). The modern word "is not the normal phonetic representative" of the Old English one [OED].

 The Germanic words are related to the general word for "deer" in Balto-Slavic (such as Russian losu , Czech los ; also see eland ), from PIE *olki- , perhaps with reference to the reddish color from root *el- (2) "red, brown" (in animal and tree names); compare Sanskrit harina- "deer," from hari- "reddish-brown." Greek alke and Latin alces probably are Germanic loan-words. Applied to similar-looking but unrelated animals in North America. Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks founded N.Y.C. 1868, originally a society of actors and writers.

 Entries linking to elk 

 eland (n.) 

 Cape elk, large South African antelope, 1786, from Dutch eland "elk," probably from a Baltic source akin to Lithuanian elnias "deer," from PIE *el- (2) "red, brown" (see elk ), cognate with first element in Greek Elaphebolion , name of the ninth month of the Attic year (corresponding to late March-early April), literally "deer-hunting (month)." Borrowed earlier in English as ellan (1610s, via French), ellend (from the German form of the word).

 alder (n.) 

 tree related to the birch, Old English alor "alder," from Proto-Germanic *aliso (source also of Old Norse ölr , Danish elle , Swedish al , Dutch els , German erle ), from the ancient PIE name of the tree (source also of Russian olicha , Polish olcha , Latin alnus (French aune ), Lithuanian alksnis ), from root *el- (2) "red, brown," used in forming animal and tree names (see elk ).

 The unetymological -d- was added 14c.; the historical form aller survived until 18c. in literary English and persists in dialects, such as Lancashire owler , which is partly from Norse.

 elm 
 hellebore 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 elm 

 common name of a type of trees noted for majestic height and the wide-spreading and gracefully curving branches, Old English elm, from Proto-Germanic *elmaz (source also of Danish elm, Old Norse almr, Old High German elme), perhaps from PIE root *el- (2) "red, brown" (see elk); c

 hellebore 

 late 14c., from Old French ellebore, from Latin elleborus, from Greek helleboros, the name given to various plants of both poisonous and medicinal qualities, reputed to cure madness; of uncertain origin. Perhaps literally "plant eaten by fawns," from Greek ellos/hellos "fawn" (fr

 moose 

 "large quadruped mammal of northern North America noted for its enormous horns," 1610s, from an Algonquian language, probably Narragansett moos or Abenaki moz (compare Penobscot muns, Ojibwa mooz, Unami Delaware /mo:s/), said by early sources to be from moosu "he strips off," sup

 each 

 From a common West Germanic expression *aina-galīk (source also of Dutch elk, Old Frisian ellik, Old High German iogilih,...

 deer 

 Old English deor "wild animal, beast, any wild quadruped," in early Middle English also used of ants and fish, from Proto-Germanic *deuzam, the general Germanic word for "animal" (as opposed to man), but often restricted to "wild animal" (source also of Old Frisian diar, Dutch di

 rede 

 "counsel, advice," Old English ræd "advice, counsel," from Proto-Germanic *redin (source also of Old Saxon rad "advice, counsel, help, advantage," Old Frisian red "council, advice," Dutch raad "advice, counsel," German Rat "advice, counsel," Old Norse rað "advice, consideration, 

 reed 

 "tall, broad-leafed grass growing on the margins of streams or in other wet places," Middle English rēd, rede, from Old English hreod "reed, rush," from Proto-Germanic *kreut- "reed" (source also of Old Saxon hraid, Old Frisian hriad, Middle Dutch ried, Dutch riet, Old High Germa

 hart 

 Middle English hert, from Old English heorot "hart, stag, male of the red deer," from Proto-Germanic *herutaz (source also of Old Saxon hirot, Old Frisian and Dutch hert "stag, deer," Old High German hiruz, Old Norse hjörtr, German Hirsch "deer, stag, hart"), perhaps from PIE *ke

 hind 

 c. 1300, "pertaining to the rear, back, posterior," perhaps a back-formation from Old English behindan "back, behind," used as adverb and preposition (see behind), or from or influenced by Old English hindan (adv.) "from behind," from Proto-Germanic *hind- "behind" (cognate with 

 stag 

 "adult male of the deer," especially one at 4 or 5 years, late 12c., stagge, which is probably from Old English stagga "a stag," from Proto-Germanic *stag-, from PIE root *stegh- "to stick, prick, sting," and probably so called for its tines. The Old Norse equivalent was used of 

 Share elk 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/elk Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/elk">Etymology of elk by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of elk. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/elk Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of elk," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/elk. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of elk." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/elk. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of elk." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/elk (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near elk 
 elitism 
 elitist 
 elixir 
 Elizabeth 
 Elizabethan 
 elk 
 ell 
 Ella 
 -ella 
 Ellen 
 ellipse 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix