URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sesqui-
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:04:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sesqui- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Sesqui- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sesqui- 

 sesqui- 

 word-forming element meaning usually "one half more" than the indicated unit, from Latin sesqui- , sesque- "one and a half; one-half more," contraction of *semis-que- "a half in addition," from * semis "a half" (see semi- ) + -que "and" (from PIE root *kwe "and, -ever," for which see ubiquity ). Latin semi- had a tendency to get partly swallowed in compounds; compare these derivatives listed in de Vaan: selibra "half a libra," semodius "half a modius," sestertius "having the value of two-and-a-half" (as a noun, the name of a silver Roman coin, short for sestertius nummus ), contracted from *semistertius ; simbella "coin worth half a libella;" sincipitis "a half-head."

 Entries linking to sesqui- 

 ubiquity (n.) 

 "omnipresence, capacity of being in an indefinite number of places at the same time," 1570s, originally theological (of God, Christ), from Modern Latin ubiquitas , from Latin ubique "everywhere," from ubi "where" (see ubi ). Second element is - que "and," also "any, also, ever," as a suffix giving universal meaning to the word it is attached to, from PIE root *kwe "and, -ever" (source also of Hittite -kku "now, even, and;" Sanskrit -ca , Avestan -ca "and, also, if;" Greek -te "and;" Gothic -uh "and, also," nih "if not").

 Related: Ubiquitary "being everywhere or in all places" (1590s); ubiquitarian "one who exists everywhere" (1727).

 sesquicentennial (adj.) 

 "pertaining to a century and a half," 1875, from sesqui- + centennial (adj.). First in a notice of a "Sesqui-Centennial gathering" of descendants of Isaac and Ann Jackson, who settled in London Grove, Chester County, Pa., in 1725. As a noun, from 1880, first in reference to Baltimore's, probably short for sesquicentennial celebration , etc. 

 Resolution to close the City Hall offices during the Sesqui-Centennial after 12 M on the 12th 13th 11th 15th and 16th of October [Journal of Proceedings of the First Branch City Council of Baltimore, Tuesday, Oct. 5, 1880]

 The alternative noun sesquicentenary or sesqui-centenary is attested from 1896 (in reference to Princeton's).

 sesquipedalian 
 semi- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sesquipedalian 

 1610s, "person or thing a foot and a half long," from Latin sesquipedalia "a foot-and-a-half long," from sesqui- "half as much again" (see sesqui-) + stem of pes "foot" (from PIE root *ped- "foot"). As an adjective in English from 1650s, in reference to words, containing or measu

 congregation 

 late-14c., congregacioun, "a gathering, assembly, a crowd; an organized group, as of a religious order or body of scholars; act of congregating," from Old French congregacion (12c., Modern French congrégation) and directly from Latin congregationem (nominative congregatio) "an as

 nervous 

 late 14c., "containing nerves; affecting the sinews" (the latter sense now obsolete); from Latin nervosus "sinewy, vigorous," from nervus "sinew, nerve" (see nerve (n.)). The meaning "of or belonging to the nerves" in the modern anatomical sense is from 1660s. From 1630s it was u

 orphan 

 "a child bereaved of one or both parents, generally the latter," c. 1300, from Late Latin orphanus "parentless child" (source of Old French orfeno, orphenin, Italian orfano), from Greek orphanos "orphaned, without parents, fatherless," literally "deprived," from orphos "bereft." 

 bias 

 1520s, "oblique or diagonal line," from French biais "a slant, a slope, an oblique," also figuratively, "an expedient, means" (13c., originally in Old French a past-participle adjective, "sideways, askance, against the grain"), a word of unknown origin. Probably it came to French

 inchoate 

 "recently or just begun," 1530s, from Latin inchoatus, past participle of inchoare, alteration of incohare "commence, begin," probably originally "to hitch up," traditionally derived from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + a verb from cohum "strap (fastened to the oxen's yoke),"

 supplication 

 late 14c., supplicacioun, "earnest request, entreaty, plea," from Old French suplicacion "humble request" and directly from Latin supplicationem (nominative supplicatio) "a public prayer, thanksgiving day," noun of action from past-participle stem of supplicare "to beg humbly" (i

 chauvinism 

 1840, "exaggerated, blind nationalism; patriotism degenerated into a vice," from French chauvinisme (1839), from the character Nicholas Chauvin, soldier of Napoleon's Grand Armee, who idolized Napoleon and the Empire long after it was history, in the Cogniards' popular 1831 vaude

 hold 

 Middle English holden, earlier halden, from Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), "to contain; to grasp; to retain (liquid, etc.); to observe, fulfill (a custom, etc.); to have as one's own; to have in mind (of opinions, etc.); to possess, control, rule; to detain, 

 aftermath 

 1520s, originally "a second crop of grass grown on the same land after the first had been harvested," from after + -math, which is from Old English mæð "a mowing, cutting of grass" (from PIE root *me- (4) "to cut down grass or grain"). Other words for it were aftercrop (1560s), a

 Share sesqui- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sesqui- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sesqui-">Etymology of sesqui- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sesqui-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sesqui- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sesqui-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sesqui-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sesqui-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sesqui-. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sesqui-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sesqui- (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sesqui- 
 servility 
 serving 
 servitude 
 servo 
 sesame 
 sesqui- 
 sesquicentennial 
 sesquipedalian 
 sessile 
 session 
 sestet 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix