URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ego
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:21:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ego - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ego - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ego 

 ego (n.) 

 by 1707, in metaphysics, "the self; that which feels, acts, or thinks," from Latin ego "I" (cognate with Old English ic ; see I ); its use is implied in egoity .

 They that have pleaded against 
 Propriety , and would have 
 all things common in this World, have forgotten that there is a 
 Propriety , in our present 
 Egoity , and Natural Constitution, which rendereth some accidental 
 Propriety necessary to us (etc.) ["The Practical Works of the Late Reverend and Pious Mr. Richard Baxter," London, 1707] 

 Psychoanalytic (Freudian) sense is from 1894; sense of "conceit" is by 1891. Ego-trip is attested by 1969, from trip (n.). Related: egoical .

 In the book of Egoism it is written, Possession without obligation to the object possessed approaches felicity. [George Meredith, "The Egoist," 1879] 
 also from 1707 

 Entries linking to ego 

 I (pron.) 

 12c., a shortening of Old English ic , the first person singular nominative pronoun, from Proto-Germanic *ek (source also of Old Frisian ik , Old Norse ek , Norwegian eg , Danish jeg , Old High German ih , German ich , Gothic ik ), from PIE *eg- "I," nominative form of the first person singular pronoun (source also of Sanskrit aham , Hittite uk , Latin ego (source of French je ), Greek ego , Russian ja , Lithuanian aš ).

 Reduced to i by mid-12c. in northern England, later everywhere; the form ich or ik , especially before vowels, lingered in northern England until c. 1400 and survived in southern dialects until 18c. It began to be capitalized mid-13c. to mark it as a distinct word and avoid misreading in handwritten manuscripts.

 The reason for writing 
 I is ... the orthographic habit in the middle ages of using a 'long i' (that is, 
 j or 
 I ) whenever the letter was isolated or formed the last letter of a group; the numeral 'one' was written 
 j or 
 I (and three 
 iij , etc.), just as much as the pronoun. [Otto Jespersen, "Growth and Structure of the English Language," p.233] 

 The dot on the "small" letter -i- began to appear in 11c. Latin manuscripts to distinguish the letter from the stroke of another letter (such as -m- or -n- ). Originally a diacritic, it was reduced to a dot with the introduction of Roman type fonts. The letter -y- also was written with a top dot in Old English and early Middle English, during the centuries when it tended to be written with a closed loop at the top and thus was almost indistinguishable from the lower-case thorn (þ). In names of U.S. highways (by 1966) it is short for Interstate (adj.).

 trip (n.) 

 "act or action of tripping" (transitive), early 14c., from trip (v.); the sense of "a short journey or voyage" is from mid-15c.; the exact connection to the earlier sense is uncertain. The meaning "psychedelic drug experience" is attested from 1959 as a noun; the verb in this sense is from 1966, from the noun.

 alter ego 
 egocentric 
 egoism 
 egoist 
 egomania 
 egotheism 
 egotism 
 egotist 
 egotize 
 super-ego 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 egoism 

 1785, in metaphysics, "the theory that a person has no proof that anything exists outside his own mind," from French égoisme (1755), from Modern Latin egoismus, from Latin ego (see ego). Meaning "doing or seeking of that which affords pleasure or advances interest" is from 1800; 

 egomania 

 "obsessive self-centeredness," 1825 (in a letter of English critic William Sidney Walker, published in 1852), from ego + mania. Not in common use before 1890s, where it translated German Ich-Sucht. [The egomaniac, as opposed to the megalomaniac,] does not regard it as necessary 

 egotism 

 1714, "too frequent use of 'I'," from ego + -ism. First used by Joseph Addison, who credits the term to "Port-Royalists" who used it in reference to obtrusive use of first person singular pronoun in writing, hence "talking too much about oneself." Meaning "self-conceit, selfishne

 restaurant 

 his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on his window a line from the Gospels: "Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego...

 self 

 Old English self, sylf (West Saxon),  seolf (Anglian), "one's own person, -self; own, personal; same, identical," from Proto-Germanic *selbaz (source also of Old Norse sjalfr, Old Frisian self, Dutch zelf, Old High German selb, German selb, selbst, Gothic silba), Proto-Germa

 psyche 

 1640s, "animating spirit, the human spirit or mind," from Latin psyche, from Greek psykhē "the soul, mind, spirit; life, one's life, the invisible animating principle or entity which occupies and directs the physical body; understanding, the mind (as the seat of thought), faculty

 bairn 

 "child" (of either gender or any age), "son or daughter," Old English bearn "child, son, descendant," from Proto-Germanic *barnan (source also of Old Saxon barn, Old Frisian bern, Old High German barn "child;" lost in modern German and Dutch), from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry,"

 brain 

 "soft, grayish mass filling the cranial cavity of a vertebrate," in the broadest sense, "organ of consciousness and the mind," Old English brægen "brain," from Proto-Germanic *bragnan (source also of Middle Low German bregen, Old Frisian and Dutch brein), a word of uncertain orig

 mania 

 late 14c., "mental derangement characterized by excitement and delusion," from Late Latin mania "insanity, madness," from Greek mania "madness, frenzy; enthusiasm, inspired frenzy; mad passion, fury," related to mainesthai "to rage, go mad," mantis "seer," menos "passion, spirit,

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 Share ego 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ego Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ego">Etymology of ego by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ego. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ego Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ego," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ego. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ego." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ego. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ego." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ego (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ego 
 eggshell 
 egg-timer 
 egg-white 
 egg-yolk 
 eglantine 
 ego 
 egocentric 
 egoism 
 egoist 
 egomania 
 egomaniac 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix