URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fluorine
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:28:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fluorine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fluorine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fluorine 

 fluorine (n.) 

 non-metallic element, 1813, coined by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy ("a name suggested to me by M. Ampère"). From fluor-spar ("calcium fluoride," modern fluorite ), the late 18c. name of the mineral in which it was first found (see fluor ) + chemical suffix -ine (2). Not known in a free state, not isolated until 1886.

 also from 1813 

 Entries linking to fluorine 

 fluor (n.) 

 1660s, an old chemistry term for "minerals which were readily fusible and useful as fluxes in smelting" [Flood], from Latin fluor , originally meaning "a flowing, flow," from fluere "to flow, stream, run, melt" (see fluent ).

 Said to be from a translation of the German miners' name, flusse . Since 1771 applied to minerals containing fluorine, especially calcium fluoride ( fluor-spar or fluorite ). Related: Fluoric ; fluoroid .

 Also in early Modern English, "fluidity, a fluid state" (1660s).

 fluorescence (n.) 

 1852, "property possessed by some substances of glowing in ultraviolet light," coined by English mathematician and physicist Sir George G. Stokes (1819-1903) from fluor-spar (see fluorine ), because in it he first noticed the phenomenon, + -escence , on analogy of phosphorescence .

 fluoride 
 iodine 
 -ine 
 fluo- 
 fluoro- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 iodine 

 non-metallic element, 1814, formed by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy from French iode "iodine," which was coined 1812 by French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac from Greek iōeidēs "violet-colored" (from ion "the violet; dark blue flower;" see violet) + eidos "appearance" (see -o

 halogen 

 general name for elements of the chlorine family, 1842, from Swedish, coined by Swedish chemist Baron Jöns Jakob Berzelius (1779-1848), literally "salt-producer," from Greek hals "salt" (from PIE root *sal- "salt") + -gen "giving birth to" (see -gen); so called because a salt is 

 flour 

 "finer portion of ground grain," mid-13c., from flower (n.), and maintaining its older spelling, on the notion of flour as the "finest part" of meal, perhaps as the flower is the finest part of the plant or the fairest plant of the field (compare French fleur de farine), as disti

 gas 

 1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos "empty space" (see chaos). The sound of Dutch "g" is roughly equivalent to that of Greek "kh." First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644), probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of "pro

 sag 

 late 14c., saggen, "hang down unevenly," also in Middle English "sink, be mired, sink down," possibly from a Scandinavian source related to Old Norse sokkva "to sink," or from Middle Low German sacken "to settle, sink" (as dregs in wine), from denasalized derivative of Proto-Germ

 element 

 c. 1300, "earth, air, fire, or water; one of the four things regarded by the ancients as the constituents of all things," from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementum "rudiment, first principle, matter in its most basic form" (translating Greek stoikheion), origin and ori

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 akimbo 

 "with the hands on the hips and the elbows bent outward at sharp angles," c. 1400, in kenebowe, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English phrase in keen bow "at a sharp angle" (with keen in its Middle English sense of "sharp" + bow "arch"), or from a Scandinavian word akin t

 sad 

 Old English sæd "sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of," from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (source also of Old Norse saðr, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High German sat, German satt, Gothic saþs "satiated, sated, full"), from PIE *seto-, from 

 Share fluorine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fluorine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fluorine">Etymology of fluorine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fluorine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fluorine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fluorine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fluorine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fluorine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fluorine. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fluorine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fluorine (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fluorine 
 fluorescence 
 fluorescent 
 fluoridate 
 fluoridation 
 fluoride 
 fluorine 
 fluoro- 
 fluorocarbon 
 fluoroscopy 
 flurry 
 flush 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix