URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/goose
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:01:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Goose - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Goose - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of goose 

 goose (n.) 

 "a large waterfowl proverbially noted, I know not why, for foolishness" [Johnson], Old English gos "a goose," from Proto-Germanic *gans- "goose" (source also of Old Frisian gos , Old Norse gas , Old High German gans , German Gans "goose").

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *ghans- (source also of Sanskrit hamsah (masc.), hansi (fem.), "goose, swan;" Greek khēn ; Latin anser ; Polish gęś "goose;" Lithuanian žąsis "goose;" Old Irish geiss "swan"), probably imitative of its honking.

 Geese are technically distinguished from swans and from ducks by the combination of feathered lores, reticulate tarsi, stout bill high at the base, and simple hind toe. [Century Dictionary]

 Spanish ganso "goose" is from a Germanic source. Loss of "n" sound before "s" is normal in English (compare tooth ). The plural geese is an example of i-mutation .

 The meaning "simpleton, silly or foolish person" is from early 15c.; proverbial expressions indicating "know no more than a goose" are by late 14c.

 The bird's reputation for stupidity is not classical. Roman geese were sacred to Juno and held in highest honor. In Athens (as also in Rome) they were noted for watchfulness, and as an erotic bird. Tales told of various geese enamored of a boy, a physician, a philosopher (see Thompson, "Glossary of Greek Birds"). It was a term of endearment in later Greek (compare duck (n.1) as an Elizabethan term of endearment).

 To cook (one's) goose is attested by 1845, of unknown signification; attempts to connect it to Swedish history and Greek fables are unconvincing. Goose-egg "zero" is attested by 1866 in baseball slang, from being large and round.

 The goose that lays golden eggs (15c.) is from Aesop. In Homer as in Middle English typically with the epithet "gray" ( argos ). Thompson notes that "The Geese in the Odyssey are tame birds, ... in the Iliad always wild."

 goose (v.) 

 "jab in the rear," c. 1880, from goose (n.), possibly from resemblance of the upturned thumb to a goose's beak, or from the notion of creating nervous excitement. Related: Goosed ; goosing .

 In 19c. theatrical slang, to be goosed meant "to be hissed" (by 1818), hence, probably, bird (n.3), the rude gesture.

 However the goose has had an erotic reputation since ancient Greece (see the noun). A broad range of English sexual slang senses historically cluster around goose and gooseberry ; goose and duck was rhyming slang for "fuck;" Farmer identifies Winchester goose as "a woman; whence, by implication, the sexual favor," and goose as a verb "to go wenching, to womanize, also to possess a woman."

 He also has goose-grease for a woman's sexual juices, while gooser and goose's neck meant "the penis." Gooseberries (they are hairy) was "testicles," and gooseberry pudding "a woman."
 also from c. 1880 

 Entries linking to goose 

 bird (n.3) 

 "middle finger held up in a rude gesture," slang derived from 1860s expression give the big bird "to hiss someone like a goose," which was kept alive in vaudeville slang with sense of "to greet someone with boos, hisses, and catcalls" (1922), and transferred 1960s to the "up yours" hand gesture (the rigid finger representing the hypothetical object to be inserted) on the common notion of defiance and contempt.

 The gesture itself seems to be much older (the human anatomy section of a 12c. Latin bestiary in Cambridge describes the middle finger as that "by means of which the pursuit of dishonour is indicated").

 In theatrical slang, by 1818, to be goosed  meant "be hissed."

 "He was goosed last night, he was goosed the night before last, he was goosed to-day. He has lately got in the way of being always goosed and he can't stand it." [Dickens, "Hard Times"] 

 On Michaelmas-day, 1808, a piece called The Fortune Teller was produced and damned at the shortest notice. Harris said to Dibdin, "My dear fellow, I did not think it would do? but who would have expected it to be goosed ? (hissed.) "Why, what could you expect, but goose on Michaelmas-day," said Tom. ["Oxberry's Anecdotes of the Stage, &c. &c.," London: 1827]

 duck (n.1) 

 waterfowl, natatorial bird of the family Anatidae , Old English duce (found only in genitive ducan ) "a duck," literally "a ducker," presumed to be from Old English *ducan "to duck, dive" (see duck (v.)). It replaced Old English ened as the name for the bird, this being from PIE *aneti- , the root of the "duck" noun in most Indo-European languages.

 In the domestic state the females greatly exceed in number, hence duck serves at once as the name of the female and of the race, drake being a specific term of sex. [OED, 1989]

 As a term of endearment, attested from 1580s (see ducky ). duck-walk, a squatting waddle done by a person, in imitation of a duck, is by 1915; duck soup, slang for "anything easily done," is by 1899. Duck's ass haircut is from 1951. Ducks-and-drakes , skipping flat stones on water, is from 1580s; the figurative sense of "throwing something away recklessly" is c. 1600.

 gooseberry 
 tooth 
 dupe 
 gander 
 gannet 
 geese 
 gonzo 
 goosebumps 
 goshawk 
 gosling 
 gossamer 
 gunsel 
 merganser 
 smorgasbord 
 snow-goose 
 spider 
 wild goose chase 
 See All Related Words (19) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gander 

 Old English gandra "male goose," from Proto-Germanic *gan(d)ron (source also of Dutch gander, Middle Low German ganre), from PIE *ghans- "goose" (see goose (n.)). OED suggests perhaps it was originally the name of some other water-bird and cites Lithuanian gandras "stork." Someti

 gonzo 

 1971, American English, in Hunter S. Thompson's phrase gonzo journalism. Thompson in 1972 said he got it from editor Bill Cardosa and explained it as "some Boston word for weird, bizarre." Probably from Italian (Neapolitan) gonzo "rude, sottish," a word of unknown origin, perhaps

 goosebumps 

 also goose-bumps, "peculiar tingling of the skin produced by cold, fear, etc.; the sensation described as 'cold water down the back'" [Farmer], 1859, from goose (n.) + bump (n.). So called because the rough condition of the skin during the sensation resembles the skin of a plucke

 wah-wah 

 Compare Chinook jargon wawa "talk, speak, call, ask, sermon, language;" Cree (Algonquian) wehwew "goose," Lenape (Algonquian...) wava "snow goose," all probably of imitative origin....

 gaggle 

 Barnhart says possibly from Old Norse gagl "small goose, gosling, wild goose;" OED calls it "one of the many artificial terms...

 barnacle 

 early 14c., bernak; earlier in Anglo-Latin, bernekke, early 13c., "species of northern European wild goose."...word is often said to be from a Celtic source (compare Breton bernik, a kind of shellfish), but the application to the goose...The goose nests in the Arctic in summer and returns to Europe in the winter, hence the mystery surrounding its reproduction...as late 17c.) to hatch or develop from the barnacle's shell, possibly because the crustacean's feathery stalks resemble goose...

 boo 

 To say boo "open one's mouth, speak," originally was to say boo to a goose. To be able to say Bo!...to a goose is to be not quite destitute of courage, to have an inkling of spirit, and was probably in the first instance...Skeat, "Cry Bo to a Goose," in Notes and Queries, 4th series, vi, Sept. 10, 1870]...

 muggins 

 "fool, simpleton," 1855, of unknown origin, apparently from the surname and perhaps influenced by slang mug "dupe, fool" (1851; see mug (n.2)). It also was the name of simple card game (1855) and the word each player tried to call out before the other in the game when two cards m

 prod 

 1530s, "to poke with a stick," of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart, Century Dictionary] a variant of brod, from Middle English brodden "to goad," from Old Norse broddr "shaft, spike" (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED]. Compare dialectal prog "pointed instrument for poking

 drop 

 Middle English drope, from Old English dropa "a small, spherical mass of liquid," from Proto-Germanic *drupon (source also of Old Saxon dropo, Old Norse dropi, Dutch drop, Old High German tropfo, German Tropfen (n.)); see drop (v.). Sense of "minute quantity of anything, least po

 Share goose 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/goose Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/goose">Etymology of goose by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of goose. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/goose Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of goose," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/goose. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of goose." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/goose. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of goose." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/goose (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near goose 
 googol 
 goo-goo 
 gook 
 goombah 
 goon 
 goose 
 gooseberry 
 goosebumps 
 goose-step 
 GOP 
 gopher 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix