URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/profile
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:19:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Profile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Profile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of profile 

 profile (n.) 

 1650s, "a drawing of the outline of anything," especially "a representation of the human face in side view," from older Italian profilo "a drawing in outline," from profilare "to draw in outline," from pro "forth" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward") + filare "draw out, spin," from Late Latin filare "to spin, draw out a line," from filum "thread" (from PIE root *gwhi- "thread, tendon"). Meaning "a side view" is from 1660s. Meaning "biographical sketch, character study" is from 1734.
 also from 1650s 

 profile (v.) 

 1715, "to represent in profile, draw with a side view," from profile (n.) or Italian profilare . Meaning "to summarize a person in writing" is from 1948. Related: Profiled ; profiling .
 also from 1715 

 Entries linking to profile 

 profiling (n.) 

 by 1852 as a term in field engineering, verbal noun from profile (v.). By 1888 as "the drawing of profiles." The racial/ethnic stereotyping sense is attested from c. 1991, American English, probably on the notion of "fitting (someone) to a profile."

 low-profile (adj.) 

 1957, in reference to automobile wheels, from low (adj.) + profile (n.). General sense is by 1970 in American English, apparently first in reference to Nixon Administration policy of partial U.S. disengagement from burdensome commitments abroad.

 *gwhi- 
 *per- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 silhouette 

 "portrait in black showing the profile," 1798, from French silhouette, in reference to Étienne de Silhouette (1709-1767),...Kitchin, 1882] The word was used of any sort of dark outline or shadow in profile from 1843; as "contour of a garment" by...

 limousine 

 The automobile meaning is from a perceived similarity of the car's profile to a type of hood worn by the inhabitants of that...

 Indian 

 Indian-head (adj.) in reference to U.S. copper pennies with a portrait of an Indian in profile, from 1862....

 butterfly 

 As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer...

 horizon 

 late 14c., orisoun, from Old French orizon (14c., Modern French horizon), earlier orizonte (13c.), from Latin horizontem (nominative horizon), from Greek horizon (kyklos) "bounding (circle)," from horizein "bound, limit, divide, separate," from horos "boundary, landmark, marking 

 indite 

 formerly also endite, late 14c., "put down in writing," from Old French enditer, enditier "dictate, write; draw up, draft; (legally) indict," from Vulgar Latin *indictare, from Latin in- "in, into, on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + dictare "to declare," frequentative of dicere

 write 

 Old English writan "to score, outline, draw the figure of," later "to set down in writing" (class I strong verb; past tense wrat, past participle writen), from Proto-Germanic *writan "tear, scratch" (source also of Old Frisian writa "to write," Old Saxon writan "to tear, scratch,

 biography 

 1680s, "the histories of individual lives, as a branch of literature," probably from Medieval Latin biographia, from later Greek biographia "description of life" (which was not in classical Greek, bios alone being the word there for it), from Greek bios "life" (from PIE root *gwe

 pen 

 late 13c., penne, "writing implement made from the hard, hollow stem at the base of a feather," from Old French pene "quill pen; feather" (12c.) and directly from Latin penna "a feather, plume," in plural "a wing," in Late Latin, "a pen for writing," from Old Latin petna, pesna, 

 interpret 

 late 14c., "expound the meaning of, render clear or explicit," from Old French interpreter "explain; translate" (13c.) and directly from Latin interpretari "explain, expound, understand," from interpres "agent, translator," from inter "between" (see inter-) + second element proba

 Share profile 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/profile Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/profile">Etymology of profile by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of profile. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/profile Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of profile," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/profile. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of profile." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/profile. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of profile." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/profile (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near profile 
 professorial 
 professorship 
 proffer 
 proficiency 
 proficient 
 profile 
 profiling 
 profit 
 profitability 
 profitable 
 profiteer 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix