URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ale
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:48:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ale - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ale - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ale 

 ale (n.) 

 "intoxicating liquor made by malt fermentation," Old English ealu "ale, beer," from Proto-Germanic *aluth- (source also of Old Saxon alo , Old Norse öl ), which is of uncertain origin. Perhaps from a PIE root meaning "bitter" (source also of Latin alumen "alum"), or from PIE *alu-t "ale," from root *alu- , which has connotations of "sorcery, magic, possession, and intoxication" [Watkins]. The word was borrowed from Germanic into Lithuanian ( alus ) and Old Church Slavonic ( olu ).

 In the fifteenth century, and until the seventeenth, ale stood for the unhopped fermented malt liquor which had long been the native drink of these islands. Beer was the hopped malt liquor introduced from the Low Countries in the fifteenth century and popular first of all in the towns. By the eighteenth century, however, all malt liquor was hopped and there had been a silent mutation in the meaning of the two terms. For a time the terms became synonymous, in fact, but local habits of nomenclature still continued to perpetuate what had been a real difference: 'beer' was the malt liquor which tended to be found in towns, 'ale' was the term in general use in the country districts. [Peter Mathias, "The Brewing Industry in England," Cambridge University Press, 1959]

 Meaning "festival or merry-meeting at which much ale was drunk" was in Old English (see bridal ).

 Entries linking to ale 

 bridal (adj.) 

 "belonging to a bride or a wedding," c. 1200, transferred use of the noun bridal "wedding feast," from Old English brydealo "marriage feast," from bryd ealu , literally "bride ale" (see bride + ale ). The second element later was confused with suffix -al (1), especially after c. 1600.

 Compare scot-ale under scot (n.), provincial lamb-ale "a country feast at lamb-shearing," and Middle English scythe-ale (mid-13c.) "drinking celebration for mowers, as compensation for a particular job." Fitzedward Hall ("Modern English," 1873) noted it as a curious etymology for "a word now suggestive of no beverage less luculent than champagne or sparkling moselle." Bridal-suite is attested by 1857.

 ale-conner (n.) 

 "one who tests the quality of ale," late 13c. as a surname, from ale + conner , from Old English cunnere "examiner, inspector," agent noun from cunnan "to know, know how" (see can (v.1)).

 alehouse 
 alewife 
 alum 
 beer 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 alum 

 "whitish mineral salt used as an astringent, dye, etc.," late 14c., from Old French alum, alun, from Latin alumen "alum," also "the alum plant," from Proto-Italic *alu- "bitter substance" literally "bitter salt," cognate with Greek aludoimos "bitter" and perhaps with English ale 

 beer 

 alcoholic drink made from grain (generally barley), infused with hops and boiled and fermented, Middle English ber, from Old English beor "strong drink, beer, mead," cognate with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier; a West Germanic wor

 Humpty-dumpty 

 Originally, humpty-dumpty was a drink (1690s), "ale boiled with brandy," probably from hump and dump, but the connection...

 corny 

 Chaucer used it of ale (late 14c.), perhaps to mean "malty."...

 huff 

 swaggerer, blusterer" (i.e., one with an inflated head), and was noted in 1577 among the popular terms for "strong beer or ale...

 pint 

 Used elliptically for "pint of ale" (or beer) from 1742....

 porter 

 type of dark-brown malty beer, 1734, short for porter's ale (1721), porter-beer, etc., from porter (n.1), said to be so called...

 stout 

 c. 1300, stoute, "valiant, brave," also "proud, haughty; skilled in battle; fierce, cruel," senses now obsolete, from Old French estout "brave, fierce, proud," earlier estolt "strong," from a Germanic source from West Germanic *stult- "proud, stately, strutting" (source also of M

 bitter 

 Old English biter "having a harsh taste, sharp, cutting; angry, full of animosity; cruel," from Proto-Germanic *bitras- (source also of Old Saxon bittar, Old Norse bitr, Dutch bitter, Old High German bittar, German bitter, Gothic baitrs "bitter"), from suffixed form of PIE root *

 report 

 late 14c., "an account brought by one person to another; rumor, gossip," from Old French report "pronouncement, judgment" (Modern French rapport), from reporter "to tell, relate" (see report (v.)). By early 15c. as "informative statement by a reputable source, authoritative accou

 Share ale 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ale Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ale">Etymology of ale by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ale. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ale Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ale," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ale. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ale." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ale. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ale." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ale (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ale 
 aldehyde 
 alder 
 alderman 
 Aldine 
 aldosterone 
 ale 
 aleatory 
 ale-conner 
 alectryomachy 
 alectryomancy 
 alee 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix