URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dough
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dough - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dough - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dough 

 dough (n.) 

 "mass of flour or meal moistened and mixed for baking," Middle English dogh , from Old English dag "dough," from Proto-Germanic *daigaz "something kneaded" (source also of Old Norse deig , Swedish deg , Middle Dutch deech , Dutch deeg , Old High German teic , German Teig , Gothic daigs "dough"), from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build." Meaning "money" is from 1851 (compare bread (n.)).

 Entries linking to dough 

 bread (n.) 

 "kind of food made from flour or the meal of some grain, kneaded into a dough, fermented, and baked," Old English bread "bit, crumb, morsel; bread," cognate with Old Norse brauð , Danish brød , Old Frisian brad , Middle Dutch brot , Dutch brood , German Brot .

 According to one theory [Watkins, etc.] from Proto-Germanic *brautham , from PIE root *bhreu- "to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn," in reference to the leavening. But OED argues at some length for the basic sense being not "cooked food" but "piece of food," and the Old English word deriving from a Proto-Germanic *braudsmon- "fragments, bits" (cognate with Old High German brosma "crumb," Old English breotan "to break in pieces") and being related to the root of break (v.). It cites Slovenian kruh "bread," literally "a piece."

 Either way, by c. 1200 it had replaced the usual Old English word for "bread," which was hlaf (see loaf (n.)).

 The extended sense of "food, sustenance in general" (late 12c.) is perhaps via the Lord's Prayer. The slang meaning "money" dates from 1940s, but compare breadwinner , and bread as "one's livelihood" dates to 1719. Bread and circuses (1914) is from Latin, in reference to food and entertainment provided by the government to keep the populace content. "Duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses" [Juvenal, Sat. x.80].

 do (n.2) 

 first (and last) note of the diatonic scale, by 1754, from do , used as a substitution for ut (see gamut ) for sonority's sake, first in Italy and Germany. U.S. slang do-re-mi "money" is from 1920s, probably a pun on dough in its slang sense of "cash."

 doughnut 
 doughy 
 play-dough 
 sourdough 
 *dheigh- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 doughnut 

 "small, spongy cake made of dough and fried in lard," 1809, American English, from dough + nut (n.), probably on the notion of being a small round lump (the holes came later; they are first mentioned c. 1861). First recorded by Washington Irving, who described them as "balls of s

 sourdough 

 also sour-dough, early 14c., "leavened bread," also "leaven" (late 14c.), from sour (adj.) + dough. Compare German Sauerteig, Dutch zuurdeeg, Danish surdeig. The meaning "fermented dough" left from a previous mixing is by 1868. This was extended during the 1898 Yukon gold rush to

 cabbage 

 type of cultivated culinary vegetable that grows a rounded head of thick leaves, mid-15c., caboge, from Old North French caboche "head" (in dialect, "cabbage"), from Old French caboce "head," a diminutive from Latin caput "head" (from PIE root *kaput- "head"). Earlier in Middle E

 paste 

 c. 1300 (mid-12c. as a surname), "dough for the making of bread or pastry," from Old French paste "dough, pastry" (13c.,...Modern French pâte), from Late Latin pasta "dough, pastry cake, paste" (see pasta)....Meaning "glue mixture, dough used as a plaster seal" is attested from c. 1400; broader sense of "a composition just moist...

 pasta 

 a generic name for Italian dough-based foods such as spaghetti, macaroni, etc., 1874, but not common in English until after...World War II, from Italian pasta, from Late Latin pasta "dough, pastry cake, paste," from Greek pasta "barley porridge,"...

 mass 

 from Old French masse "lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot, bar" (11c.), and directly from Latin massa "kneaded dough..., lump, that which adheres together like dough," probably from Greek maza "barley cake, lump, mass, ball," which is related...

 leaven 

 mid-14c., "substance added to dough to produce fermentation," from Old French levain "leaven, sourdough" (12c.), from Latin...

 pastry 

 mid-15c., "food made with or from paste or having it as a principal ingredient," not originally limited to sweets, from Middle English paste (see paste (n.)) + -ry. Probably influenced by Old French pastoierie "pastry" (Modern French pâtisserie), from pastoier "pastry cook," from

 scratch 

 c. 1400, scracchen, transitive, "mark or wound slightly on the surface by a scraping or tearing action with something rough, sharp, or pointed," probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning "to scratch," both of uncertain origin. Also compare scr-. Relat

 concoction 

 1530s, "digestion" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin concoctionem (nominative concoctio) "digestion," noun of action from past participle stem of concoquere "to digest; to boil together, prepare; to consider well," from assimilated form of com "together" (see con-) + coquere "to

 Share dough 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dough Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dough">Etymology of dough by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dough. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dough Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dough," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dough. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dough." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dough. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dough." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dough (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dough 
 doubt 
 doubtful 
 doubtless 
 douche 
 douchebag 
 dough 
 doughboy 
 doughface 
 doughnut 
 doughty 
 doughy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix