URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/butter
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:17:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Butter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Butter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of butter 

 butter (n.) 

 Old English butere "butter, the fatty part of milk," obtained from cream by churning, general West Germanic (compare Old Frisian, Old High German butera , German Butter , Dutch boter ), an early loan-word from Latin butyrum "butter" (source of Italian burro , Old French burre , French beurre ), from Greek boutyron . This is apparently "cow-cheese," from bous "ox, cow" (from PIE root *gwou- "ox, bull, cow") + tyros "cheese" (from PIE root *teue- "to swell"); but this might be a folk etymology of a Scythian word.

 The product was used from an early date in India, Iran and northern Europe, but not in ancient Greece and Rome. Herodotus described it (along with cannabis) among the oddities of the Scythians. In old chemistry, applied to certain substances of buttery consistency. Butter-knife , a small, dull knife used for cutting butter at the table, is attested from 1818.

 butter (v.) 

 Old English buterian "spread butter on," from the same source as butter (n.). The figurative meaning "to flatter lavishly" is by 1798 (with up (adv.), in Connelly's Spanish-English dictionary, p.413). Related: Buttered ; buttering . To know which side one's bread is buttered on is to be able to take care of oneself.

 Entries linking to butter 

 bread-and-butter (adj.) 

 "pertaining to basic material needs," from the noun phrase, "one's means of living," 1685, a figurative use of the words for the basic foodstuffs; see bread (n.) + butter (n.). Also, in reference to bread-and-butter as the typical food of young boys and girls, "of the age of growth; school-aged" (1620s).

 butane (n.) 

 paraffin hydrocarbon, 1875, from butyl , hydrocarbon from butyric acid , a product of fermentation found in rancid butter, from Latin butyrum (see butter (n.)) + chemical suffix -ane .

 butterball 
 butter-bean 
 buttercup 
 butter-fingered 
 butterfly 
 buttermilk 
 butternut 
 butterscotch 
 buttery 
 butty 
 butyl 
 butyric 
 *gwou- 
 *teue- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 butterfly 

 common name of any lepidopterous insect active in daylight, Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but the name is of obscure signification. Perhaps based on the old notion that the insects (or, according to Grimm, witches disguised as butterflies) consume bu

 buttermilk 

 liquid that remains after the butter has been churned out of milk, c. 1500, from butter (n.) + milk (n.). Compare German Buttermilch, Dutch botermelk. Middle French had laict beurré and babeurre. Meaning "soured milk" by 1590s. Said to be either from a practice of letting th

 butternut 

 also butter-nut, 1753, nut of the white walnut, a North American tree; transferred to the tree itself from 1783, from butter (n.) + nut (n.). So called from the oil it contains. The dye made from the tree's inner bark was yellowish-brown, and the word was used (from 1861) to desc

 smorgasbord 

 1893, from Swedish smörgåsbord, literally "butter-goose table," from smörgås, "slice of bread and butter," compounded from...smör "butter" (see smear (n.)) and gås, literally "goose" (and from the same Germanic root that yielded English goose (n...[Smörgås] properly signifies "a slice of bread-and-butter"; and has come by custom—in much the same way as when we familiarly...

 margarine 

 butter substitute, 1873, from French margarine (see margarin)....The "enterprising merchant" of Paris, who sells Margarine as a substitute for Butter, and does not sell his customers by...selling it as Butter, and at Butter's value, has very likely found honesty to be the best policy....

 dairy 

 c. 1300, daerie, "building for making butter and cheese; dairy farm," formed with Anglo-French -erie (from Latin -arius;...Meaning "branch of farming concerned with the production of milk, butter, and cheese" is from 1670s....Later also "shop where milk, butter, etc. are sold."...

 salve 

 Middle Dutch salve, Dutch zalf, Old High German salba, German salbe "ointment"), from PIE *solpa-, from root *selp- "fat, butter..." (source also of Greek elpos "fat, oil," Albanian gjalpë "butter," Sanskrit sarpis "melted butter")....

 food 

 Middle English foode, fode, from Old English foda "food, nourishment; fuel," also figurative, from Proto-Germanic *fodon (source also of Swedish föda, Danish föde, Gothic fodeins), from Germanic *fod- "food," from PIE *pat-, extended form of root *pa- "to feed." Food chain is by 

 stick 

 "piece of wood, generally rather long and slender," Middle English stikke, from Old English sticca "twig or slender branch from a tree or shrub," also "rod, peg, spoon," from Proto-Germanic *stikkon- "pierce, prick" (source also of Old Norse stik, Middle Dutch stecke, stec, Old H

 freight 

 early 15c. "transporting of goods and passengers by water," variant of fraght, which is from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German vracht, vrecht (see fraught). Danish fragt, Swedish frakt apparently also are from Dutch or Frisian. Also from Low German are Portuguese frete, Spanish f

 Share butter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/butter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/butter">Etymology of butter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of butter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/butter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of butter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/butter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of butter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/butter. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of butter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/butter (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near butter 
 butchery 
 butler 
 butt 
 butte 
 butt-end 
 butter 
 butterball 
 butter-bean 
 buttercup 
 butter-fingered 
 butterfingers 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix