URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bezoar
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:03:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bezoar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bezoar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bezoar 

 bezoar (n.) 

 1540s, "stone used as an antidote against poison," via Medieval Latin, from Arabic bazahr , from Persian pad-zahr "counter-poison," from pad "protecting, guardian, master" (from Iranian *patar- , source also of Avestan patar- , from PIE *pa-tor- , from root *pa- "to feed, protect") + zahr "poison" (from Old Iranian *jathra , from PIE *gwhn-tro- , from root *gwhen- "to strike, kill;" see bane ).

 The name is attested later in reference to a concoction from solid matter found in the stomachs and intestines of ruminants, which was held to have antidotal qualities (1570s). Related: Bezoardic .
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to bezoar 

 bane (n.) 

 Middle English bane , from Old English bana "killer, slayer, murderer, a worker of death" (human, animal, or object), also "the devil," from Proto-Germanic *banon , cognate with *banja- "wound" (source also of Old Frisian bona "murderer," Old Norse bani "death; that which causes death," Old High German bana "death, destruction," Old English benn "wound," Gothic banja "stroke, wound"), a word of no certain IE etymology. The sense of "that which causes ruin or woe" is attested from 1570s. Related: Baneful .

 *pa- 

 *pā- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to protect, feed."

 It might form all or part of: antipasto ; appanage ; bannock ; bezoar ; companion ; company ; feed ; fodder ; food ; forage ; foray ; foster ; fur ; furrier ; impanate ; pabulum ; panatela ; panic (n.2) "type of grass;" pannier ; panocha ; pantry ; pastern ; pastor ; pasture ; pester ; repast ; satrap .

 It might also be the source of: Greek pateisthai "to feed;" Latin pabulum "food, fodder," panis "bread," pasci "to feed," pascare "to graze, pasture, feed," pastor "shepherd," literally "feeder;" Avestan pitu- "food;" Old Church Slavonic pasti "feed cattle, pasture;" Russian pishcha "food;" Old English foda , Gothic fodeins "food, nourishment."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pad 

 1550s, "bundle of straw to lie on," a word of obscure origin (perhaps a merger of several separate words), possibly from or related to Low German or obsolete Flemish pad "sole of the foot," which is perhaps from PIE *pent- "to tread, go" (see find (v.)), but see path (n.). Sense 

 cantankerous 

 "marked by ill-tempered contradiction or opposition," 1772, said by Grose to be "a Wiltshire word," conjectured to be from an alteration (influenced perhaps by raucous) of a dialectal survival of Middle English contakour "troublemaker" (c. 1300), which is from Anglo-French contec

 aberration 

 1590s, "a wandering, act of straying," from Latin aberrationem (nominative aberratio) "a wandering," noun of action from past-participle stem of aberrare "to wander out of the way, lose the way, go astray," literally and figuratively, from ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + errare "

 empty 

 c. 1200, from Old English æmettig, of persons, "at leisure, not occupied; unmarried" (senses now obsolete), also, of receptacles, "containing nothing," of places, "unoccupied," from æmetta "leisure." Watkins explains it as from Proto-Germanic *e-mot-ja-, with a prefix of uncertai

 sheepish 

 c. 1200, shepishe, "of, pertaining to, or resembling a sheep" in some perceived characteristic, from sheep + -ish. Originally "meek, modest, docile, simple," often as qualities of good Christians. With suggestions of "easy to deceive" by c. 1400. The sense of "bashful, over-modes

 Arab 

 "one of the native people of Arabia and surrounding regions," late 14c. (Arabes, a plural form), from Old French Arabi, from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem), from Greek Araps (genitive Arabos), from Arabic 'arab, indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally "inhabitant of the

 diligent 

 "constant in effort to accomplish what is undertaken," mid-14c., from Old French diligent (14c.) and directly from Latin diligentem (nominative diligens) "attentive, assiduous, careful," present-participle adjective from diligere "single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; as

 patriot 

 1590s, "compatriot," from French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota "fellow-countryman" (6c.), from Greek patriotes "fellow countryman," from patrios "of one's fathers," patris "fatherland," from pater (genitive patros) "father" (see father (n.)); with -otes, s

 clout 

 Old English clut "lump of something," also "patch of cloth put over a hole to mend it," from Proto-Germanic *klutaz (source also of Old Norse klute "kerchief," Danish klud "rag, tatter," Frisian klut "lump," Dutch kluit "clod, lump"); perhaps related to clot (v.). In later use "a

 distress 

 late 13c., "circumstance that causes anxiety or hardship," from Old French destresse (Modern French détresse), from Vulgar Latin *districtia "restraint, affliction, narrowness, distress," from Latin districtus, past participle of distringere "draw apart, hinder," also, in Medieva

 Share bezoar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bezoar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bezoar">Etymology of bezoar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bezoar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bezoar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bezoar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bezoar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bezoar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bezoar. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bezoar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bezoar (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bezoar 
 bey 
 beyond 
 bezant 
 bezel 
 bezique 
 bezoar 
 bezzle 
 *bha- 
 *bhag- 
 Bhagavad-Gita 
 bhang 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix