URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rouge
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rouge - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rouge - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rouge 

 rouge (n.) 

 1753, "red cosmetic coloring for the skin, fine red powder used to give artificial color to the face," from French rouge "red coloring matter," noun use of adjective meaning "red" (12c.), from Latin rubeus , related to ruber "red" (from PIE root *reudh- "red, ruddy").

 It replaced native paint in this sense. The verb, "to color (the skin, especially the cheeks) with rouge" is attested by 1777. Related: Rouged ; rouging . The same French word had been borrowed in Middle English with the sense of "red color" (early 15c.), also "red" (adj.).
 also from 1753 

 Entries linking to rouge 

 Khmer 

 1867, native name. Khmer Rouge , communist party of Cambodia, literally "Red Khmer," is with French rouge (see rouge (n.)).

 *reudh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "red, ruddy." The only color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r- .

 It might form all or part of: bilirubin ; corroborate ; Eritrea ; erysipelas ; erythema ; erythro- ; Radnor ; red ; redskin ; roan ; robust ; rooibos ; Rotwelsch ; rouge ; roux ; rowan ; rubella ; rubicund ; rubric ; ruby ; ruddock ; ruddy ; rufous ; Rufus ; russet ; rust .

 It might also be the source of: Latin ruber , also dialectal rufus "light red," mostly of hair; Greek erythros ; Sanskrit rudhira- ; Avestan raoidita- ; Old Church Slavonic rudru , Polish rumiany , Russian rumjanyj "flushed, red," of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas ; Old Irish ruad , Welsh rhudd , Breton ruz "red."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 paint 

 mid-13c., peinten, "represent (someone or something) in paint;" c. 1300, "decorate (something or someone) with drawings or pictures;" early 14c., "put color or stain on the surface of; coat or cover with a color or colors;" from Old French peintier "to paint," from peint, past pa

 haiku 

 [Miller Williams, "Patterns of Poetry," Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1986]....

 red 

 of blood and violence) is from at least 1297, but got a boost 1793 with adoption of the red Phrygian cap (French bonnet rouge...

 hood 

 Little Red Riding Hood (1729) translates Charles Perrault's Petit Chaperon Rouge ("Contes du Temps Passé" 1697)....

 limerick 

 [Miller Williams, "Patterns of Poetry," Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1986] The place name is literally "bare...

 rabbit 

 was at the time of the rising of the curtain consulting a mirror in regard to the effect produced by the application of a rouge-laden...

 make-up 

 also makeup, "manner in which something is put together," 1821, from the verbal phrase (see make (v.) + up (adv.)). To make up as "build, collect into one form by bringing together" is from late 14c., also "prepare." It is attested from late 15c. as "supply as an equivalent," fro

 bow 

 [bend the body] Middle English bouen, from Old English bugan "to bend, become bent, have or assume a curved direction; to bow down, bend the body in condescension or reverence, to submit," also "to turn back" (class II strong verb; past tense beag, past participle bogen), from Pr

 wait 

 c. 1200, "to watch with hostile intent, lie in wait for, plot against," from Anglo-French and Old North French waitier "to watch" (Old French gaitier "defend, watch out, be on one's guard; lie in wait for;" Modern French guetter), from Frankish *wahton or another Germanic source,

 panic 

 "sudden mass terror," especially an exaggerated fright affecting a number of persons without visible cause or inspired by trifling cause or danger, 1708, from an earlier adjective (c. 1600, modifying fear, terror, etc.), from French panique (15c.), from Greek panikon, literally "

 Share rouge 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rouge Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rouge">Etymology of rouge by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rouge. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rouge Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rouge," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rouge. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rouge." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rouge. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rouge." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rouge (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rouge 
 rotunda 
 rotundity 
 Rotwelsch 
 roue 
 Rouen 
 rouge 
 rough 
 roughage 
 roughen 
 rough-hewn 
 rough-house 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix