URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/forest
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:16:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Forest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Forest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of forest 

 forest (n.) 

 late 13c., "extensive tree-covered district," especially one set aside for royal hunting and under the protection of the king, from Old French forest "forest, wood, woodland" (Modern French forêt ), probably ultimately from Late Latin/Medieval Latin forestem silvam "the outside woods," a term from the Capitularies of Charlemagne denoting "the royal forest." This word comes to Medieval Latin, perhaps via a Germanic source akin to Old High German forst , from Latin foris "outside" (see foreign ). If so, the sense is "beyond the park," the park (Latin parcus ; see park (n.)) being the main or central fenced woodland.

 Another theory traces it through Medieval Latin forestis , originally "forest preserve, game preserve," from Latin forum in legal sense "court, judgment;" in other words "land subject to a ban" [Buck]. Replaced Old English wudu (see wood (n.)). Spanish and Portuguese floresta have been influenced by flor "flower."
 also from late 13c. 

 forest (v.) 

 "cover with trees or woods," 1818 ( forested is attested from 1610s), from forest (n.). The earlier word was afforest (c. 1500).
 also from 1818 

 Entries linking to forest 

 afforest (v.) 

 "convert to forest" (especially for hunting grounds), c. 1500, from Anglo-Latin afforestare , from assimilated form of Latin ad "to" (see ad- ) + Medieval Latin forestis (see forest (n.)). Related: Afforested; afforestation .

 foreign (adj.) 

 c. 1300, ferren , foran , foreyne , in reference to places, "outside the boundaries of a country;" of persons, "born in another country," from Old French forain "strange, foreign; outer, external, outdoor; remote, out-of-the-way" (12c.), from Medieval Latin foraneus "on the outside, exterior," from Latin foris (adv.) "outside," literally "out of doors," related to foris "a door" (from PIE *dhwor-ans- , suffixed form of root *dhwer- "door, doorway").

 English spelling altered 17c., perhaps by influence of reign , sovereign . Sense of "alien to one's nature, not connected with, extraneous" attested late 14c. Meaning "pertaining to another country" (as in foreign policy ) is from 1610s. Replaced native fremd . Related: Foreignness . Old English had ælþeodig , ælþeodisc "foreign," a compound of æl- "foreign" + þeod "people."

 park 
 wood 
 deforest 
 forester 
 forestry 
 reforest 
 *dhwer- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 park 

 mid-13c., "tract of land enclosed as a preserve for beasts of the chase," from Old French parc "enclosed wood or heath land used as a game preserve" (12c.), probably ultimately from West Germanic *parruk "enclosed tract of land" (source also of Old English pearruc, root of paddoc

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic *widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu- "tree, wood" (source als

 timber 

 Old English timber "building, structure," in late Old English "building material, trees suitable for building," and "trees or woods in general," from Proto-Germanic *tem(b)ra- (source also of Old Saxon timbar "a building, room," Old Frisian timber "wood, building," Old High Germa

 Smokey Bear 

 Ultimately the reference is to the popular illustrated character of that name, a bear dressed in forest ranger gear (including...Forest Service and the Wartime Advertising Council in a campaign to lower the number of forest fires in the West....

 heath 

 also of Old Saxon hetha, Old High German heida "heather," Dutch heide "heath," Gothic haiþi "field"), from PIE *kaito "forest..., uncultivated land" (source also of Old Irish ciad, Welsh coed, Breton coet "wood, forest")....

 Nemean 

 1580s, "pertaining to Nemea," a wooded valley in the northern Argolis, from Greek nemos "grove, forest," from PIE *nemos...(source also of Latin nemus "forest, (holy) wood" and the Celtic word for "(holy) wood, sanctuary" preserved in Gaulish nemeton...

 wold 

 Old English wald (Anglian), weald (West Saxon, Kentish) "forest, wooded upland," from Proto-Germanic *walthuz (source also...and Old Frisian wald, Middle Dutch woude, wold, Dutch woud, Middle Low German walde, Old High German wald, German Wald "forest...

 land 

 Old English lond, land, "ground, soil," also "definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries," from Proto-Germanic *landja- (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, Gothic land, German Land), perhaps fro

 terra firma 

 c. 1600, "part of the Italian mainland ruled by Venice," from Modern Latin terra firma, literally "firm land," from Latin terra "earth, land" (from PIE root *ters- "to dry") + firma, fem. of firmus "strong, steadfast" (from suffixed form of PIE root *dher- "to hold firmly, suppor

 flora 

 c. 1500, "Roman goddess of flowers;" 1777, "the plant life of a region or epoch," from Latin Flora, "goddess of flowers," from flos (accusative florem, genitive floris) "flower," from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- "to blossom, flourish" (source also of Middle Irish 

 Share forest 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/forest Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/forest">Etymology of forest by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of forest. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/forest Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of forest," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/forest. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of forest." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/forest. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of forest." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/forest (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near forest 
 foreseeable 
 foreshadow 
 foreshorten 
 foresight 
 foreskin 
 forest 
 forestall 
 forester 
 forestry 
 foretaste 
 foretell 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix