URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/early
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:50:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Early - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Early - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of early 

 early (adv.) 

 Old English ærlice "early, near the initial point of some reckoning in time," from ær "soon, ere" (see ere ) + -lice , adverbial suffix (see -ly (2)). Compare Old Norse arliga "early." The adjective is Old English ærlic . The early bird of the proverb is from 1670s. Related: Earlier ; earliest .

 Entries linking to early 

 ere (prep.) 

 c. 1200, from Old English ær (adv., conj., & prep.) "soon, before (in time)," from Proto-Germanic *airiz , comparative of *air "early" (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German er , Dutch eer ; German eher "earlier;" Old Norse ar "early;" Gothic air "early," airis "earlier"), from PIE *ayer- "day, morning" (source also of Avestan ayar "day;" Greek eerios "at daybreak," ariston "breakfast"). The adverb erstwhile retains the Old English superlative ærest "earliest."

 -ly (2) 

 common adverbial suffix, forming, from adjectives, adverbs signifying "in a manner denoted by" the adjective; Middle English -li , from Old English -lice , from Proto-Germanic *-liko- (source also of Old Frisian -like , Old Saxon -liko , Dutch -lijk , Old High German -licho , German -lich , Old Norse -liga , Gothic -leiko ). See -ly (1). It is cognate with lich , and identical with like (adj.).

 Weekley notes as "curious" that Germanic uses a word essentially meaning "body" for the adverbial formation, while Romanic uses one meaning "mind" (as in French constamment from Latin constanti mente ). The modern English form emerged in late Middle English, probably from influence of Old Norse -liga .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 late 

 Old English læt "occurring after the customary or expected time," originally "slow, sluggish, slack, lax, negligent," from Proto-Germanic *lata- (source also of Old Norse latr "sluggish, lazy," Middle Dutch, Old Saxon lat, Dutch laat, German laß "idle, weary," Gothic lats "weary,

 middle 

 Old English middel, "equally distant from extremes or limits; intermediate," from Proto-West Germanic *midla- (source also of Old Frisian middel, Old Saxon middil, Middle Low German, Dutch middel, Old High German mittil, German mittel), from Proto-Germanic *medj, from PIE root *m

 duress 

 early 14c., "harsh or severe treatment," from Old French duresse, durece, from Latin duritia "hardness," from durus "hard...Sense of "coercion, compulsion" is from early 15c.; in law, "actual or apprehended physical constraint so great as to amount...to coercion" (early 15c.)....

 priory 

 Middle English had priorwike for "position or office of a prior" (early 13c.); priority (early 15c.) also was used in this...sense, as were priorhede (early 15c.), priorate (c. 1400)....

 premature 

 mid-15c., "ripe;" 1520s, "existing or done before the proper or usual time, arriving too early at maturity," from Latin praematurus..."early ripe" (as fruit), "too early, untimely," from prae "before" (see pre-) + maturus "ripe, timely" (see mature (v.))...

 dim 

 Of eyes, "not seeing clearly," early 13c....Of sound from early 14c.; of light, "not bright, faintly luminous," from early 14c....

 tale 

 Middle English tale, from Old English talu "piece of information, story, narrative, fable; statement or relation of events alleged to be true;" also "deposition, accusation, reproach, blame;" in the broadest sense "talk, that which is told; action of telling." This is from Proto-

 teal 

 "small freshwater duck," early 14c., a word of uncertain origin, probably from an unrecorded Old English word cognate with Middle Dutch teling "teal," Middle Low German telink, from West Germanic *taili. As the name of a shade of dark greenish-blue resembling the color patterns o

 other 

 Old English oþer "second, the second of two; additional, further" (adj.), also as a pronoun, "one of the two; a different person or thing from the one in view," from Proto-Germanic *anthera- (source also of Old Saxon athar, Old Frisian other, Old Norse annarr, Middle Dutch and Du

 Share early 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/early Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/early">Etymology of early by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of early. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/early Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of early," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/early. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of early." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/early. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of early." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/early (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near early 
 ear-drum 
 earful 
 earl 
 earldom 
 earlobe 
 early 
 earmark 
 ear-muff 
 earn 
 earner 
 earnest 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix