URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/zinc
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:58:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Zinc - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Zinc - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of zinc 

 zinc (n.) 

 element, one of the useful metals, 1650s, zinke , from German Zink , perhaps related to Zinke "prong, point;" said to have been used first by Paracelsus (c. 1526) on analogy of the form of its crystals after smelting. Zinke is from Old High German zint "a point, jag."

 This is from from Proto-Germanic *teng- "tine" (source also of Old Norse tindr "point, top, summit," Old English tind "prong, spike"), which is reconstructed to be from PIE *denk- "to bite." The spelling with -c- is from 1813, from French influence.
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to zinc 

 synovia (n.) 

 a name applied to the albuminous fluid secreted by certain glands; with -al (1). + Modern Latin sinovia (16c.), a word probably coined by Paracelsus (1493-1541), whose coinages tend to be unetymological. Compare sylph , gnome (n.1), zinc , undine , and he influenced gas (n.1) and alcohol . The first element often is referred to syn- , the second perhaps to Latin ovum "egg," which would make it a hybrid.

 In modern physiology, in reference to the lubricating fluid of joints and tendons, by 1690s. Related: Synovial (1756), "pertaining to the synovia."

 tine (n.) 

 mid-14c., an alteration of tinde , "horn of an animal, branch of a deer's antlers," also used of the projecting sharp points on a rake, harrow, etc.; from Old English tind "spike, beak, prong, tooth of a fork." This is a general Germanic word (compare Old High German zint "sharp point, spike," Old Norse tindr "tine, point, top, summit," German Zinne "pinnacle") of unknown origin (compare zinc ). Related: Tined .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 galvanized 

 Iron covered with zinc has been called galvanised iron, from the fact that we have two metals in different electrical conditions...; the zinc, suffering chemical change, oxidising, and acting as a protecting agent to the iron....

 indium 

 Ferdinand Reich (1799-1882), professor of physics at Freiberg, isolated it while analyzing local zinc ores in 1863 and identified...

 ormolu 

 1765, "an alloy of copper, zinc, and tin resembling gold," from French or moulu, literally "ground gold," from or "gold"...

 galvanize 

 coat with metal by means of galvanic electricity" (especially to plate iron with tin, but now typically to plate it with zinc...

 cadmium 

 1835), coined in Modern Latin from cadmia, a word used by ancient naturalists for various earths and oxides (especially zinc...

 bronze 

 In Middle English, the distinction between bronze (copper-tin alloy) and brass (copper-zinc alloy) was not clear, and both...

 brass 

 usually with tin (this is now called bronze), later and in modern use an alloy of roughly two parts copper to one part zinc...

 coat 

 early 14c., "principal outer garment, tunic, kirtle," typically made of cloth and usually with sleeves, worn alone or under a mantle, from Old French cote "coat, robe, tunic, overgarment," from Frankish *kotta "coarse cloth" or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon kot "w

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 surface 

 1610s, "the bounding or limiting parts of a body," from French surface "an outermost boundary, outside part" (16c.), from Old French sur- "above" (see sur-) + face (see face (n.)). The French words is patterned on Latin superficies "surface, upper side, top" (see superficial). Th

 Share zinc 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/zinc Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/zinc">Etymology of zinc by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of zinc. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/zinc Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of zinc," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zinc. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of zinc." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zinc. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of zinc." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/zinc (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near zinc 
 Zika 
 zilch 
 zill 
 zillion 
 Zimbabwe 
 zinc 
 zine 
 zinfandel 
 zing 
 Zingaro 
 zinger 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix