URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/island
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:23:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Island - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Island - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of island 

 island (n.) 

 1590s, earlier yland (c. 1300), from Old English igland , iegland "an island," from ieg "island" (from Proto-Germanic *awjo "thing on the water," from PIE root *akwa- "water") + land (n.).

 The spelling of the first syllable was modified from 16c. by association with similar but unrelated isle . The second syllable was added to distinguish it from homonyms, especially Old English ea "water" (see ea ). Similar formation are in Old Frisian eiland , Middle Dutch eyland , German Eiland , Danish öland , etc.

 In place names, Old English ieg is often used of "slightly raised dry ground offering settlement sites in areas surrounded by marsh or subject to flooding" [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names], as probably in Isle of Ely . Old English had ealand "river-land, watered place, meadow by a river."

 As an adjective from 1620s. Island univers e "solar system" (1846) translates German Weltinsel (von Humboldt, 1845). Related: Islander .
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to island 

 ea (n.) 

 the usual Old English word for "river, running water" (still in use in Lancashire, according to OED), from Proto-Germanic *ahwo- (source also of Old Frisian a, Old Saxon aha, Old High German aha, German ahe-, Old Dutch aha, Old Norse "water"), from PIE root *ekweh- "water" (see aqua- ). "The standard word in place-names for river denoting a watercourse of greater size than a broc or a burna " [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names].

 isle (n.) 

 late 13c., ile , from Old French ile , earlier isle , from Latin insula "island," a word of uncertain origin.

 Perhaps (as the Ancients guessed) from in salo "(that which is) in the (salty) sea," from ablative of salum "the open sea," related to sal "salt" (see salt (n.)). De Vaan finds this "theoretically possible as far as the phonetics go, but being 'in the sea' is not a very precise description of what an island is; furthermore, the Indo-Europeans seem to have indicated with 'island' mainly 'river islands.' ... Since no other etymology is obvious, it may well be a loanword from an unknown language." He proposes the same lost word as the source of Old Irish inis , Welsh ynys "island" and Greek nēsos "island." The -s- was restored first in French, then in English in the late 1500s.

 land 
 eyot 
 islander 
 jersey 
 Runnymede 
 Swansea 
 *akwa- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 land 

 Old English lond, land, "ground, soil," also "definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries," from Proto-Germanic *landja- (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, Gothic land, German Land), perhaps fro

 jersey 

 1580s as a type of knitted cloth; 1842 as a breed of cattle; both from Jersey, one of the Channel Islands. Its name is said to be a corruption of Latin Caesarea, the Roman name for the island (or another near it), influenced by Old English ey "island" (see island); but it is perh

 Puerto Rico 

 island in the Greater Antilles group of the West Indies, Spanish, literally "rich harbor;" see port (n.1) + rich (adj.)....The name was given in 1493 by Christopher Columbus to the large bay on the north side of the island; he called the island...Over time the name of the bay became the name of the island and the name of the island was taken by the town that grew up...

 insular 

 1610s, "of or pertaining to an island," from Late Latin insularis "of or belonging to an island," from Latin insula "island...

 canary 

 Spanish canario "canary bird," literally "of the Canary Islands" (where it is indigenous), from Latin Insula Canaria "Canary Island...," largest of the Fortunate Isles, literally "island of dogs" (canis, derived adjective canarius, from PIE root *kwon- "dog...The name was extended to the whole island group (Canariæ Insulæ) by the time of Arnobius (c. 300)....[Recent DNA analysis (2019) of ancient remains on the island suggest the indigenous people were of typical North African...

 holm 

 "small island in a river; river meadow," late Old English, from Old Norse holmr "small island," especially in a river or...Obsolete, but preserved in place names, where it has various senses derived from the basic one of "island:" "'raised ground...

 Scandinavia 

 1765, from Late Latin Scandinavia (Pliny), Skandinovia (Pomponius Mela), name of a large and fruitful island vaguely located...source (compare Old English Scedenig, Old Norse Skaney "south end of Sweden"), from Proto-Germanic *skadinaujo "Scadia island...It might have been an island when the word was formed; the coastlines and drainage of the Baltic Sea changed dramatically...

 zone 

 late 14c., from Latin zona "geographical belt, celestial zone," from Greek zōnē "a belt, the girdle worn by women at the hips," from zōnnynai "to gird," from PIE root *yos- "to gird" (source also of Avestan yasta- "girt," Lithuanian juosiu, juosti "to gird," Old Church Slavonic p

 archipelago 

 c. 1500, from Italian arcipelago "the Aegean Sea" (13c.), from arci- "chief, principal," from Latin archi- (see arch-) + pelago "pool; gulf, abyss," from Medieval Latin pelagus "pool; gulf, abyss, sea," from Greek pelagos "sea, high sea, open sea, main" (see pelagic). The element

 terra firma 

 c. 1600, "part of the Italian mainland ruled by Venice," from Modern Latin terra firma, literally "firm land," from Latin terra "earth, land" (from PIE root *ters- "to dry") + firma, fem. of firmus "strong, steadfast" (from suffixed form of PIE root *dher- "to hold firmly, suppor

 Share island 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/island Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/island">Etymology of island by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of island. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/island Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of island," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/island. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of island." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/island. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of island." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/island (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near island 
 Isis 
 Islam 
 Islamic 
 Islamist 
 Islamophobia 
 island 
 islander 
 isle 
 islet 
 -ism 
 ism 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix