URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/excavate
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:40:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Excavate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Excavate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of excavate 

 excavate (v.) 

 "to hollow out, make hollow by digging or scooping, or by removing extraneous matter," 1590s, from Latin excavatus , past participle of excavare "to hollow out," from ex "out" (see ex- ) + cavare "to hollow, hollow out," from cavus "cave" (from PIE root *keue- "to swell," also "vault, hole"). Related: Excavated ; excavating . Cockeram's "English Dictionarie" (1623) has a verb excave "to hollow."
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to excavate 

 excavation (n.) 

 1610s, "action of excavating," from Latin excavationem (nominative excavatio ) "a hollowing out," noun of action from past-participle stem of excavare "to hollow out" (see excavate ). Meaning "an excavated place" is from 1779.

 ex- 

 word-forming element, in English meaning usually "out of, from," but also "upwards, completely, deprive of, without," and "former;" from Latin ex "out of, out from the interior of a thing" (in opposition to in ), "from within; from which time, since; according to; in regard to." This is reconstructed to be from PIE *eghs "out" (source also of Gaulish ex- , Old Irish ess- , Old Church Slavonic izu , Russian iz ). In some cases also from Greek cognate ex , ek .

 Often reduced to e- before -b- , -d- , -g- , consonantal -i- , -l- , -m- , -n- , -v- (as in elude , emerge , evaporate , etc.).

 The sense in Latin naturally tended toward "thoroughly, utterly," and in some English ex- words with no clear connection to the idea of "out of," the element might be purely intensive. Among them are exhort , exhilarate , evident , excruciate , exclaim , exuberant , exaggerate , expiate , expect .

 For use of Latin ex- as "(rise) up out of," as preserved in English emerge , emend , the notion is "out from the interior of a thing," in opposition to in- . Hence also in Latin, "in an upward direction," as in  effervesce , exult , extol .

 PIE *eghs had comparative form *eks-tero and superlative *eks-t(e)r-emo- .

 *keue- 

 *keuə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to swell," also "vault, hole."

 It might form all or part of: accumulate ; accumulation ; cave ; cavern ; cavity ; celiac ; church ; codeine ; coelacanth ; coeliac ; coelomate ; concave ; cumulate ; cumulative ; cumulus ; enceinte ; excavate ; kirk ; kymatology ; Kyrie eleison .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit svayati "swells up, is strong;" Greek kyein "to swell," koilos "hollow, hollowed out, spacious, deep;" Latin cumulus "a heap, pile, mass, surplus;" Lithuanian šaunas "firm, solid, fit, capable;" Middle Irish cua "hollow;" Armenian soyl "cavity."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dig 

 c. 1200, diggen, "to make a ditch or other excavation," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps related to dike and ditch, either via Anglo-French diguer, from Old French digue "dike" (which is ultimately from Proto-Germanic *dīk-, from PIE root *dheigw- "to stick, fix") or directly 

 hollow 

 c. 1200, adjective developed from Old English holh (n.) "hollow place, hole," from Proto-Germanic *hul-, from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover, conceal, save." The figurative sense of "insincere" is attested from 1520s. Related: Hollowly. Spelling development followed that of fallow,

 delve 

 Middle English delven, from Old English delfan "to dig, turn up with a spade or other tool, excavate" (class III strong verb...

 ditch 

 "a trench made by digging," especially a trench for draining wet land," Middle English diche, from Old English dic "ditch, dike," a variant of dike (q.v.), which at first meant "an excavation," but later in Middle English was applied to the ridge or bank of earth thrown up in exc

 exhume 

 "to disinter that which has been buried," especially a dead body, early 15c., from Medieval Latin exhumare "to unearth" (13c.), from Latin ex "out of" (see ex-) + humare "bury," from humus "earth" (from PIE root *dhghem- "earth"). An alternative form was exhumate (1540s), taken d

 take 

 Middle English taken, from late Old English tacan "to grip, seize by force, lay hold of," from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka "take, grasp, lay hold," past tense tok, past participle tekinn; also compare Swedish ta, past participle tagit). This is reconstructed to 

 obtain 

 early 15c., obteinen, "to get or acquire, inherit, gain, conquer," from Old French obtenir "acquire, obtain" (14c.) and directly from Latin obtinere "hold, hold fast, take hold of, get possession of, acquire," from ob "in front of" (though perhaps intensive in this case; see ob-)

 drive 

 Old English drifan "to compel or urge to move, impel in some direction or manner; to hunt (deer), pursue; to rush against" (class I strong verb; past tense draf, past participle drifen), from Proto-Germanic *dreibanan (source also of Old Frisian driva "I lead, impel, drive (away)

 reveal 

 c. 1400, revelen, "disclose, divulge, make known (supernaturally or by divine agency, as religious truth)," from Old French reveler "reveal" (14c.), from Latin revelare "reveal, uncover, disclose," literally "unveil," from re- "back, again," here probably indicating "opposite of"

 nuzzle 

 early 15c., "to bring the nose to the ground," back-formation from noselyng "face-downward, on the nose, in a prostrate position" (c. 1400), frequentative of nose (v.). The meaning "burrow with the nose, thrust the nose into" is attested from 1520s; that of "lie snug" is from 159

 Share excavate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/excavate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/excavate">Etymology of excavate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of excavate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/excavate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of excavate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/excavate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of excavate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/excavate. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of excavate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/excavate (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near excavate 
 exanimate 
 exarch 
 exasperate 
 exasperation 
 Excalibur 
 excavate 
 excavation 
 exceed 
 excel 
 excellence 
 excellency 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix