URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gargle
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:00:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gargle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gargle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gargle 

 gargle (v.) 

 1520s, from French gargouiller "to gurgle, bubble" (14c.), from Old French gargole "throat, waterspout," which is perhaps from garg- , imitative of throat sounds, + *goule , dialect word for "mouth," from Latin gula "throat." Related: Gargled ; gargling . The earlier, native, form of the word was Middle English gargarize (early 15c.), from Latin gargarizare , from Greek gargarizein .
 also from 1520s 

 gargle (n.) 

 1650s, "liquid used in gargling," from gargle (v.).
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to gargle 

 gargantuan (adj.) 

 "enormous," 1590s, from Gargantua , name of the voracious giant in Rabelais' novels, supposedly from Spanish/Portuguese garganta "gullet, throat," which is from the same imitative root as gargle (v.).

 gargoyle (n.) 

 "grotesque carved waterspout," connected to the gutter of a building to throw down water clear of the wall, common in 13c.-16c. buildings; late 13c., gargoile , also garguile , gargule , etc., "carved mouth of a rain spout, a gargoyle," from Old French gargole , gargoule "throat;" also "carved downspout," in the form of a serpent or some other fanciful shape, also from Medieval Latin gargola , gargulio (see gargle (v.)). "An archaic spelling, retained in books; better gargoil or, in more modern form gargel " [Century Dictionary].

 gobble (v.2) 

 "make a turkey noise," 1670s, probably imitative, perhaps influenced by gobble (v.1) or gargle . As a noun from 1781.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rinse 

 c. 1300, rinsen, rincen, "subject to light washing; wash with water only" (originally in liturgy; from mid-13c. in surname Rinsfet), from Old French reincier (transitive) "to wash, cleanse" (12c., Modern French rincer), probably a dissimilation of recincier, from Vulgar Latin *re

 sound 

 "noise, what is heard, sensation produced through the ear," late 13c., soun, from Old French son "sound, musical note, voice," from Latin sonus "sound, a noise," from PIE *swon-o-, from root *swen- "to sound." The unetymological -d was established c. 1350-1550 (see D). Sound-boar

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 utter 

 Old English utera, uterra, "outer, exterior, external," from Proto-Germanic *utizon (source also of Old Norse utar, Old Frisian uttra, Middle Dutch utere, Dutch uiter-, Old High German uzar, German äußer "outer"), comparative adjective from ut (see out (adv.)). Meaning "complete,

 vale 

 river-land between two ranges of hills, early 14c., from Old French val "valley, vale" (12c.), from Latin vallem (nominative vallis, valles) "valley" (see valley). Now "little used except in poetry" [Century Dictionary]. Vale of years "old age" is from "Othello." Vale of tears "t

 veal 

 late 14c., "calf meat as food," from Anglo-French vel, Old French veel "a calf" (12c., Modern French veau), earlier vedel, from Latin vitellus "a little calf," diminutive of vitulus "calf," perhaps originally "yearling," if related, as some think, to Sanskrit vatsah "calf," liter

 solution 

 late 14c., solucioun, "explanation, answer; interpretation of a dream; the dissolving of a substance in a liquid, transformation of matter to a liquid state," from Old French solucion "division, dissolving; explanation; payment" and directly from Latin solutionem (nominative solu

 wash 

 Old English wascan "to wash, cleanse, bathe," transitive sense in late Old English, from Proto-Germanic *watskan "to wash" (source also of Old Norse vaska, Middle Dutch wasscen, Dutch wassen, German waschen), from PIE root *wed- (1) "water; wet." Related: Washed; washing. Used ma

 Share gargle 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gargle Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gargle">Etymology of gargle by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gargle. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gargle Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gargle," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gargle. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gargle." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gargle. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gargle." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gargle (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gargle 
 gardening 
 garderobe 
 gare 
 garfish 
 gargantuan 
 gargle 
 gargoyle 
 Garibaldi 
 garish 
 garland 
 garlic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix