URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Euphrates
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:00:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Euphrates - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Euphrates - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Euphrates 

 Euphrates 

 Mesopotamian river, arising in Armenia and flowing to the Persian Gulf, Old English Eufrate , from Greek Euphrates , from Old Persian Ufratu , perhaps from Avestan huperethuua "good to cross over," from hu- "good" + peretu- "ford" (from PIE root *per- (2) "to lead, pass over"). But Kent says "probably a popular etymologizing in O.P. of a local non-Iranian name" ["Old Persian," p.176]. In Akkadian, purattu . Related: Euphratean .

 Entries linking to Euphrates 

 *per- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to lead, pass over." A verbal root associated with *per- (1), which forms prepositions and preverbs with the basic meaning "forward, through; in front of, before," etc.

 It might form all or part of: aporia ; asportation ; comport ; deport ; disport ; emporium ; Euphrates ; export ; fare ; farewell ; fartlek ; Ferdinand ; fere ; fern ; ferry ; firth ; fjord ; ford ; Fuhrer ; gaberdine ; import ; important ; importune ; opportune ; opportunity ; passport ; porch ; pore (n.) "minute opening;" port (n.1) "harbor;" port (n.2) "gateway, entrance;" port (n.3) "bearing, mien;" port (v.) "to carry;" portable ; portage ; portal ; portcullis ; porter (n.1) "person who carries;" porter (n.2) "doorkeeper, janitor;" portfolio ; portico ; portiere ; purport ; practical ; rapport ; report ; sport ; support ; transport ; warfare ; wayfarer ; welfare .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit parayati "carries over;" Greek poros "journey, passage, way," peirein "to pierce, pass through, run through;" Latin portare "to carry," porta "gate, door," portus "port, harbor," originally "entrance, passage," peritus "experienced;" Avestan peretush "passage, ford, bridge;" Armenian hordan "go forward;" Old Welsh rit , Welsh rhyd "ford;" Old Church Slavonic pariti "to fly;" Old English faran "to go, journey," Old Norse fjörðr "inlet, estuary."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 weeping 

 The tree is native to Asia; the first brought to England were imported 1748, from the Euphrates....

 Hebrew 

 Traditionally from an ancestral name Eber, but probably literally "one from the other side," perhaps in reference to the River Euphrates...

 Mesopotamia 

 ancient name for the land that lies between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers north of Babylon (in modern Iraq), from Greek...

 antelope 

 from Late Greek antholops (Eusebius of Antioch, c. 336 C.E.), in reference to a fabulous animal haunting the banks of the Euphrates...

 turkey 

 1540s, originally "guinea fowl" (Numida meleagris), a bird imported from Madagascar via Turkey, and called guinea fowl when brought by Portuguese traders from West Africa. The larger North American bird (Meleagris gallopavo) was domesticated by the Aztecs, introduced to Spain by 

 Iraq 

 country name, 1920, from an Arabic name attested since 6c. for the region known in Greek as Mesopotamia; often said to be from Arabic `araqa, covering notions such as "perspiring, deeply rooted, well-watered," which may reflect the desert Arabs' impression of the lush river-land.

 sad 

 Old English sæd "sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of," from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (source also of Old Norse saðr, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High German sat, German satt, Gothic saþs "satiated, sated, full"), from PIE *seto-, from 

 feature 

 early 14c., "make, form, fashion" (obsolete), from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture "deed, action; fashion, shape, form; countenance," from Latin factura "a formation, a working," from past participle stem of facere "make, do, perform" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, pu

 destiny 

 mid-14c., "fate, over-ruling necessity, the irresistible tendency of certain events to come about; inexorable force that shapes and controls lives and events;" also "that which is predetermined and sure to come true," from Old French destinée "purpose, intent, fate, destiny; that

 ace 

 c. 1300, "one at dice," from Old French as "one at dice" (12c.), from Latin as "a unit, one, a whole, unity;" also the name of a small Roman coin (originally a rectangular bronze plaque weighing one pound, it eventually was reduced by depreciation to half an ounce; in imperial ti

 Share Euphrates 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Euphrates Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Euphrates">Etymology of Euphrates by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Euphrates. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Euphrates Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Euphrates," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Euphrates. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Euphrates." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Euphrates. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Euphrates." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Euphrates (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Euphrates 
 euphemism 
 euphemistic 
 euphony 
 euphoria 
 euphoric 
 Euphrates 
 Euphrosyne 
 Euphues 
 Eurafrican 
 Eurasia 
 Eurasian 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix