URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Eve
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:19:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Eve - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Eve - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of eve 

 eve (n.) 

 c. 1200, eve "evening," especially the time between sunset and darkness, from Old English æfen , with loss of terminal -n (which, though forming part of the stem, perhaps was mistaken for an inflection), from Proto-Germanic *æbando- (source also of Old Saxon aband , Old Frisian ewnd , Dutch avond , Old High German aband , German Abend , Old Norse aptann , Danish aften ), which is of uncertain origin. Now superseded in its original sense by evening .

 Specific meaning "day before a saint's day or festival" is from late 13c. Transferred sense of "the moment right before any event, etc." is by 1780. Even (n.), evening keep the original form.
 also from c. 1200 

 Eve 

 fem. proper name, Biblical first woman, Late Latin, from Hebrew (Semitic) Hawwah , literally "a living being," from base hawa "he lived" (compare Arabic hayya , Aramaic hayyin ).

 Like most of the explanations of names in Genesis, this is probably based on folk etymology or an imaginative playing with sound. ... In the Hebrew here, the phonetic similarity is between 
 hawah , "Eve," and the verbal root 
 hayah , "to live." It has been proposed that Eve's name conceals very different origins, for it sounds suspiciously like the Aramaic word for "serpent." [Robert Alter, "The Five Books of Moses," 2004, commentary on Genesis iii.20] 

 Entries linking to eve 

 even (n.) 

 "end of the day," Old English æfen , Mercian efen , Northumbrian efern (see eve (n.)).

 evening (n.) 

 from Old English æfnung "the coming of evening, sunset, time around sunset," verbal noun from æfnian "become evening, grow toward evening," from æfen "evening" (see eve ). As a synonym of even (n.) in the sense "time from sunset to bedtime," it dates from mid-15c. and now entirely replaces the older word in this sense. Another Old English noun for "evening" was cwildtid .

 Evelyn 
 hymie 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 vigil 

 c. 1200, "eve of a religious festival" (an occasion for devotional watching or observance), from Anglo-French and Old French...vigile "watch, guard; eve of a holy day" (12c.), from Latin vigilia "a watch, watchfulness," from vigil "watchful, awake...Meaning "watch kept on a festival eve" in English is from late 14c.; general sense of "occasion of keeping awake for some...

 Cain 

 elder son of Adam and Eve, the first murderer and the first fratricide, from Hebrew Qayin, literally "created one," also...Why are Adam and Eve the oldest sugar planters? Because they were he first to raise Cain....

 Agnes 

 Agnes' Eve (Jan. 20-21) with love divinations....

 twelfth 

 Twelfth Night is Old English twelftan niht "Twelfth Night," the eve of Epiphany, which comes twelve days after Christmas,...

 Davy Jones 

 "presides over all the evil spirits of the deep, and is often seen in various shapes, perching among the rigging on the eve...

 Adam's apple 

 The reference is to the legend that a piece of the forbidden fruit (commonly believed to have been an apple) that Eve gave...

 Christmas 

 Christmas Eve is Middle English Cristenmesse Even (c. 1300)....

 gloaming 

 Old English glomung "twilight, the fall of evening," found but once (glossing Latin crepusculum), and formed (probably on model of æfning "evening") from glom "twilight," which is related to glowan "to glow" (hence "glow of sunrise or sunset"), from Proto-Germanic *glo- (see glow

 sunset 

 "apparent descent of the sun below the horizon in evening," late 14c., from sun (n.) + set (v.). Perhaps a shortening of sun-setting, or perhaps taken from a Middle English subjunctive such as before the sun set. Old English had sunnansetlgong "sunset," while sunset meant "west."

 dusk 

 "partial darkness, state between light and darkness, twilight," 1620s, from an earlier adjective dusk, from Middle English dosc (c. 1200) "obscure, not bright; tending to darkness, shadowy," having more to do with color than light, which is of uncertain origin, not found in Old E

 Share eve 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/eve Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/eve">Etymology of eve by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of eve. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/eve Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of eve," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eve. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of eve." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eve. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of eve." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/eve (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near eve 
 evangelize 
 evaporate 
 evaporation 
 evasion 
 evasive 
 eve 
 evection 
 Evelyn 
 even 
 even-handed 
 evening 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix