URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/umbrella
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:57:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Umbrella - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Umbrella - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of umbrella 

 umbrella (n.) 

 "hand-held portable canopy which opens and folds," c. 1600, in Donne's letters, from Italian ombrello , from Late Latin umbrella , altered (by influence of umbra ) from Latin umbella "sunshade, parasol," diminutive of umbra "shade, shadow" (see umbrage ).

 A sunshade in the Mediterranean, a shelter from the rain in England; in late 17c. usage, usually as an Oriental or African symbol of dignity. Said to have been used by women in England from c. 1700; the use of rain-umbrellas carried by men there traditionally is dated to c. 1750, first by Jonas Hathaway, noted traveler and philanthropist.

 The figurative sense of "authority, unifying quality" (usually in a phrase such as under the umbrella of ) is recorded by 1948. Umbrella-stand is by 1820. The umbrella-tree (a type of American magnolia) is so called by 1738, for its shape.
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to umbrella 

 umbrage (n.) 

 early 15c., "shadow, darkness, shade" (senses now obsolete), from Old French ombrage "shade, shadow," from noun use of Latin umbraticum "of or pertaining to shade; being in retirement," neuter of umbraticus "of or pertaining to shade," from umbra "shade, shadow," from PIE root *andho- "blind; dark" (source also of Sanskrit andha- , Avestan anda- "blind, dark").

 Especially shade from the foliage of trees. The word had many figurative uses in 17c.; the meaning "suspicion that one has been slighted," is recorded by 1610s from the notion of being "overshadowed" by another and consigned to obscurity.

 Hence phrase take umbrage at , attested by 1670s. Compare modern (by 2013) slang verbal phrase throw shade "(subtly) insult (something or someone)."

 brolly (n.) 

 British slang, "umbrella," by 1866, a clipped and shortened form of umbrella .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 parachute 

 "apparatus, usually in the shape of a very large umbrella, carried in an aircraft, that may allow a person or thing to drop...PARACHUTE, a kind of large and strong umbrella, contrived to break a person's fall from an airballoon, should any accident...

 skirmish 

 *skirmjanan (compare Middle Dutch schermen "protect," Old High German scirmen "to protect, defend," German Schirm "umbrella...

 top-notch 

 At the time it was the name of a part in umbrella patents....

 union 

 early 15c., "action of joining one thing to another," also "agreement, accord," also "state of matrimony," from Anglo-French unioun, Old French union (12c.), from Late Latin unionem (nominative unio) "oneness, unity, a uniting," also in Latin meaning "a single pearl or onion," fr

 conjugation 

 mid-15c., "the inflection of a verb in all its different forms; a class of verbs similarly conjugated," from Latin coniugationem (nominative coniugatio), literally "a combining, connecting," noun of action from past-participle stem of coniugare "to join together," from assimilate

 grip 

 Old English grippan "to grip, seize, obtain" (class I strong verb; past tense grap, past participle gripen), from West Germanic *greipanan (source also of Old High German gripfen "to rob," Old English gripan "to seize;" see gripe (v.)). Related: Gripped; gripping. French gripper 

 prig 

 "a conceited, narrow-minded pragmatical person; a dull, precise person; one who cultivates or affects propriety and offends or bores others," 1753, originally in reference to theological scruples (1704), a word of unknown origin. It could be related to earlier appearances of the 

 jointure 

 late 14c., "act or fact of being joined," from Old French jointure "a putting together," from Latin iunctura "a joining, juncture," from iunctus, past participle of iungere "to join together," from nasalized form of PIE root *yeug- "to join." Specific legal sense is from mid-15c.

 hold 

 Middle English holden, earlier halden, from Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), "to contain; to grasp; to retain (liquid, etc.); to observe, fulfill (a custom, etc.); to have as one's own; to have in mind (of opinions, etc.); to possess, control, rule; to detain, 

 defense 

 c. 1300, "action of guarding or shielding from attack or injury; act of defending by fighting; a fortified place of refuge," from Old French defense, from Latin defensus, past participle of defendere "ward off, protect" (see defend). It also arrived (without the final -e) from Ol

 Share umbrella 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/umbrella Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/umbrella">Etymology of umbrella by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of umbrella. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/umbrella Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of umbrella," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/umbrella. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of umbrella." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/umbrella. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of umbrella." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/umbrella (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near umbrella 
 umbles 
 umbo 
 umbra 
 umbrage 
 umbrageous 
 umbrella 
 Umbrian 
 umiak 
 umlaut 
 umma 
 ump 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix