URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/migraine
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:22:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Migraine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Migraine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of migraine 

 migraine (n.) 

 late 14c., migrane , "severe headache, especially on one side of the head," from Old French migraine , migraigne (13c.), from the vulgar pronunciation of Late Latin hemicrania "pain in one side of the head, headache," from Greek hēmikrania, from hēmi- "half" + kranion "skull" (see cranium ).

 The corrupt form megrim was common from 15c. on and is the principle entry for the word in Century Dictionary (1895), but it seems to be now obsolete or archaic even in its secondary senses of "depression; low spirits" and "a whim or fancy." Related: Migrainous .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to migraine 

 cranium (n.) 

 the skull of a human being," "early 15c., craneum , from Medieval Latin cranium "skull," from Greek kranion "skull, upper part of the head," related to kara (poetic kras ) "head," from PIE root *ker- (1) "horn; head." Strictly, the "brain-box," the bony case which encloses the brain. Englished by Sir Thomas Browne as crany .

 megrim 

 see migraine .

 *ker- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "horn; head," with derivatives referring to horned animals, horn-shaped objects, and projecting parts.

 It might form all or part of: alpenhorn ; Capricorn ; carat ; carotid ; carrot ; carotene ; cerato- ; cerebellum ; cerebral ; cerebrum ; cervical ; cervix ; charivari ; cheer ; chelicerae ; corn (n.2) "hardening of the skin;" cornea ; corner ; cornet ; cornucopia ; cranium ; flugelhorn ; hart ; hartebeest ; horn ; hornbeam ; hornblende ; hornet ; keratin ; kerato- ; migraine ; monoceros ; reindeer ; rhinoceros ; saveloy ; serval ; triceratops ; unicorn .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit srngam "horn;" Persian sar "head," Avestan sarah- "head;" Greek karnon "horn," koryne "club, mace," koryphe "head;" Latin cornu "horn," cervus "deer;" Old English horn "horn of an animal;" Welsh carw "deer."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 balance 

 early 13c., "scales, apparatus for weighing by comparison of mass," from Old French balance "balance, scales for weighing" (12c.), also in figurative sense; from Medieval Latin bilancia, from Late Latin bilanx, from Latin (libra) bilanx "(scale) having two pans," possibly from La

 play 

 Middle English pleien, from Old English plegan, plegian "move lightly and quickly, occupy or busy oneself, amuse oneself; engage in active exercise; frolic; engage in children's play; make sport of, mock; perform music." It is from Proto-West Germanic *plegōjanan "occupy oneself 

 fast 

 Old English fæst "firmly fixed, steadfast, constant; secure; enclosed, watertight; strong, fortified," probably from Proto-Germanic *fastu- "firm, fast" (source also of Old Frisian fest, Old Norse fastr, Dutch vast, German fest), from PIE root *past- "firm, solid" (source of Sans

 patriotism 

 "love of one's country; the passion which moves a person to serve his country, either in defending it or in protecting its rights and maintaining its laws and institutions," 1726, from patriot + -ism. The patriotic quip My country, right or wrong traces to a toast given by U.S. W

 dialogue 

 c. 1200, "literary work consisting of a conversation between two or more persons," from Old French dialoge and directly from Latin dialogus, from Greek dialogos "conversation, dialogue," related to dialogesthai "converse," from dia "across, between" (see dia-) + legein "to speak"

 renege 

 1540s, renegue, "deny, renounce, abandon" (archaic), from Medieval Latin renegare, from Latin re-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see re-), + negare "to refuse" (from PIE root *ne- "not"). The meaning "change one's mind, go back on (one's word or promise)" is by 1784. OED iden

 gang 

 from Old English gang "a going, journey, way, passage," and Old Norse gangr "a group of men, a set," both from Proto-Germanic *gangaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Danish, Dutch, Old High German, German gang, Old Norse gangr, Gothic gagg "act of going"), of uncertain or

 pretend 

 late 14c., pretenden, "to profess, put forward as a statement or assertion, maintain" (a claim, etc.), "to direct (one's) efforts," from Old French pretendre "to lay claim," from Latin praetendere "stretch in front, spread before, put forward; put forward as an excuse, allege," f

 strategy 

 1810, "the art of a general, the science of war," from French stratégie (16c.) and directly from Latinized form of Greek stratēgia "office or command of a general," from stratēgos "general, commander of an army," also the title of various civil officials and magistrates, from str

 spirit 

 mid-13c., "life, the animating or vital principle in man and animals," from Anglo-French spirit, Old French espirit "spirit, soul" (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus "a breathing (of respiration, also of the wind), breath;" also "breath of a god," hence

 Share migraine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/migraine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/migraine">Etymology of migraine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of migraine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/migraine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of migraine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/migraine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of migraine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/migraine. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of migraine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/migraine (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near migraine 
 might 
 mightily 
 mightiness 
 mighty 
 mignon 
 migraine 
 migrant 
 migrate 
 migration 
 migrational 
 migratory 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix