URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/vitamin
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:27:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Vitamin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Vitamin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of vitamin 

 vitamin (n.) 

 1920, originally vitamine (1912) coined by Polish biochemist Casimir Funk (1884-1967), from Latin vita "life" (see vita ) + amine , because they were thought to contain amino acids. Related: Vitaminic .

 The terminal -e formally was stripped off when scientists learned the true nature of the substance; -in was acceptable because it was used for neutral substances of undefined composition. The lettering system of nomenclature ( Vitamin A, B, C, etc.) was introduced at the same time (1920).
 also from 1920 

 Entries linking to vitamin 

 amine (n.) 

 "compound in which one of the hydrogen atoms of ammonia is replaced by a hydrocarbon radical," 1863, from ammonia + chemical suffix -ine (2).

 vita (n.) 

 plural vitae , Latin, literally "life" (from PIE root *gwei- "to live"). As "biography," by 1949. Vita Nuova "the New Life" was the title of Dante's work.

 *gwei- 

 also *gweie- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to live."

 It might form all or part of: abiogenesis ; aerobic ; amphibian ; anaerobic ; azo- ; azoic ; azotemia ; bio- ; biography ; biology ; biome ; bionics ; biopsy ; biota ; biotic ; cenobite ; Cenozoic ; convivial ; couch (n.2) "grass;" epizoic ; epizoon ; epizootic ; macrobiotic ; Mesozoic ; microbe ; Protozoa ; protozoic ; quick ; quicken ; quicksand ; quicksilver ; quiver (v.) "to tremble;" revive ; survive ; symbiosis ; viable ; viand ; viper ; vita ; vital ; vitamin ; victuals ; viva ; vivace ; vivacious ; vivarium ; vivid ; vivify ; viviparous ; vivisection ; whiskey ; wyvern ; zodiac ; Zoe ; zoetrope ; zoic ; zoo- ; zoolatry ; zoology ; zoon ; zoophilia ; zoophobia ; zooplankton .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit jivah "alive, living;" Old Persian *jivaka- "alive," Middle Persian zhiwak "alive;" Greek bios "one's life, course or way of living, lifetime," z ōē "animal life, organic life;" Old English cwic , cwicu "living, alive;" Latin vivus "living, alive," vita "life;" Old Church Slavonic zivo "to live;" Lithuanian gyvas "living, alive," gyvata "(eternal) life;" Old Irish bethu "life," bith "age;" Welsh byd "world."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 niacin 

 "pellagra-preventing vitamin in enriched bread," 1942, coined from first syllables of  nicotinic acid (see nicotine)...

 rickets 

 disease caused by vitamin D deficiency, 1630s, of uncertain origin (see note in OED)....

 rickettsia 

 and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, but is unrelated by pathology or etymology to rickets (q.v.), which is the result of vitamin...

 nutrition 

 1550s, "act or process by which organisms absorb their proper food into their systems and build it into living tissue," from Old French nutrition (14c.) and directly from Latin nutritionem (nominative nutritio) "a nourishing," noun of action from past-participle stem of nutrire "

 nourishment 

 early 15c., norishement, "food, sustenance, that which, taken into the system, tends to nourish," from Old French norissement "food, nourishment," from norrir (see nourish). From c. 1300 as "fostering, upbringing; act of nourishing or state of being nourished." Figurative sense o

 sustenance 

 c. 1300, sustenaunce, "that which is essential to sustain life; food, victuals, provisions," also "means of living, income, wealth," from Anglo-French sustenance, sustenaunce, Old French sostenance "support, aid" (Modern French soutenance), from Late Latin sustinentia "endurance,

 victuals 

 c. 1300, vitaylle (singular), from Anglo-French and Old French vitaille "food, nourishment, provisions," from Late Latin victualia "provisions," noun use of plural of victualis "of nourishment," from victus "livelihood, food, sustenance, that which sustains life," from past parti

 mystery 

 early 14c., misterie, in a theological sense, "religious truth via divine revelation, hidden spiritual significance, mystical truth," from Anglo-French *misterie, Old French mistere "secret, mystery, hidden meaning" (Modern French mystère) and directly from Latin mysterium "secre

 race 

 [act of running] late Old English, also rase, "a narrative, an account;" c. 1300, "an act of swift running, a hurried attack," also "a course of life or conduct, a swift current;" from Old Norse rās "a running, a rush (of water)," cognate with Old English ræs "a running, a rush, 

 absorb 

 "to drink in, suck up, take in by absorption," early 15c., from Old French absorbir, assorbir (13c., Modern French absorber), from Latin absorbere "to swallow up, devour," from ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + sorbere "suck in," from PIE root *srebh- "to suck, absorb" (source also

 Share vitamin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/vitamin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/vitamin">Etymology of vitamin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of vitamin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/vitamin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of vitamin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vitamin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of vitamin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vitamin. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of vitamin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/vitamin (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near vitamin 
 vita 
 vital 
 vitality 
 vitalize 
 vitals 
 vitamin 
 Vitaphone 
 vitelline 
 vitiate 
 vitiation 
 viticulture 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix