URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/aluminum
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:48:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Aluminum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Aluminum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of aluminum 

 aluminum (n.) 

 by 1812, from alumina , alumine , the name given by French chemists late 18c. to aluminum oxide, from Latin alumen "alum" (see alum ). Sir Humphry Davy, working to isolate it, called it alumium (1808), later he used aluminum (by 1812), which remains the U.S. word.

 The form aluminium , the modern preferred British word, was proposed by January 1811 in an account of Davy's published experiments written by William Hyde Wollaston (discoverer of palladium and rhodium) and printed in The Critical Review:

 Potassium, acting upon alumine and glucine, produces pyrophoric substances of a dark grey colour, which burnt, throwing off brilliant sparks, and leaving behind alkali and earth, and which, when thrown into water, decomposed it with great violence. The result of this experiment is not wholly decisive as to the existence of what might be called aluminium and glucinium .

 It better harmonizes with the other metallic element names ( sodium , potassium ).

 Aluminium, for so we shall take the liberty of writing the word, in preference to aluminum, which has a less classical sound. [Quarterly Review, September 1812]

 Aluminum foil attested by 1859; popularized in food packaging from c. 1950.
 also from 1812 

 Entries linking to aluminum 

 alum (n.) 

 "whitish mineral salt used as an astringent, dye, etc.," late 14c., from Old French alum , alun , from Latin alumen "alum," also "the alum plant," from Proto-Italic *alu- "bitter substance" literally "bitter salt," cognate with Greek aludoimos "bitter" and perhaps with English ale and some Balto-Slavic words for "beer" (such as Lithuanian alus). The plant's medicinal use on wounds was known to Pliny.

 potassium (n.) 

 metallic element, 1807, coined by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy from Modern Latin potassa , Latinized form of potash (q.v.). Davy first isolated it from potash. The chemical symbol K is from Latin kalium "potash," from Arabic al-qaliy "the ashes, burnt ashes" (see alkali ). Related: Potassic .

 sodium 
 aluminium 
 sial 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 turquoise 

 "Chemically it is a hydrated phosphate of aluminum and copper" [Flood]....

 topaz 

 In modern science, fluo-silicate of aluminum. As a color name from 1908....

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 maul 

 mid-13c., meallen "to strike, beat, or bruise with a heavy weapon," from Middle English mealle (mid-13c.) "mace, wooden club, heavy hammer" (see maul (n.)). It has gradually lost its association with hammering. To maul through "pierce with a pointed weapon" is attested by mid-14c

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 bachelor 

 c. 1300, "young man;" also "youthful knight, novice in arms," from Old French bacheler, bachelor, bachelier (11c.) "knight bachelor," a young squire in training for knighthood, also "young man; unmarried man," and a university title. A word of uncertain origin. Perhaps it is from

 organization 

 early 15c., organisacioun, "structure of the body or its parts;" mid-15c., "act or process of organizing, the arranging of parts in an organic whole" from Medieval Latin organizationem (nominative organizatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of organizare, from Latin or

 performance 

 late 15c., "accomplishment, completion" (of something), from perform + -ance. Meaning "that which is accomplished, a thing performed" is from 1590s; that of "action of performing a play, etc." is from 1610s; that of "a public entertainment" is from 1709. The earlier noun in Middl

 disciple 

 Old English discipul (fem. discipula), "one who follows another for the purpose of learning," especially "the personal followers of Jesus Christ during his life, the twelve Apostles chosen or called by him to be his immediate associates," a Biblical borrowing from Latin discipulu

 Share aluminum 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/aluminum Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/aluminum">Etymology of aluminum by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of aluminum. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/aluminum Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of aluminum," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aluminum. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of aluminum." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aluminum. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of aluminum." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/aluminum (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near aluminum 
 altruism 
 altruist 
 altruistic 
 alum 
 aluminium 
 aluminum 
 alumna 
 alumnae 
 alumni 
 alumnus 
 alveolar 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix