URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/astigmatism
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Astigmatism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Astigmatism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of astigmatism 

 astigmatism (n.) 

 "defect in the structure of the eye whereby the rays of light do not converge to a point upon the retina," 1849, coined by the Rev. William Whewell, English polymath, from Greek a- "without" (see a- (3)) + stigmatos genitive of stigma "a mark, spot, puncture" (from PIE root *steig- "to stick; pointed;" see stick (v.)).
 also from 1849 

 Entries linking to astigmatism 

 stick (v.) 

 Middle English stiken , from Old English stician "to pierce or puncture, to stab with a weapon; transfix; goad," also "to remain embedded, stay fixed, be fastened," from Proto-Germanic *stekanan "pierce, prick, be sharp" (source also of Old Saxon stekan , Old Frisian steka , Dutch stecken , Old High German stehhan , German stechen "to stab, prick").

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *steig- "to stick; pointed" (source also of Latin instigare "to goad," instinguere "to incite, impel;" Greek stizein "to prick, puncture," stigma "mark made by a pointed instrument;" Old Persian tigra- "sharp, pointed;" Avestan tighri- "arrow;" Lithuanian stingu, stigti "to remain in place;" Russian stegati "to quilt").

 Etymologists have tried to connect this to *stegh- , reconstructed PIE root of words for sting , but Boutkan (2005) writes that the attempt has "formal problems" and the relationship "remains unclear."

 Loosely, "put something where it will remain," with or without the notion of penetration. Hence the figurative sense of "remain permanently in mind" (c. 1300). The meaning "persist (in a course of action), insist upon" is mid-15c. The transitive sense of "to fasten (something) in place" is attested from late 13c. Related: Stuck ; sticking .

 To stick out "protrude, project" is recorded from 1560s. Slang stick around "remain" is from 1912; stick it as a rude item of advice is recorded by 1922. Sticking point , beyond which one refuses to go, is from 1956. Sticking-place , where any thing put will stay, is from 1570s; modern use generally is an echo of Shakespeare.

 astigmatic (adj.) 

 "exhibiting astigmatism," 1849; see astigmatism + -ic .

 a- (3) 

 prefix meaning "not, without," from Greek a- , an- "not" (the "alpha privative"), from PIE root *ne- "not" (source also of English un- ).

 In words from Greek, such as abysmal , adamant , amethyst ; also partly nativized as a prefix of negation ( asexual , amoral , agnostic ). The ancient alpha privatum , denoting want or absence.

 Greek also had an alpha copulativum , a- or ha- , expressing union or likeness, which is the a- expressing "together" in acolyte , acoustic , Adelphi , etc. It is from PIE root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 status 

 1670s, "height" of a situation or condition, later "legal standing of a person" (1791), from Latin status "condition, position, state, manner, attitude," from past-participle stem of stare "to stand" (from PIE root *sta- "to stand, make or be firm"). In law, the meaning "legal st

 condition 

 mid-14c., condicioun, "particular mode of being of a person or thing," also "a requisite or prerequisite, a stipulation," from Old French condicion "stipulation; state; behavior; social status" (12c., Modern French condition), from Medieval Latin conditionem (nominative conditio)

 stigma 

 1590s (earlier stigme, c. 1400), "mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron," from Latin stigma (plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) "mark of a pointed instrument, puncture, tattoo-mark, brand," which is related to stizein "to mark, tattoo" (from PIE root 

 gazette 

 "newspaper," c. 1600, from French gazette (16c.), from Italian gazzetta, Venetian dialectal gazeta "newspaper," also the name of a small copper coin, literally "little magpie," from gazza; applied to the monthly newspaper (gazeta de la novità) published in Venice by the governmen

 cultivate 

 by 1650s, of land, "till, prepare for crops;" by 1690s of crops, "raise or produce by tillage;" from Medieval Latin cultivatus, past participle of cultivare "to cultivate," from Late Latin cultivus "tilled," from Latin cultus "care, labor; cultivation," from past participle of co

 shenanigan 

 "nonsense; deceit, humbug," 1855, American English slang, of uncertain origin. Earliest records of it are in California (San Francisco and Sacramento). Suggestions include Spanish chanada, a shortened form of charranada "trick, deceit;" or, less likely, German Schenigelei, peddle

 random 

 1650s, "having no definite aim or purpose, haphazard, not sent in a special direction," from phrase at random (1560s), "at great speed" (thus, "carelessly, haphazardly"), from an alteration of the Middle English noun randon, randoun "impetuosity; speed" (c. 1300). This is from Ol

 scarf 

 [band of silk, strip of cloth], 1550s, "a band worn across the body or over the shoulders," probably from Old North French escarpe "sash, sling," which probably is identical with Old French escherpe "pilgrim's purse suspended from the neck," perhaps from Frankish *skirpja or some

 knight 

 Old English cniht "boy, youth; servant, attendant," a word common to the nearby Germanic languages (Old Frisian kniucht, Dutch knecht, Middle High German kneht "boy, youth, lad," German Knecht "servant, bondman, vassal"), of unknown origin. For pronunciation, see kn-. The plural 

 pool 

 "small body of standing water," Old English pol "small body of water; deep, still place in a stream," from Proto-West Germanic *pōl- (source also of Old Frisian and Middle Low German pol, Dutch poel, Old High German pfuol, German Pfuhl "pool, puddle"), which is of uncertain origi

 Share astigmatism 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/astigmatism Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/astigmatism">Etymology of astigmatism by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of astigmatism. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/astigmatism Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of astigmatism," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/astigmatism. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of astigmatism." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/astigmatism. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of astigmatism." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/astigmatism (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near astigmatism 
 asthenic 
 asthenosphere 
 asthma 
 asthmatic 
 astigmatic 
 astigmatism 
 astir 
 astonish 
 astonishing 
 astonishment 
 astound 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix