URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tobacco
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:15:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tobacco - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tobacco - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tobacco 

 tobacco (n.) 

 1580s, tabaco , plant with powerful narcotic qualities, found by Europeans in cultivation in the Americas, from Spanish tabaco , which is in part from an Arawakan language of the Caribbean (probably Taino), said to mean "a roll of tobacco leaves" (according to Las Casas, 1552) or "a kind of pipe for smoking tobacco" (according to Oviedo, 1535). Scholars of Caribbean languages lean toward Las Casas' explanation.

 Early German and Portuguese accounts of Brazil also record another name for tobacco, bittin or betum , evidently a native word in South America, which made its way into 17c. Spanish, French, and English as petun , petumin , etc., and which is preserved in petunia and butun , the Breton word for "tobacco."

 Many haue giuen it [tobacco] the name, 
 Petum , whiche is in deede the proper name of the Hearbe, as they whiche haue traueiled that countrey can tell. [John Frampton, translation of Nicolás Monardes' "Joyful Newes Oute of the Newe Founde Worlde," 1577] 

 Cultivation of the plant in France began 1556 with an importation of seed by Andre Thevet; it was introduced in Spain 1558 by Francisco Fernandes.

 The spelling shift from ta- to to- in English is from 18c. From Spanish the word passed into the European languages: German Tabak , Polish tabaka , etc. The West Indian island of Tobago was said to have been named by Columbus in 1498 from Haitian tambaku "pipe," in reference to the native custom of smoking dried tobacco leaves [Room].

 In fashion, as a shade or color, by 1923. Tobacco Road as a mythical place representative of rural Southern U.S. poverty is from the title of Erskine Caldwell's 1932 novel.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to tobacco 

 petunia (n.) 

 genus of ornamental plants native to South America and Mexico, 1825, from Modern Latin Petunia (1789), from French petun (16c.), an obsolete word for "tobacco plant" (in Century Dictionary, 1890, "said to be still in use in some parts of Canada"), from Portuguese petum , evidently from Guarani (Paraguay) pety . The petunia has a botanical affinity to the tobacco plant. See tobacco .

 tabacco (n.) 

 obsolete form of tobacco . In pharmacy tabacum was "tobacco in the natural dried state."

 tabagie 
 tobacconist 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cigarette 

 "small cigar made of finely cut tobacco," rolled up in an envelop of tobacco, corn-husk, or (typically) rice paper, 1835,...

 cigar 

 "cylindrical roll of tobacco for smoking," generally pointed at one end and cut at the other, 1730, from Spanish cigarro...(source also of French cigare), probably from Maya sicar "to smoke rolled tobacco leaves," from si'c "tobacco;" or from or...Negroes, with feathered headdresses and kilts, smoking pipes, are to be seen outside tobacco shops on the Continent, as well...

 blunt 

 As street slang for "marijuana and tobacco cigar" (easier to pass around, easier to disguise, and the stimulant in the tobacco...

 smoke 

 In reference to tobacco, "draw fumes from burning into the mouth and puff them out again," it is first recorded 1604 in James...I's "Counterblast to Tobacco."...

 plantation 

 The meaning "large farm on which tobacco or cotton is grown" is recorded by 1706; "Century Dictionary" [1895] defines it...southern parts of the United States, South America, the West Indies, Africa, India, Ceylon, etc., in which cotton, sugar-cane, tobacco...

 niacin 

 The new name was found to be necessary because some anti-tobacco groups warned against enriched bread because it would foster...

 chaw 

 The noun meaning "that which is chewed" (especially a quid of tobacco) is recorded from 1709....

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 nicotine 

 also nicotin, poisonous volatile alkaloid base found in tobacco leaves, 1819, from French nicotine, earlier nicotiane, from Modern Latin Nicotiana, the formal botanical name for the tobacco plant, named for Jean Nicot (c. 1530-1600), French ambassador to Portugal, who sent tobacc

 gash 

 1540s, an alteration of Middle English garce "a gash, cut, wound, incision" (early 13c.), from Old North French garser "to scarify, cut, slash" (Old French *garse), apparently from Vulgar Latin *charassare, from Greek kharassein "engrave, sharpen, carve, cut" (from PIE *gher- (4)

 Share tobacco 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tobacco Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tobacco">Etymology of tobacco by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tobacco. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tobacco Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tobacco," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tobacco. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tobacco." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tobacco. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tobacco." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tobacco (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tobacco 
 toadstool 
 toady 
 toast 
 toaster 
 toasty 
 tobacco 
 tobacconist 
 to-be 
 Tobias 
 toboggan 
 Toby 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix