URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/plush
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:00:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Plush - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Plush - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of plush 

 plush (n.) 

 "soft fabric, cloth having a softer and longer nap than that of velvet," 1590s, from French pluche "shag, plush," contraction of peluche "hairy fabric," from Old French peluchier "to pull, to tug, to pluck" (the final process in weaving plush), from Vulgar Latin *piluccare "remove hair" (see pluck (v.)). Related: Plushy ; plushness .
 also from 1590s 

 plush (adj.) 

 1620s, "made or consisting of plush," from plush (n.). The meaning "swanky, luxurious" is by 1927. Plushy in this sense is recorded from 1923; plushie (n.) "soft toy" is by 2003. Related: Plushly ; plushness .
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to plush 

 pluck (v.) 

 Middle English plukken , "pull (something) off or out from a surface" (especially hair or feathers, but also teeth), from late Old English ploccian , pluccian "pull off, cull," from West Germanic *plokken (source also of Middle Low German plucken , Middle Dutch plocken , Dutch plukken , Flemish plokken , German pflücken ). This is perhaps from an unrecorded Gallo-Roman or Vulgar Latin *piluccare (source of Old French peluchier , late 12c.; Italian piluccare ), a frequentative, ultimately from Latin pilare "pull out hair," from pilus "hair" (see pile (n.3)). But despite the similarities, OED finds difficulties with this and cites gaps in historical evidence. From late 14c. as "to pull sharply with a sudden jerk or force (of the strings of a bow, harp, etc.). Related: Plucked ; plucking .

 To pluck a rose, an expression said to be used by women for going to the necessary house, which in the country usually stands in the garden. [F. Grose, "Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue," 1785]

 This euphemistic use is attested from 1610s. To pluck up "summon up" (courage, heart, etc.) is from c. 1300.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cloth 

 "woven fabric, pliable stuff made of intertexture of threads or fibers," Old English claþ "a cloth, sail, cloth covering, woven or felted material to wrap around one," hence, also, "garment," from Proto-Germanic *kalithaz (source also of Old Frisian klath "cloth," Middle Dutch cl

 lush 

 mid-15c., "lax, flaccid, soft, tender" (obsolete or dialectal), from Old French lasche "soft, loose, slack, negligent, cowardly," from laschier "loosen," from Late Latin laxicare "become shaky," related to Latin laxare "loosen," from laxus "loose" (from PIE root *sleg- "be slack,

 material 

 mid-14c., "real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world" (contrasted with spiritual, mental, supernatural), a term in scholastic philosophy and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis (adj.) "of or belonging to matter,

 fabric 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "a building," a sense now obsolete, from Old French fabrique (14c.), verbal noun from fabriquer (13c.), from Latin fabricare "to make, construct, fashion, build," from fabrica "workshop," also "an art, trade; a skillful production, structure, fabric," from fab

 finance 

 c. 1400, "an end, settlement, retribution," from Old French finance "end, ending; pardon, remission; payment, expense; settlement of a debt" (13c.), noun of action from finer "to end, settle a dispute or debt," from fin (see fine (n.)). Compare Medieval Latin finis "a payment in 

 fine 

 mid-13c., "unblemished, refined, pure, free of impurities," also "of high quality, choice," from Old French fin "perfected, of highest quality" (12c.), a back-formation from finire or else from Latin finis "that which divides, a boundary, limit, border, end" (see finish (v.)); he

 magpie 

 popular name of a common bird of Europe, Asia, and America, known for its chattering, acquisitiveness, curiosity, and mimicry, c. 1600, earlier simply pie (mid-13c.). The first element is Mag, nickname for Margaret, long used in proverbial and slang English for qualities associat

 solution 

 late 14c., solucioun, "explanation, answer; interpretation of a dream; the dissolving of a substance in a liquid, transformation of matter to a liquid state," from Old French solucion "division, dissolving; explanation; payment" and directly from Latin solutionem (nominative solu

 carpenter 

 "artificer in timber, one who does the heavier sort of wood-working," c. 1300 (attested from early 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French carpenter, Old North French carpentier (Old French and Modern French charpentier), from Late Latin (artifex) carpentarius "wagon (maker); carri

 stake 

 "pointed stick or post; stick of wood sharpened at one end for driving into the ground, used as part of a fence, as a boundary-mark, as a post to tether an animal to, or as a support for something (a vine, a tent, etc.)," Old English staca "pin, stake," from Proto-Germanic *stako

 Share plush 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/plush Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/plush">Etymology of plush by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of plush. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/plush Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of plush," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/plush. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of plush." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/plush. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of plush." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/plush (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near plush 
 pluri- 
 pluripotential 
 plus 
 -plus 
 plus ca change 
 plush 
 plutarchy 
 Pluto 
 plutocracy 
 plutocrat 
 plutogogue 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix