URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/borage
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T15:31:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Borage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Borage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of borage 

 borage (n.) 

 blue-flowered plant used in salads, etc., mid-13c., from Anglo-French burage , Old French borage (13c., Modern French bourrache ), from Medieval Latin borrago , which also is the source of Spanish boraja , Italian borraggine , German Boretsch .

 The Medieval Latin word was held by folk-etymology to be from Arabic abu arak , literally "the father of sweat," supposedly so called by Arab physicians for its effect on humans. But OED and other sources find it rather to be from Latin borra "rough hair, short wool," in reference to the texture of the foliage. Related: Boraginaceous .
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to borage 

 orach (n.) 

 also arach, arrach , or orage , one of several old-world plants of the genus Atriplex, c. 1300, from Old French arrache , said to be from Latin atriplice , from Greek atraphaxus, but Prior proposes the source of the French is an unattested Medieval Latin * aurago from aurum , "gold" + ago , "wort" (as in borage , plantago , etc.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 intimate 

 1630s, "closely acquainted, very familiar," also "inmost, intrinsic," from Late Latin intimatus, past participle of intimare "make known, announce, impress," from Latin intimus "inmost, innermost, deepest" (adj.), also used figuratively, of affections, feelings, and as a noun, "c

 year 

 Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) "year," from Proto-Germanic *jēr "year" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr, Gothic jer "year"), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- "year, season" (source al

 honest 

 c. 1300, "respectable, decent, of neat appearance," also "free from fraud," from Old French oneste, honeste "virtuous, honorable; decent, respectable" (12c.; Modern French honnête), from Latin honestus "honorable, respected, regarded with honor," figuratively "deserving honor, ho

 tangle 

 mid-14c., tanglen, "encumber, enmesh, knit together confusedly," a shortening of entangle in some cases, in others probably a nasalized variant of tagilen "to involve in a difficult situation, entangle," from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Swedish taggla "to disorder," 

 class 

 c. 1600, "group of students," in U.S. especially "number of pupils in a school or college of the same grade," from French classe (14c.), from Latin classis "a class, a division; army, fleet," especially "any one of the six orders into which Servius Tullius divided the Roman peopl

 fiscal 

 1560s, "pertaining to public revenue," from French fiscal, from Late Latin fiscalis "of or belonging to the state treasury," from Latin fiscus "state treasury," originally "money bag, purse, basket made of twigs (in which money was kept)," which is of unknown origin. The etymolog

 asylum 

 early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), "place of refuge, sanctuary," from Latin asylum "sanctuary," from Greek asylon "refuge, fenced territory," noun use of neuter of asylos "inviolable, safe from violence," especially of persons seeking protection, from a- "without" (see a- (3)

 propaganda 

 1718, "committee of cardinals in charge of foreign missions of the Catholic Church," short for Congregatio de Propaganda Fide "congregation for propagating the faith," a committee of cardinals established 1622 by Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the 

 shag 

 1590s, "cloth having a velvet nap on one side," perhaps ultimately from Old English sceacga "rough matted hair or wool," but the word seems to be missing in Middle English. The Old English word is from Proto-Germanic *skagjan (source also of Old Norse skegg, Swedish skägg "beard"

 Share borage 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/borage Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/borage">Etymology of borage by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of borage. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/borage Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of borage," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borage. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of borage." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borage. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of borage." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/borage (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near borage 
 boo-ya 
 booze 
 boozy 
 bop 
 bo-peep 
 borage 
 borax 
 borborygmus 
 Bordeaux 
 bordel 
 bordello 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix