URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/thyroid
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:16:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Thyroid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Thyroid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of thyroid 

 thyroid (adj.) 

 1690s, in anatomy, in reference to both the cartilage and the gland, from Latinized form of Greek thyreoeid ē s , literally "shield-shaped" (in khondros thyreoeides "shield-shaped cartilage," used by Galen to describe the "Adam's apple" in the throat), from thyreos "oblong, door-shaped shield" (from thyra "door," from PIE root *dhwer- "door, doorway") + -eides "form, shape" (see -oid ). The noun, short for thyroid gland , is recorded from 1849. Combining form is thyro- .
 also from 1690s 

 Entries linking to thyroid 

 hyperthyroidism (n.) 

 1895, from hyper- "over, exceedingly, to excess" + thyroid + -ism .

 pylon (n.) 

 1823, "gateway to an Egyptian temple," from Greek pylon "gateway," from pylē "gate, wing of a pair of double gates; an entrance, entrance into a country; mountain pass; narrow strait of water," a word of unknown etymology, perhaps a foreign technical term. The usual word for "door" in PIE in Greek took the form thyra (see thyroid ). Meaning "tower for guiding aviators" (1909) led to that of "steel tower for high-tension wires" (1923).

 thyroxine 
 *dhwer- 
 -oid 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 epic 

 1580s, "pertaining to or constituting a lengthy heroic poem," via French épique or directly from Latin epicus, from Greek epikos, from epos "a word; a tale, story; promise, prophecy, proverb; poetry in heroic verse" (from PIE root *wekw- "to speak"). Extended sense of "grand, her

 honky 

 also honkey, derogatory word for "white person," by 1967, African-American vernacular, of unknown origin, perhaps from late 19c. hunky "East-Central European immigrant," which probably is a colloquial shortening of Hungarian (compare hunk (n.2)). Honky in the sense of "factory ha

 money 

 mid-13c., monie, "funds, means, anything convertible into money;" c. 1300, "coinage, coin, metal currency," from Old French monoie "money, coin, currency; change" (Modern French monnaie), from Latin moneta "place for coining money, mint; coined money, money, coinage," from Moneta

 pretend 

 late 14c., pretenden, "to profess, put forward as a statement or assertion, maintain" (a claim, etc.), "to direct (one's) efforts," from Old French pretendre "to lay claim," from Latin praetendere "stretch in front, spread before, put forward; put forward as an excuse, allege," f

 dialogue 

 c. 1200, "literary work consisting of a conversation between two or more persons," from Old French dialoge and directly from Latin dialogus, from Greek dialogos "conversation, dialogue," related to dialogesthai "converse," from dia "across, between" (see dia-) + legein "to speak"

 quixotic 

 of persons, "extravagantly chivalrous, absurdly romantic," abstractly, "striving for an unattainable or impractical ideal," 1791, from Don Quixote, the romantic, impractical hero of Cervantes' satirical novel "Don Quixote de la Mancha" (1605; in English translation by 1620). Don 

 bender 

 late 15c., "instrument for bending," agent noun from bend (v.). Slang meaning "drinking bout" is American English, attested from 1846, perhaps from the Scottish sense of "a hard drinker" (1728). Perhaps from the verb in the figurative sense of "strain, brace, wind up." Other slan

 adamant 

 late 14c., "hard, unbreakable," from adamant (n.). The figurative sense of "unshakeable" (in belief, etc.) is by 1670s. Related: Adamantly; adamance...."a very hard stone," mid-14c., adamant, adamaunt, from Old French adamant "diamond; magnet" or directly from Latin adamantem (no

 shift 

 Middle English shiften, from Old English sciftan, scyftan "arrange, place, put in order" (a sense now obsolete), also "divide, separate, partition; distribute, allot, share" (now obsolete or provincial), from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (source also of Old Norse skipta "to divide, ch

 rap 

 early 14c., rappe, "a quick, light blow; a resounding stroke," also "a fart" (late 15c.), native or borrowed from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish rap, Swedish rapp "light blow"); either way probably of imitative origin (compare slap, clap). Slang meaning "a rebuke, the blam

 Share thyroid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/thyroid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/thyroid">Etymology of thyroid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of thyroid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/thyroid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of thyroid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/thyroid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of thyroid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/thyroid. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of thyroid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/thyroid (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near thyroid 
 thwart 
 thy 
 thyme 
 thymine 
 thymus 
 thyroid 
 thyroxine 
 thyrsus 
 thyself 
 ti 
 Tia Maria 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix