URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrism
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chrism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chrism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chrism 

 chrism (n.) 

 "oil mingled with balm, a sacred ointment consecrated and used in Church rites," late Old English chrisma , from Church Latin chrisma , from Greek khrisma "an unguent, anointing, unction," from khriein "to anoint" (from PIE root *ghrei- "to rub"). Chrisom "baptismal robe," is a c. 1200 variant of this. Related: Chrismal ; chrismatory .

 Entries linking to chrism 

 anoint (v.) 

 mid-14c., enointen , "pour oil upon, smear with ointment," from Old French enoint "smeared on," past participle of enoindre "smear on," from Latin inunguere "to anoint," from in- "in, into" (see in ) + unguere "to smear" (see unguent (n.)).

 Forms in a- by late 14c. Originally in reference to grease or oil smeared on for medicinal purposes; its use in the Coverdale Bible in reference to Christ (as in The Lord's Anointed ; see chrism ) has spiritualized the word. Related: Anointed ; anointing (c. 1300 as a verbal noun).

 *ghrei- 

 ghrēi- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to rub." 

 It might form all or part of: chrism ; Christ ; christen ; Christian ; Christmas ; cream ; grime ; grisly ; Kriss Kringle .

 It might also be the source of: Greek khriein "to anoint, besmear;" Lithuanian grieju, grieti "to skim the cream off;" Old English grima "mask, helmet, ghost," Middle Low German greme "dirt."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cream 

 early 14c., creyme, "the rich and buttery part of milk," from Old French cresme, craime, creme "chrism, holy oil" (13c.,...

 salve 

 "medicinal ointment or adhesive preparation for external use on wounds and sores," Old English sealf "healing ointment," from West Germanic *salbo- "oily substance" (source also of Old Saxon salba, Middle Dutch salve, Dutch zalf, Old High German salba, German salbe "ointment"), f

 balm 

 c. 1200, basme, "oily, resinous aromatic substance exuding naturally from shrubs of the genus Commiphora," from Old French basme, baume, balme "balsam, balm" (12c., Modern French baume), from Latin balsamum, from Greek balsamon "balsam," from Hebrew (Semitic) basam "spice," which

 lamb 

 Old English lamb, lomb, Northumbrian lemb "lamb," from Proto-Germanic *lambaz (source also of Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Gothic lamb, Middle Dutch, Dutch lam, Middle High German lamp, German Lamm "lamb"). Common to the Germanic languages, but with no certain cognates outs

 oil 

 late 12c., "olive oil," from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile "oil" (12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum "oil, olive oil" (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from Greek elaion "olive tree," from elaia (see olive). Nearly all the European 

 holy 

 Old English halig "holy, consecrated, sacred; godly; ecclesiastical," from Proto-Germanic *hailaga- (source also of Old Norse heilagr, Danish hellig, Old Frisian helich "holy," Old Saxon helag, Middle Dutch helich, Old High German heilag, German heilig, Gothic hailags "holy"), fr

 diaphragm 

 late 14c., diafragma, in anatomy, "muscular membrane which separates the thorax from the abdominal cavity in mammals," from Late Latin diaphragma, from Greek diaphragma "partition, barrier, muscle which divides the thorax from the abdomen," from diaphrassein "to barricade," from 

 quench 

 Middle English quenchen, "to extinguish, put out" (heat, light, fire, also of desire, hunger, thirst), also figurative, "to bring to naught, eliminate, render ineffectual" (c. 1200), Old English acwencan "to quench" (of fire, light), from Proto-Germanic *kwenkjanan, probably a ca

 carbohydrate 

 general name for a group of organic compounds consisting of carbon atoms in multiples of 6 and hydrogen and oxygen in the proportion of water, 1851, from carbo-, combining form of carbon, + hydrate (n.), denoting compound produced when certain substances combine with water, from 

 Share chrism 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrism Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrism">Etymology of chrism by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chrism. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrism Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chrism," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrism. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chrism." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrism. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chrism." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chrism (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chrism 
 chow 
 chow mein 
 chowder 
 chrestomathy 
 Chris 
 chrism 
 Christ 
 Christabel 
 christ-cross 
 christen 
 Christendom 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix