URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/harem
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:17:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Harem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Harem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of harem 

 harem (n.) 

 1630s, "part of a Middle Eastern house reserved for women," from Turkish harem , from Arabic haram "wives and concubines," originally "women's quarters," literally "something forbidden or kept safe," from root of harama "he guarded, forbade." From 1784 in English as "wives, female relatives and female slaves in a Middle Eastern household." The harem-skirt was introduced in fashion 1911. Harem pants attested from 1921; fashionable c. 1944. An earlier word for them (in a Middle Eastern/Balkan context) was bag-trousers (1849).
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to harem 

 haram (adj.) 

 in Islamic terminology, "forbidden;" see harem .

 Marrano (n.) 

 also Marano , "a Jew or Moor in Spain who, to avoid persecution, publicly professed conversion to Christianity while privately continuing in the practices and beliefs of their old religion," 1580s, from Spanish, probably literally "pig, swine," an expression of contempt, from Arabic muharram "forbidden thing" (eating of pork is forbidden by Muslim and Jewish religious law), from haruma "was forbidden" (see harem ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 seraglio 

 1580s, in reference to Muslim lands, "the part of the dwelling where the women are secluded," also the name of a former palace of the sultan in Istanbul, which contained his harem; from Italian seraglio, alteration of Turkish saray "palace, court," from Persian sara'i "palace, in

 eunuch 

 man," late 14c., eunuk, from Latin eunuchus, from Greek eunoukhos "castrated man," originally "guard of the bedchamber or harem...[Ranulph Higden’s "Polychronicon," mid-14c., John Trevisa's translation,  1380s] Harem attendants in Oriental courts...

 quarters 

 "military dwelling place," 1590s, from quarter (n.1) in sense of "portion of a town." As "part of an American plantation where the slaves live," from 1724. The military sense seems to be also the source of quartermaster and it might be behind the phrase give quarter "spare from i

 pants 

 "trousers, drawers," 1840, see pantaloons. The word was limited to vulgar and commercial use at first. I leave the broadcloth,—coats and all the rest,— The dangerous waistcoat, called by cockneys "vest," The things named "pants" in certain documents, A word not made for ge

 acolyte 

 early 14c., "inferior officer in the church," from Old French acolite or directly from Medieval Latin acolytus (Late Latin acoluthus), from Greek akolouthos "following, attending on," as a noun, "a follower, attendant," literally "having one way," from a- "together with," copulat

 encounter 

 c. 1300, "meeting of adversaries, confrontation," from Old French encontre "meeting; fight; opportunity" (12c.), noun use of preposition/adverb encontre "against, counter to" from Late Latin incontra "in front of," from Latin in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + contra "against" (

 capital 

 early 13c., "of or pertaining to the head," from Old French capital, from Latin capitalis "of the head," hence "capital, chief, first," from caput (genitive capitis) "head" (from PIE root *kaput- "head"). The meaning "main, principal, chief, dominant, first in importance" is from

 article 

 c. 1200, "separate parts of anything written" (such as the statements in the Apostles' Creed, the clauses of a statute or contract), from Old French article (13c.), from Latin articulus "a part, a member," also "a knuckle; the article in grammar," diminutive of artus "a joint" (f

 salary 

 late 13c., salarie, "compensation, payment," whether periodical, for regular service or for a specific service; from Anglo-French salarie, Old French salaire "wages, pay, reward," from Latin salarium "an allowance, a stipend, a pension," said to be originally "salt-money, soldier

 dauphin 

 title of the eldest son of the king of France (in use from 1349-1830), early 15c., from Old French dauphin, literally "dolphin" (see dolphin). Originally it was the title attached to "the Dauphin of Viennois," whose province (in the French Alps north of Provence) came to be known

 Share harem 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/harem Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/harem">Etymology of harem by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of harem. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/harem Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of harem," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harem. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of harem." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harem. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of harem." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/harem (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near harem 
 hardy 
 hare 
 Hare Krishna 
 hare-brained 
 hare-lip 
 harem 
 hark 
 harken 
 Harleian 
 Harlem 
 Harlemite 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix