URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/climax
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:00:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Climax - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Climax - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of climax 

 climax (n.) 

 1580s, in the rhetorical sense ("a chain of reasoning in graduating steps from weaker to stronger"), from Late Latin climax (genitive climacis ), from Greek klimax "propositions rising in effectiveness," literally "ladder," from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- "to lean."

 Originally in rhetoric an arrangement of successive clauses so that the last important word of one is repeated as the first important word of the next, as in Romans v.3-5: "... but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope: And hope maketh not ashamed ...." Compare anadiplosis . From the rhetorical meaning, the word evolved through "series of steps by which a goal is achieved," to "escalating steps," to (1789) "high point of intensity or development," a usage credited by the OED to "popular ignorance."

 The meaning "sexual orgasm" is recorded by 1880 (also in terms such as climax of orgasm ), and is said to have been promoted from c. 1900 by birth-control pioneer Marie Stopes (1880-1958) and others as a more accessible word than orgasm (n.).
 also from 1580s 

 climax (v.) 

 1835, "to reach the highest point, culminate," from climax (n.). For erotic sense, see the noun. Related: Climaxed ; climaxing .
 also from 1835 

 Entries linking to climax 

 anadiplosis (n.) 

 in rhetoric, "repetition at the start of a line or phrase of the last word or words of the preceding one," 1580s, from Latin, from Greek anadiplosis , from anadiploesthai "to be doubled back, to be made double," from ana "back" (see ana- ) + diploun "to double, fold over" (see diploma ).

 Fear leads to anger. Anger leads to hate. Hate leads to suffering. [Yoda, "Star Wars"]

 orgasm (n.) 

 1680s, "sexual climax, the acme of venereal excitement," from French orgasme or Modern Latin orgasmus , from Greek orgasmos "excitement, swelling," from organ "be in heat, become ripe for," literally "to swell, be excited," related to orge "impulse, excitement, anger," from PIE root *wrog- "to burgeon, swell with strength" (source also of Sanskrit urja "a nourishment, sap, vigor," Old Irish ferc , ferg "anger"). Also used 17c. of other violent excitements of emotion or other bodily functions; broader sense of "immoderate excitement or action" is from 1763.

 anticlimax 
 climacteric 
 climactic 
 *klei- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 climacteric 

 1620s, "a critical stage in human life, a period supposed to be especially liable to remarkable change with regard to health, life or fortune," from Latin climactericus, from Greek klimaktērikos "of a critical period," from klimaktēr "rung of a ladder," figuratively "critical poi

 culminate 

 1640s, in astronomy, of a star or planet, "come to or be on the highest point of altitude; come to or be on the meridian," from Late Latin culminatus past participle of culminare "to top, to crown," from Latin culmen (genitive culminis) "top, peak, summit, roof, gable," also used

 culmination 

 1630s, in astronomy/astrology, "position of a heavenly body when it is on the meridian," from French culmination, noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin culminare "to top, to crown," from Latin culmen (genitive culminis) "top, peak, summit, roof, gable," also used

 drama 

 Extended sense of "sequence of events or actions leading up to a climax" is by 1714....

 apogee 

 The figurative sense of "climax, culmination" is from 1640s....

 cap 

 The figurative sense of "complete, consummate, bring to a climax" is from 1580s; that of "go one better, outdo, excel" is...

 Prince Charming 

 As for me, I have always agreed with the fairy books that the moment when Prince Charming arrives is the perfect climax....

 occasion 

 late 14c., occasioun, "opportunity; grounds for action or feeling; state of affairs that makes something else possible; a happening, occurrence leading to some result," from Old French ochaison, ocasion "cause, reason, excuse, pretext; opportunity" (13c.) or directly from Latin o

 instant 

 late 14c., "moment in time, infinitely short space of time," from noun use of Old French instant "near, immediate, at hand; assiduous, urgent" (see instant (adj.)). Related: Instanted; instanting....mid-15c., "now, present, of the moment, current," from Old French instant "near, 

 post 

 "a timber of considerable size set upright," from Old English post "pillar, doorpost," and from Old French post "post, upright beam," both from Latin postis "door, post, doorpost," in Medieval Latin "a beam, rod, pole," which is perhaps from Vulgar Latin *por- "forth," a variant 

 Share climax 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/climax Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/climax">Etymology of climax by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of climax. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/climax Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of climax," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/climax. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of climax." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/climax. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of climax." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/climax (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near climax 
 climatic 
 climatography 
 climatological 
 climatologist 
 climatology 
 climax 
 climb 
 climbable 
 climber 
 clime 
 clinch 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close