URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pocket
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:07:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pocket - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pocket - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pocket 

 pocket (n.) 

 mid-14c., pokete , "small bag or pouch, small sack," from Anglo-French pokete (13c.), diminutive of Old North French poque "bag" (Old French pouche ), from a Germanic source akin to Frankish *pokka "bag," from Proto-Germanic *puk- (see poke (n.1)).

 The narrower meaning "small bag worn on the person, especially one sewn into a garment" is from early 15c. The sense of "one of the small bags or nets at the corners and sides of some billiards tables" is from 1754. The mining sense of "cavity in the ground filled with ore" is attested from 1850; the military sense of "area held by troops almost surrounded by the enemy" is from 1918; the general sense of "small area different than its surroundings" (1926) apparently was extended from the military use.

 Figuratively, "one's money" (conceived as being kept in a pocket), from 1717; hence to be out of pocket "expend or lose money" (1690s); Pope Pokett (late 15c.) was figurative of the greedy and corrupt Church.
 also from mid-14c. 

 pocket (v.) 

 1580s, "to place in a pocket or one's pocket" (often with implications of dishonesty, "to appropriate to one's self or for one's own use"), from pocket (n.). From the earliest use often figurative. Meaning "to form pockets" is from c. 1600. Related: Pocketed ; pocketing .
 also from 1580s 

 pocket (adj.) 

 1610s, "of or pertaining to or meant for a pocket," from pocket (n.). Pocket-money "money for occasional or trivial purposes" is attested from 1630s; pocket-handkerchief is from 1640s. Often merely implying a small-sized version of something (for example of of warships, from 1930; also compare Pocket Venus "beautiful, small woman," attested from 1808). Pocket veto attested from 1842, American English.

 The "pocket veto" can operate only in the case of bills sent to the President within ten days of Congressional adjournment. If he retain such a bill (figuratively, in his pocket) neither giving it his sanction by signing it, nor withholding his sanction in returning it to Congress, the bill is defeated. The President is not bound to give reasons for defeating a bill by a pocket veto which he has not had at least ten days to consider. In a regular veto he is bound to give such reasons. [James Albert Woodburn, "The American Republic and its Government," Putnam's, 1903]

 In English history a pocket borough (by 1798) was one whose parliamentary representation was under the control of one person or family.

 BRAMBER, Sussex. This is one of the burgage-tenure or nomination boroughs. The place altogether consists only of twenty-two miserable thatched cottages, and is composed of two intersections of a street, the upper and middle parts of which constitute another pocket borough, called Steyning, which we shall notice in the second class, as belonging to the Duke of Norfolk. ["A Key to the House of Commons," London, 1820]
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to pocket 

 poke (n.1) 

 "small sack," early 13c., probably from a merger of Old English pohha (Northumbrian poha, pocca ) "bag, pocket" and Old Norse poki "bag, pouch, pocket," influenced by Old North French poque (12c., Old French poche ) "purse, poke, purse-net," which is probably from Germanic. All of them probably are from Proto-Germanic *puk- (source also of Middle Dutch poke , dialectal German Pfoch ), from PIE root *beu- , an imitative root associated with words for "to swell" (see bull (n.2)). Compare pocket .

 Wan man ʒevit þe a pig, opin þe powch . [The Proverbs of Hendyng, early 14c.] 

 pickpocket (n.) 

 also pick-pocket , "one who steals from the pockets of others," 1590s, from pick (v.) + pocket (n.). Earlier was pick-purse (late 14c.). As a verb from 1670s.

 pocketbook 
 pocketful 
 pocket-knife 
 watch-pocket 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scoop 

 mid-14c., scōpen, "to bail out, draw out with a scoop," from scoop (n.) and from Middle Low German schüppen "to draw water," Middle Dutch schoppen, from Proto-Germanic *skuppon (source also of Old Saxon skeppian, Dutch scheppen, Old High German scaphan, German schöpfen "to scoop,

 pouch 

 early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), pouche, "bag worn on one's person for carrying things," especially (late 14c.) "small bag in which money is carried," from Anglo-French puche, Old North French pouche (13c.), Old French poche "purse, poke," all from a Germanic source (compare 

 poach 

 (implied in pocched egges), from Old French poché, past participle of pochier (12c.), apparently literally "put into a pocket..." (perhaps as the white of an egg forms a pocket for the yolk), from poche "bag, pocket," from Frankish *pokka "bag," from...

 task 

 German tasche "pocket" is from the same Vulgar Latin source (via Old High German tasca), with presumable sense evolution...from "amount of work imposed by some authority," to "payment for that work," to "wages," to "pocket into which money is put...," to "any pocket."...

 Moll 

 woman" in old underworld slang, for instance Moll-buzzer "pickpocket who specializes in women;" Moll-tooler "female pick-pocket...

 jack-knife 

 also jackknife, "pocket knife larger than a pen-knife," 1711, probably American English, apparently from some sense of jack...

 opening 

 Old English openung "act of making open" (a door, mouth, etc.), "disclosure, manifestation," verbal noun from present participle of open (v.). Meaning "vacant space, hole, aperture, doorway" is attested from c. 1200. Meaning "act of opening (a place, to the public)" is from late 

 take 

 Middle English taken, from late Old English tacan "to grip, seize by force, lay hold of," from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka "take, grasp, lay hold," past tense tok, past participle tekinn; also compare Swedish ta, past participle tagit). This is reconstructed to 

 space 

 c. 1300, "extent or area; room" (to do something), a shortening of Old French espace "period of time, distance, interval" (12c.), from Latin spatium "room, area, distance, stretch of time," a word of unknown origin (also source of Spanish espacio, Italian spazio). From early 14c.

 Share pocket 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pocket Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pocket">Etymology of pocket by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pocket. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pocket Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pocket," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pocket. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pocket." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pocket. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pocket." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pocket (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pocket 
 poach 
 poached 
 poacher 
 Pocahontas 
 pock 
 pocket 
 pocketbook 
 pocketful 
 pocket-knife 
 pock-mark 
 poco 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix