URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nanny
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:29:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nanny - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nanny - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nanny 

 nanny (n.) 

 "children's nurse," 1795, from the widespread child's word for "female adult other than mother" (compare Greek nanna "aunt," and see nana ). The word also is a nickname form of the fem. proper name Ann , which probably is the sense in nanny-goat "female goat" (1706, compare billy-goat ). Nanny-house "brothel" is slang from c. 1700. Nanny state , in reference to overintrusive government policies is attested by 1987, the term is associated with British political leader Margaret Thatcher, who criticized the tendency. Nannyism in reference to actions or policies considered unduly protective is by 1959; also compare the verb.
 also from 1795 

 nanny (v.) 

 "to be unduly protective," 1954, from nanny (n.). Related: Nannied ; nannying .
 also from 1954 

 Entries linking to nanny 

 Ann 

 fem. proper name, alternative form of Anna , from Latin Anna , from Greek, from Hebrew Hannah (see Hannah ). In African-American vernacular, "white woman," also "a black woman who is considered to be acting 'too white;' " also Miss Ann (by 1926). She is the spouse of Mr. Charlie .

 nana 

 child's word for "grandmother" or, sometimes, "nurse," 1844 (see nanny ).

 Nan 
 nun 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nun 

 Old English nunne "woman devoted to religious life under vows of celibacy, poverty, and obedience to a superior," also "vestal, pagan priestess," from Late Latin nonna "nun, tutor," originally (along with masc. nonnus) a term of address to elderly persons, perhaps from children's

 nurse 

 c. 1200, norice, nurrice, "wet-nurse, woman who nourishes or suckles an infant; foster-mother to a young child," from Old French norrice "foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny" (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin *nutricia "nurse, governess, tutoress," noun use of fem. of L

 bag 

 "small sack," c. 1200, bagge, probably from Old Norse baggi "pack, bundle," or a similar Scandinavian source. OED rejects connection to other Germanic words for "bellows, belly" as without evidence and finds a Celtic origin untenable. In some senses perhaps from Old French bague,

 gab 

 "talk much," 1786, probably via Scottish and northern England dialect from earlier sense "speak foolishly; talk indiscreetly" (late 14c.), from gabben "to scoff, jeer; mock (someone), ridicule; reproach (oneself)," also "to lie to" (late 13c.), from a Scandinavian source, such as

 toga 

 c. 1600, from Latin toga "cloak or mantle," from PIE *tog-a- "covering," suffixed form of root *(s)teg- "to cover." The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace. The toga as the Roman national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full po

 woman 

 "adult female human," late Old English wimman, wiman (plural wimmen), literally "woman-man," alteration of wifman (plural wifmen) "woman, female servant" (8c.), a compound of wif "woman" (see wife) + man "human being" (in Old English used in reference to both sexes; see man (n.))

 integrity 

 c. 1400, integrite, "innocence, blamelessness; chastity, purity," from Old French integrité and directly from Latin integritatem (nominative integritas) "soundness, wholeness, completeness," figuratively "purity, correctness, blamelessness," from integer "whole" (see integer). Th

 excruciate 

 "to torture, torment, inflict very severe pain on," as if by crucifying, 1560s, from Latin excruciatus, past participle of excruciare "to torture, torment, rack, plague;" figuratively "to afflict, harass, vex, torment," from ex "out, out from; thoroughly" (see ex-) + cruciare "ca

 affirmation 

 early 15c., affirmacioun, "assertion that something is true," from Old French afermacion "confirmation" (14c.), from Latin affirmationem (nominative affirmatio) "an affirmation, solid assurance," noun of action from past-participle stem of affirmare "to make steady; strengthen; c

 brown-nose 

 also brownnose, "try excessively to make a good impression on one with authority," 1939, American English colloquial, said to be military slang originally, from brown (adj.) + nose (n.), "from the implication that servility is tantamount to having one's nose in the anus of the pe

 Share nanny 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nanny Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nanny">Etymology of nanny by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nanny. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nanny Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nanny," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nanny. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nanny." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nanny. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nanny." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nanny (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nanny 
 nana 
 nance 
 Nancy 
 nankeen 
 Nanking 
 nanny 
 nano- 
 nanogram 
 nanometer 
 nanosecond 
 nanotechnology 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix