URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/canary
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:41:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Canary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Canary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of canary 

 canary (n.) 

 type of small songbird, 1650s (short for Canary-bird , 1570s), from French canarie , from Spanish canario "canary bird," literally "of the Canary Islands" (where it is indigenous), from Latin Insula Canaria "Canary Island," largest of the Fortunate Isles, literally "island of dogs" ( canis , derived adjective canarius , from PIE root *kwon- "dog").

 Supposedly so called "from its multitude of dogs of a huge size" (Pliny), but perhaps this is folk-etymology, and the name might instead be that of the Canarii , a Berber people who lived near the coast of Morocco opposite the island and might have settled on it. The name was extended to the whole island group ( Canariæ Insulæ ) by the time of Arnobius (c. 300). As a type of wine (from the Canary Islands) from 1580s.

 [Recent DNA analysis (2019) of ancient remains on the island suggest the indigenous people were of typical North African lineages as well as Mediterranean and sub-Saharan African groups and may have arrived by c. 100 C.E.]
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to canary 

 *kwon- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "dog."

 It might form all or part of: canaille ; canary ; canicular ; canid ; canine ; chenille ; corgi ; cynic ; cynical ; cynosure ; dachshund ; hound ; kennel ; Procyon ; quinsy .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit svan- , Avestan spa , Greek kyōn , Latin canis , Old English hund , Old High German hunt , Old Irish cu , Welsh ci , Russian sobaka (apparently from an Iranian source such as Median spaka ), Armenian shun , Lithuanian šuo "dog."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fink 

 1902, of uncertain origin, possibly from German Fink "a frivolous or dissolute person," originally "a finch" (see finch); the German word also had a sense of "informer" (compare stool pigeon). The other theory traces it to Pinks, short for Pinkerton agents, the private police for

 stool pigeon 

 "police informer," 1859, American English; earlier "one who betrays the unwary (or is used to betray them)," 1821, earlier "a decoy bird" (1812), from a stool as the movable pole or perch to which a pigeon was fastened to lure wild birds. Perhaps a stool was the original device, 

 sneak 

 1550s (implied in sneakish), "creep or steal about privately; move or go in a stealthy, slinking way" (intransitive); perhaps from some dialectal survival of Middle English sniken "to creep, crawl" (c. 1200), which is from Old English snican "to sneak along, creep, crawl," from P

 jonquil 

 From 1791 as the name of a pale yellow color, like that of the flower, and thus a type of canary bird (1865) of that color...

 malmsey 

 [Sir Richard Guylforde, "Pylgrymage," 1506]  The wine later was made in the Azores, Madeira, and the Canary Islands...

 sneaker 

 1590s, "a sneak, one who sneaks," agent noun from sneak (v.). The meaning "rubber-soled shoe" is attested by 1895, American English; so called because the shoe was noiseless. Earlier sneak (1862) was used in the same sense: The night-officer is generally accustomed to wear a sp

 yellow 

 Middle English yelwe, from Old English geolu, geolwe, "yellow," from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish gul "yellow"), from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to sh

 finch 

 common European bird, Old English finc "finch," from Proto-Germanic *finkiz "finch" (source also of Middle Low German and Middle Dutch vinke, Dutch vink, Old High German finco, German Fink), perhaps imitative of the bird's note (compare Breton pint "chaffinch," Russian penka "wre

 snake 

 Middle English snake, "a long, limbless reptile," from Old English snaca, from Proto-Germanic *snakon (source also of Old Norse snakr "snake," Swedish snok, German Schnake "ring snake"), from PIE root *sneg- "to crawl, creeping thing" (source also of Old Irish snaighim "to creep,

 tar 

 type of thick, viscous, dark-colored liquid used as a salve (for sheep), caulking agent (for ships), and incendiary material, Middle English tēr, from Old English teoru, teru "tar, bitumen, resin, gum," literally "the pitch of (certain kinds of) trees," from Proto-Germanic *terw-

 Share canary 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/canary Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/canary">Etymology of canary by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of canary. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/canary Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of canary," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/canary. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of canary." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/canary. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of canary." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/canary (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near canary 
 Canadian 
 Canadianism 
 canaille 
 canal 
 canard 
 canary 
 canasta 
 Canberra 
 cancan 
 cancel 
 cancellation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix