URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/knee
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:52:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Knee - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Knee - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of knee 

 knee (n.) 

 "joint between the principal bones of the leg," Old English cneo , cneow "knee," from Proto-Germanic *knewa- (source also of Old Norse kne , Old Saxon kneo , Old Frisian kni , Middle Dutch cnie , Dutch knie , Old High German kniu , German Knie , Gothic kniu ), from PIE root *genu- (1) "knee; angle." For pronunciation, see kn- .

 To be across (someone's) knee in reference to spanking is from 1866. Knee-breeches is from 1827; knee-pants is from 1858. Knee-slapper "funny joke" is from 1955.

 knee (v.) 

 early 13c., "to bend the knee, kneel," from Old English cneowian , from cneow (see knee (n.)). The meaning "to strike with the knee" is first recorded 1892. Related: Kneed ; kneeing .
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to knee 

 kneecap (n.) 

 1650s, "a covering or protection for the knee," from knee (n.) + cap (n.). Meaning "bone in front of the knee joint" is from 1869; the verb in the underworld sense of "to shoot (someone) in the knee" as punishment is attested by 1975. Related: Kneecapped .

 knee-deep (adj.) 

 c. 1400, "up to the knees," from knee (n.) + deep (adj.).

 knee-high 
 knee-jerk 
 kneepad 
 knock-kneed 
 weak-kneed 
 *genu- 
 kn- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stifle 

 late 14c., stuflen, "have difficulty breathing, choke, suffocate; drown, suffocate by drowning," a word of of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Old French estouffer "to stifle, smother" (Modern French étouffer), itself of uncertain etymology but perhaps from a Germanic 

 genuine 

 [Alternative etymology is from Latin genu "knee," from a supposed ancient custom of a father acknowledging paternity of a...newborn by placing it on his knee.]...

 garter 

 fastening to keep a stocking in place on the leg," early 14c., from Old North French gartier "band just above or below the knee..." (Old French jartier, 14c., Modern French jarretière), from garet/jaret "bend of the knee," perhaps from Gaulish (compare...

 ham 

 " (especially salted and cured or smoke-dried), 1630s, extended from earlier sense of "part of the human leg behind the knee...; hock of a quadruped," from Old English hamm "hollow or bend of the knee," from Proto-Germanic *hamma- (source also of Old...

 knuckle 

 "submit, give in" is first recorded 1740, supposedly from the former more general sense of "knuckle" and here meaning "knee...

 pantaloons 

 By 1798 the word was revived in reference to tight long trousers buttoned or tied below the knee (replacing knee-breeches...

 hock 

 Proto-Germanic *hanhaz (source also of German Hachse "hock," Old English hæla "heel"), from PIE *kenk- (3) "heel, bend of the knee...

 articulation 

 early 15c., articulacioun (Chauliac), "a joint or joining; setting of bones," from Old French articulation, from Medieval Latin articulationem (nominative articulatio) "separation into joints," noun of action from past-participle stem of articulare "to separate (meat) into joints

 joint 

 c. 1300, "an (anatomical) joint, a part of a body where two bones meet and move in contact with one another, the structure that holds such bones together," from Old French joint "joint of the body" (12c.), from Latin iunctus "united, connected, associated," past participle of iun

 leg 

 late 13c., from a Scandinavian source, probably Old Norse leggr "a leg, bone of the arm or leg," from Proto-Germanic *lagjaz (cognates Danish læg, Swedish läg "the calf of the leg"), a word with no certain ulterior connections. Perhaps from a PIE root meaning "to bend" [Buck]. Fo

 Share knee 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/knee Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/knee">Etymology of knee by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of knee. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/knee Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of knee," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/knee. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of knee." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/knee. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of knee." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/knee (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near knee 
 knapweed 
 knave 
 knavery 
 knavish 
 knead 
 knee 
 kneecap 
 knee-deep 
 knee-high 
 knee-jerk 
 kneel 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix