URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/toxic
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:14:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Toxic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Toxic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of toxic 

 toxic (adj.) 

 1660s, "of or pertaining to poisons, poisonous," from French toxique and directly from Late Latin toxicus "poisoned," from Latin toxicum "poison," from Greek toxikon (pharmakon) "(poison) for use on arrows," from toxikon , neuter of toxikos "pertaining to arrows or archery," and thus to a bow, from toxon "bow," which has been regarded as a loan-word from Scythian.

 Watkins suggests a possible source in Iranian  taxša-  "bow" (from PIE  *tekw-  "to run, flee"). Beekes, pointing to the early attestation of the Greek word, suggests a Pre-Greek origin.

 As a noun from 1890. Related: Toxical . Compare intoxicate . Toxic waste is by 1888 in medicine, "toxin;" by 1955 as "chemical or radioactive waste."
 also from 1660s 

 Entries linking to toxic 

 intoxicate (v.) 

 mid-15c., "to poison, kill with poison" (obsolete), from Medieval Latin intoxicatus , past participle of intoxicare "to poison," from in- "in" (see in- (2)) + Latin toxicare "to poison," from toxicum "poison" (see toxic ). The meaning "make drunk" is recorded by 1570s (implied in intoxicated ). The figurative sense of "excite to a high pitch of feeling" is attested from 1590s. Related: Intoxicating .

 antitoxic (n.) 

 "substance which counteracts a poison," 1860; from anti- "against" + toxic . As an adjective, "counteracting a poison," from 1862.

 cytotoxic 
 detoxicate 
 detoxify 
 non-toxic 
 taxine 
 toxemia 
 toxicate 
 toxicity 
 toxicology 
 toxicophobia 
 toxicosis 
 toxin 
 toxoplasmosis 
 See All Related Words (15) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 intoxicate 

 mid-15c., "to poison" (obsolete), from Medieval Latin intoxicatus, past participle of intoxicare "to poison," from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + Latin toxicare "to poison," from toxicum "poison" (see toxic). Meaning "make drunk" first recorded 1570s (implied in intoxicated)

 hysteria 

 nervous disease, 1801, coined in medical Latin as an abstract noun from Greek hystera "womb," from PIE *udtero-, variant of *udero- "abdomen, womb, stomach" (see uterus). Originally defined as a neurotic condition peculiar to women and thought to be caused by a dysfunction of the

 burgeon 

 early 14c., "grow, sprout, blossom," from Anglo-French burjuner, Old French borjoner "to bud, sprout," from borjon "a bud, shoot, pimple" (Modern French bourgeon), a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *burrionem (nominative *burrio), from Late Latin burra "flock 

 hot dog 

 also hotdog, "sausage on a split roll," c. 1890, American English, from hot (adj.) + dog (n.). Many early references are in college student publications; later popularized, but probably not coined, by cartoonist T.A. "Tad" Dorgan (1877-1929). It is said in early explanations to e

 innovation 

 mid-15c., innovacion, "restoration, renewal," from Late Latin innovationem (nominative innovatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of innovare "to change; to renew," from in- "into" (from PIE root *en "in") + novus "new" (see new). Meaning "a novel change, experimental v

 about 

 Middle English aboute, from Old English abutan (adv., prep.), earlier onbutan "on the outside of; around the circumference of, enveloping; in the vicinity of, near; hither and thither, from place to place," also "with a rotating or spinning motion," in late Old English "near in t

 inchoate 

 "recently or just begun," 1530s, from Latin inchoatus, past participle of inchoare, alteration of incohare "commence, begin," probably originally "to hitch up," traditionally derived from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + a verb from cohum "strap (fastened to the oxen's yoke),"

 warrant 

 c. 1200, "protector, defender," from Old North French warant "defender; surety, pledge; justifying evidence" (Old French garant), from Frankish *warand, from Proto-Germanic *war- "to warn, guard, protect" (source also of Old High German werento "guarantor," noun use of present pa

 focus 

 1640s, "point of convergence," from Latin focus "hearth, fireplace" (also, figuratively, "home, family"), which is of unknown origin. Used in post-classical times for "fire" itself; taken by Kepler (1604) in a mathematical sense for "point of convergence," perhaps on analogy of t

 scalper 

 1650s as a type of surgical instrument; 1760 as "one who takes or removes scalps," agent noun from scalp (v.). The meaning "person who re-sells tickets at unauthorized prices for a profit" is by 1869 in American English; the earliest reference is to theater tickets, but it more o

 Share toxic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/toxic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/toxic">Etymology of toxic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of toxic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/toxic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of toxic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/toxic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of toxic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/toxic. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of toxic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/toxic (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near toxic 
 township 
 townspeople 
 tow-path 
 tow-truck 
 toxemia 
 toxic 
 toxicate 
 toxicity 
 toxicology 
 toxicophobia 
 toxicosis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix