URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/belong
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:58:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Belong - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Belong - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of belong 

 belong (v.) 

 mid-14c., "to go along with, properly relate to," from be- intensive prefix, + longen "to go," from Old English langian "pertain to, to go along with," which is of uncertain origin but perhaps related to the root of long (adj.). The senses of "be the property of" and "be a member of" are attested from late 14c. Cognate with Middle Dutch belanghen , Dutch belangen , German belangen . It displaced earlier Old English gelang , with completive prefix ge- .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to belong 

 long (adj.) 

 Old English lang "having a great linear extent, that extends considerably from end to end; tall; lasting," from Proto-Germanic *langa- (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang , Old High German and German lang , Old Norse langr , Middle Dutch lanc , Dutch lang , Gothic laggs "long").

 The Germanic words perhaps are from PIE *dlonghos- (source also of Latin longus "long, extended; further; of long duration; distant, remote," Old Persian darga- , Persian dirang , Sanskrit dirghah "long"), from root *del- (1) "long" (source also of Greek dolikhos "long," endelekhes "perpetual"). Latin longus (source of prolong , elongate , longitude , etc.) thus is probably cognate with, but not the source of, the Germanic words. The word illustrates the Old English tendency for short "a" to become short "o" before -n- (also retained in bond / band and West Midlands dialectal lond from land and hond from hand ).

 Also in Old English in reference to time, "drawn out in duration," with overtones of "serious." The old sense of "tall" now appears to be dialectal only, or obsolete. For long "during a long time" is from c. 1300. To be long on something, "have a lot" of it, is from 1900, American English slang. A long vowel (c. 1000) originally was pronounced for an extended time. Mathematical long division is from 1808. Sporting long ball is from 1744, originally in cricket. Long jump as a sporting event is attested from 1864. A long face , one drawn downward in expression of sadness or solemnity, is from 1786. Long in the tooth (1841 of persons) is from horses showing age by recession of gums (but not in this sense until 1870). Long knives , name Native Americans gave to white settlers (originally in Virginia/Kentucky) is from 1774, perhaps a reference to their swords. Long time no see , supposedly imitative of American Indian speech, is first recorded 1919 as Chinese English.

 belongings (n.) 

 "goods, effects, possessions," 1817, from plural of verbal noun from belong .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 go 

 Old English gan "to advance, walk; depart, go away; happen, take place; conquer; observe, practice, exercise," from West Germanic *gaian (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian gan, Middle Dutch gaen, Dutch gaan, Old High German gan, German gehen), from PIE root *ghē- "to release,

 pertain 

 early 14c., perteinen, "be attached legally," from Old French partenir "to belong to" and directly from Latin pertinere "...to reach, stretch; relate, have reference to; belong, be the right of; be applicable," from per "through" (from PIE root...From late 14c. as "to belong to as a possession or an adjunct; belong to as one's care or concern," also "have reference...

 appurtenance 

 apartenance, apertenance, present participle of apartenir "be related to," from Late Latin appertinere "to pertain to, belong...to," from Latin ad "to" (see ad-) + pertinere "belong; be the right of" (see pertain)....

 append 

 late 14c., appenden, "to belong to as a possession or right," from Old French apendre (13c.)..."belong, be dependent (on); attach (oneself) to; hang, hang up," and directly from Latin appendere "cause to hang (from something...

 exile 

 It might belong to amb-ulare < *-al- 'to walk', hence 'who walks out'....It might even belong to *helh-, the root of [Greek elauno] 'to drive': ex-ul 'who is driven out' [de Vaan, "Etymological...

 caries 

 But de Vaan writes that "semantically, caries may just as well belong to careocared 'to lack' as 'defect, state of defectiveness...

 behold 

 Old English bihaldan (West Saxon behealdan) "give regard to, hold in view," also "keep hold of; belong to," from be- + haldan...

 appertain 

 late 14c., appertenen, "belong as parts to the whole, or as members to a family or class, belong by association or attribution," from Anglo-French apartenir, Old French apartenir "be related to; be incumbent upon" (12c.), from Late Latin appertinere "to pertain to," from ad "to; 

 be 

 Old English beon, beom, bion "be, exist, come to be, become, happen," from Proto-Germanic *biju- "I am, I will be." This "b-root" is from PIE root *bheue- "to be, exist, grow," and in addition to the words in English it yielded the German present first and second person singular 

 appeal 

 early 14c., appelen, originally in the legal sense, to "call" to a higher judge or court, from Anglo-French apeler "to call upon, accuse," Old French apeler "make an appeal" (11c., Modern French appeler), from Latin appellare "to accost, address, appeal to, summon, name," iterati

 Share belong 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/belong Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/belong">Etymology of belong by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of belong. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/belong Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of belong," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/belong. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of belong." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/belong. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of belong." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/belong (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near belong 
 belly-ache 
 belly-button 
 belly-dance 
 bellyful 
 belly-punch 
 belong 
 belongings 
 beloved 
 below 
 Belshazzar 
 belt 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix