URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pearl
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pearl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pearl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pearl 

 pearl (n.) 

 "nacreous mass formed in the shell of a bivalve mollusk as a result of irritation caused by some foreign body," early 14c., perle (mid-13c. as a surname), from Old French perle (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin perla (mid-13c.), which is of unknown origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *pernula , diminutive of Latin perna , which in Sicily meant "pearl," earlier "sea-mussel," literally "ham, haunch, gammon," so called for the shape of the mollusk shells.

 Other theories connect it with the root of pear , also somehow based on shape, or Latin pilula "globule," with dissimilation. The usual Latin word for "pearl" was margarita (see margarite ).

 Used from 14c. of anything valuable or of the finest kind; from mid-15c. of something small, round, and glistening white. For pearls before swine , see swine . Pearl Harbor translates Hawaiian Wai Momi , literally "pearl waters," so named for the pearl oysters found there; transferred sense of "effective sudden attack" is attested from 1942 (in reference to Dec. 7, 1941).
 also from early 14c. 

 pearl (v.) 

 late 14c., "to adorn with pearls," from pearl (n.). From 1590s as "to take a rounded form" (intrans.); from c. 1600 as "to make into a form, or cause to assume the form and appearance, of a pearl" (trans.). Related: Pearled; pearling .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to pearl 

 margarite (n.) 

 "a pearl," late Old English, from Late Latin margarita (see Margaret ). Figuratively, "that which is precious or excellent, a priceless quality or attribute;" also used as an epithet for Christ, Mary, etc., late 13c. Also margerie (mid-14c.). Related: Margaritic .

 pear (n.) 

 Middle English pere , from Old English pere , peru "fruit of the pear tree," common West Germanic (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German pere , Old High German pira , bira , Dutch peer ), from Vulgar Latin *pera , variant of Latin pira , plural (taken for fem. singular) of pirum "pear," a loan word from an unknown source, perhaps Semitic or a lost Mediterranean language. It likely shares an origin with Greek apion "pear," apios "pear tree." Their cultivation began as much as 3,000 years ago.

 swine 
 pearly 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 drop 

 Middle English drope, from Old English dropa "a small, spherical mass of liquid," from Proto-Germanic *drupon (source also of Old Saxon dropo, Old Norse dropi, Dutch drop, Old High German tropfo, German Tropfen (n.)); see drop (v.). Sense of "minute quantity of anything, least po

 bead 

 mid-14c., bede, "prayer bead," from Old English gebed "prayer," with intensive or collective prefix *ge- + Proto-Germanic *bidam "entreaty." This reconstructed word is also the source of Middle Dutch bede, Old High German beta, German bitte, Gothic bida "prayer, request," which a

 bone 

 Middle English bon, from Old English ban "bone, tusk, hard animal tissue forming the substance of the skeleton; one of the parts which make up the skeleton," from Proto-Germanic *bainan (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon ben, Old Norse bein, Danish ben, German Bein). Absen

 nacre 

 1590s, "type of shellfish that yields mother-of-pearl," from French nacre (Old French nacaire, 14c.), from Italian naccaro...Meaning "mother-of-pearl" is from 1718....The French adjectival form nacré was applied in English to decorative objects iridescent like mother of pearl (1895)....

 Margaret 

 proper name (c. 1300), from Old French Margaret (French Marguerite), from Late Latin Margarita, female name, literally "pearl...," from Greek margaritēs (lithos) "pearl," which is of unknown origin....Beekes writes, "An oriental loanword, mostly assumed to be from Iranian" and cites Middle Persian marvarit "pearl."...He adds, "The older view" derives it from Sanskrit manjari "pearl; flowering bead," "but the late and rare occurrence of...

 orient 

 Meaning "a pearl of the first water" is by 1831, short for pearl of the Orient (late 14c.) originally meaning one from the...Hence also the meaning "a delicate iridescence, the peculiar luster of a fine pearl" (1755)....

 margarin 

 Eugène Chevreul (1786-1889) in 1813 from (acide) margarique "margaric (acid);" literally "pearly," from Greek margaritēs "pearl...

 prod 

 1530s, "to poke with a stick," of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart, Century Dictionary] a variant of brod, from Middle English brodden "to goad," from Old Norse broddr "shaft, spike" (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED]. Compare dialectal prog "pointed instrument for poking

 ivory 

 mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), Anglo-French ivorie, from Old North French ivurie (12c.), from Medieval Latin eborium "ivory," noun use of neuter of Latin eboreus "of ivory," from ebur (genitive eboris) "ivory," probably via Phoenician from an African source (compare Egyptian 

 gem 

 "a precious stone" (especially when cut or polished), c. 1300, probably from Old French gemme (12c.), from Latin gemma "precious stone, jewel," originally "bud," from Proto-Italic *gebma- "bud, sprout," from PIE *geb-m- "sprout, bud" (source also of Lithuanian žembėti "to germina

 Share pearl 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pearl Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pearl">Etymology of pearl by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pearl. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pearl Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pearl," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pearl. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pearl." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pearl. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pearl." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pearl (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pearl 
 peak 
 peaked 
 peal 
 peanut 
 pear 
 pearl 
 pearly 
 peart 
 peasant 
 peasantry 
 pease 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix