URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/columbarium
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:11:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Columbarium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Columbarium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of columbarium 

 columbarium (n.) 

 "subterranean sepulchre in ancient Roman places with niches for urns holding remains," 1540s, neuter of Latin columbarius , "dove-cote" (the funereal place so called from resemblance), literally "pertaining to doves;" from columba "dove, pigeon," a word of uncertain origin. Literal sense of "dove-cote" in English is attested from 1881.
 also from 1540s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 niche 

 1610s, "shallow recess in a wall," from French niche "recess (for a dog), kennel" (14c.), perhaps from Italian nicchia "niche, nook," which is said to be from nicchio "seashell," itself said by Klein, Barnhart, etc. to be probably from Latin mitulus "mussel," but the change of -m

 vault 

 "arched roof or ceiling," c. 1300, vaute, from Old French voute "arch, vaulting, vaulted roof or chamber," from Vulgar Latin *volta, contraction of *volvita, noun use of fem. of *volvitus, alteration of Latin volutus "bowed, arched," past participle of volvere "to turn, turn arou

 recess 

 1530s, "act of receding or going back or away" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin recessus "a going back, retreat," from recessum, past participle of recedere "to go back, fall back; withdraw, depart, retire," from re- "back" (see re-) + cedere "to go" (from PIE root *ked- "to go

 heuristic 

 "serving to discover or find out," 1821, irregular formation from Greek heuriskein "to find; find out, discover; devise, invent; get, gain, procure" (from PIE *were- (2) "to find;" cognate with Old Irish fuar "I have found") + -istic. As a noun, from 1860. Greek had heuretikos "i

 ginger 

 11c., from Old English ginȝifer, ginȝiber, from Late Latin gingiber, from Latin zingiberi, from Greek zingiberis, from Prakrit (Middle Indic) singabera, from Sanskrit srngaveram, from srngam "horn" + vera- "body," so called from the shape of its root. But this may be Sanskrit fol

 diaspora 

 1825 in reference to Moravian protestants; 1869 in reference to the dispersion of the Jews; from Greek diaspora "dispersion," from diaspeirein "to scatter about, disperse," from dia "about, across" (see dia-) + speirein "to scatter" (see sparse). The Greek word was used in Septua

 anxiety 

 1520s, "apprehension caused by danger, misfortune, or error, uneasiness of mind respecting some uncertainty, a restless dread of some evil," from Latin anxietatem (nominative anxietas) "anguish, anxiety, solicitude," noun of quality from anxius "uneasy, troubled in mind" (see anx

 fresh 

 c. 1200, fresh, also fersh, "unsalted; pure; sweet; eager;" the modern form is a metathesis of Old English fersc, of water, "not salt, unsalted," itself transposed from Proto-Germanic *friskaz (source also of Old Frisian fersk, Middle Dutch versch, Dutch vers, Old High German fri

 capacity 

 early 15c., capacite, "ability to contain; size, extent;" also "ability" in a legal, moral, or intellectual sense, from Old French capacité "ability to hold" (15c.), from Latin capacitatem (nominative capacitas) "breadth, capacity, capability of holding much," noun of state from 

 attrition 

 early 15c., attricioun, "a breaking;" 1540s, "abrasion, scraping, the rubbing of one thing against another," from Latin attritionem (nominative attritio), literally "a rubbing against," noun of action from past-participle stem of atterere "to wear, rub away," figuratively "to des

 Share columbarium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/columbarium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/columbarium">Etymology of columbarium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of columbarium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/columbarium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of columbarium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/columbarium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of columbarium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/columbarium. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of columbarium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/columbarium (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near columbarium 
 colostrum 
 colour 
 colposcopy 
 colt 
 coltish 
 columbarium 
 Columbia 
 columbine 
 Columbus 
 column 
 columnar 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix