URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/leg
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:14:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Leg - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Leg - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of leg 

 leg (n.) 

 late 13c., from a Scandinavian source, probably Old Norse leggr "a leg, bone of the arm or leg," from Proto-Germanic *lagjaz (cognates Danish læg , Swedish läg "the calf of the leg"), a word with no certain ulterior connections. Perhaps from a PIE root meaning "to bend" [Buck]. For Old Norse senses, compare Bein , the German word for "leg," in Old High German "bone, leg" (see bone (n.)). Replaced Old English shank (n.), itself also perhaps from a root meaning "crooked."

 Distinguished from an arm, leg, or fin in being used for support. Of triangle sides from 1650s (translating Greek skelos , literally "leg"). Extended to furniture supports from 1670s. Meaning "part of pants which cover the leg" is from 1570s. By 1870s as an adjective it had a salacious suggestion of artistic displays focused on the female form, such as leg-piece in theater jargon, leg-business as slang for "ballet."

 The meaning "a part or stage of a journey or race" (1920) is from earlier sailing sense of "a run made by a ship on a single tack when beating to windward" (1867), which was usually qualified as long leg , short leg , etc. Slang phrase shake a leg is attested from 1869 as "dance," 1880 as "hurry up." To be on (one's) last legs "at the end of one's life" is from 1590s, the notion is of something that serves one for support and keeps one moving. To take leg bail was old slang for "run away" (1774). Legs "ability to be an enduring success, staying power" is from 1970s show business slang.
 also from late 13c. 

 leg (v.) 

 "to use the legs; walk or run," c. 1500 (from the beginning usually with it ); from leg (n.).
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to leg 

 bone (n.) 

 Middle English bon , from Old English ban "bone, tusk, hard animal tissue forming the substance of the skeleton; one of the parts which make up the skeleton," from Proto-Germanic *bainan (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon ben , Old Norse bein , Danish ben , German Bein ). Absent in Gothic, with no cognates outside Germanic (the common PIE root is *ost- ); the Norse, Dutch, and German cognates also mean "shank of the leg," and this is the main meaning in Modern German, but English seems never to have had this sense.

 To work (one's) fingers to the bone is from 1809. To have a bone to pick (1560s) is an image of a dog struggling to crack or gnaw a bone (to pick a bone "strip a bone by picking or gnawing" is attested from late 15c.); to be a bone of contention (1560s) is of two dogs fighting over a bone; the images seem to have become somewhat merged. Also compare bones .

 Bone-china , which is mixed with bone-dust, is so called by 1854. Bone-shaker (1874) was an old name for the early type of bicycle, before rubber tires.

 shank (n.) 

 "leg of a human or animal," especially "the part of the leg from the knewe to the ankle," Old English sceanca "leg, shank, shinbone," specifically, the part of the leg from the knee to the ankle, from Proto-Germanic *skunkia- , perhaps literally "that which bends," from PIE root *skeng- "crooked" (source also of Old Norse skakkr "wry, distorted," Greek skazein "to limp").

 From late 15c. as "straight part of a nail or pin." As "part of an instrument, tool, etc., which connects the acting part with the handle," from 1680s. The slang sense of "latter part or end of anything" is by 1828.

 Jocular shank's mare "one's own legs as a means of transportation" is attested from 1774 (as shanks-naig ).

 Germanic cognates include Middle Low German schenke , German schenkel "shank, leg."

 blackleg 
 bootleg 
 cross-legged 
 dog-leg 
 foreleg 
 leg up 
 legged 
 legging 
 leggy 
 legless 
 leg-lock 
 leg-man 
 leg-rest 
 leg-room 
 leg-warmer 
 leg-work 
 See All Related Words (18) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 blackleg 

 "swindler," originally especially in equestrian events, 1771, from black (adj.) + leg (n.), but the exact signification is uncertain. The term implies the habitual frequenting of places where wagers are made and games of chance are played, and the seeking of subsistence by disho

 bootleg 

 also boot-leg, "upper part of the leg of a boot," 1630s, from boot (n.1) + leg (n.). As an adjective in reference to illegal liquor, 1889, American English slang, from the trick of concealing a flask of liquor down the leg of a high boot. Before that the bootleg was the place to 

 branch 

 c. 1300, braunch, "division or subdivision of the stem of a tree or bush" (also used of things resembling a branch in its relation to a trunk, such as geographic features, lines of family descent), from Old French branche "branch, bough, twig; branch of a family" (12c.), from Lat

 hose 

 late 13c., "covering of woven cloth or leather for the lower part of the leg, with or without feet," from late Old English...hosa "covering for the leg," from Proto-Germanic *huson- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse hosa "covering for the leg...between the knee and ankle," Middle High German hose "covering for the leg," German Hose "trousers," Danish hose "hose,..., the covering of the lower part of the leg and foot being called the stocking or nether-stock....

 jamb 

 side-piece of an opening of a door, window, etc., early 14c., from Old French jambe "pier, side post of a door," originally "a leg..., shank" (12c.), from Late Latin gamba "leg, (horse's) hock," which is from Greek kampē "a bending," (on notion...The Greek word also was borrowed in Albanian as këmbë "leg, foot."...

 lock-step 

 A mode of marching by a body of men going one after another as closely as possible, in which the leg of each moves at the...same time with and closely follows the corresponding leg of the person directly before him....

 fibula 

 As "smaller bone in the lower leg" from 1706, from a Latin loan-translation of Greek perone "small bone in the lower leg,...

 travel 

 late 14c., "to journey," from travailen (1300) "to make a journey," originally "to toil, labor" (see travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced 

 chair 

 "a seat with a back, intended for one person," early 13c., chaere, from Old French chaiere "chair, seat, throne" (12c.; Modern French chaire "pulpit, throne;" the humbler sense having gone since 16c. with the variant form chaise), from Latin cathedra "seat" (see cathedral). The f

 limb 

 "part or member," Old English lim "limb of the body; any part of an animal body, distinct from the head and trunk;" main branch of a tree," from Proto-Germanic *limu- (source also of Old Norse limr "limb," lim "small branch of a tree"), a variant of *lithu- (source of Old English

 Share leg 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/leg Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/leg">Etymology of leg by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of leg. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/leg Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of leg," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/leg. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of leg." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/leg. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of leg." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/leg (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near leg 
 leftover 
 leftward 
 left-wing 
 lefty 
 *leg- 
 leg 
 leg up 
 legacy 
 legal 
 legalese 
 legalise 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix