URL: https://www.ahdictionary.com/word/semitic.html
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:30:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Appendix II - Semitic Roots

Appendix II - Semitic Roots 

 HOW TO USE THE DICTIONARY
 To look up an entry in The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, use the search window above. For best results, after typing in the word, click on the “Search” button instead of using the “enter” key.
 Some compound words (like bus rapid transit, dog whistle, or identity theft ) don’t appear on the drop-down list when you type them in the search bar. For best results with compound words, place a quotation mark before the compound word in the search window.
 guide to the dictionary 

 THE USAGE PANEL
 The Usage Panel is a group of nearly 200 prominent scholars, creative writers, journalists, diplomats, and others in occupations requiring mastery of language. Annual surveys have gauged the acceptability of particular usages and grammatical constructions.
 The Panelists 

 NEED HELP SOLVING A CROSSWORD PUZZLE?

 Go to our Crossword Puzzle Solver and type in the letters that you know, and the Solver will produce a list of possible solutions.

-->
 AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY APP
 The new American Heritage Dictionary app is now available for 
 iOS and Android. 

 THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY BLOG
 The articles in our blog examine new words, revised definitions, interesting images from the fifth edition, discussions of usage, and more.

 OPEN DICTIONARY PROJECT

 Share your ideas for new words and new meanings of old words!

 Start Sharing Now! 

 --> See word lists from the best-selling 100 Words Series!
 Find out more! 

 INTERESTED IN DICTIONARIES?
 Check out the Dictionary Society of North America at http://www.dictionarysociety.com 

 The American Heritage Dictionary Semitic Roots Appendix
 The letter ʾ (aleph) and the letter ʿ (ayin) are alphabetized before the letter a . Therefore, ʿbd follows ʾzr and b follows ʿzz .

For more information about this section, please refer to the Guide to the Semitic Roots Appendix. 

 Jump to section: 
 ʾ , ʿ , b , d , ḏ , g , ġ , h , ḥ , ḫ , k , l , m , n , p , q , r , s , ś , š , ṣ , ṣ́ , t , ṯ , ṭ , ṯ̣ , w , x̣ , y , z .

 ‌ ʾ b 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ ab‑ , father. Abraham , from Hebrew ʾ abrāhām , the (divine) father is exalted, from ʾ ab , reduced form of ʾ āb , father. 
 Job , from Hebrew ʾ iyyôb , perhaps from an early Northwest Semitic dialectal name meaning "where is the father?", from ʾ ôb , father, of dialectal origin, akin to Hebrew ʾ āb , father. (Alternatively, ʾ iyyôb may be akin to Hebrew ʾ ōyēb , enemy; see ʾ yb ). 
 Joab , from Hebrew yô ʾ āb , Yahweh (is) father ( yô , Yahweh; see hwy );
 Ahab , from Hebrew ʾ aḥ ʾ āb , father's brother ( ʾ aḥ , brother; see ʾ ḫ ). Both a and b from ʾ āb , father. 

 Abigail , from Hebrew ʾ ăbîgayil , my father (is) joy (see gyl );
 Absalom , from Hebrew ʾ abšālōm , short for ʾ ăbîšālōm , my father (is) peace ( šālōm , peace; see šlm ). Both a and b from Hebrew ʾ ăbî , shortened form of ʾ ābî , my father, from ʾ āb , father. 

 baobab , from North African Arabic bū ḥibāb , tree of many seeds;
 borage , probably from Arabic bū ʿ araq , from ʾ abū ʿ araq, father of sweat;
 bwana , from Arabic ʾ abūnā , our father;
 pataca , from Arabic ʾ abū ṭāqa , "father of the window," a type of coin. a-e all from Arabic ʾ abū , bound form of ʾ ab , father, source. 

 abba , abbacy , abbatial , abbé , abbess , abbey , abbot , from Aramaic ʾ abbā , the father, my father, from ʾ ab , father;
 Barabbas , from Aramaic bar- ʾ abbā , son of the father (see bn ).

 ‌ ʾ bb 

To blossom (?). Abib , from Hebrew ʾ ābîb , young barley, spring, a month name;
 Tel Aviv , from Hebrew tēl ʾ ābîb , barley tell (see tll ). 

 Addis Ababa , from Amharic addis abäba , new flower, from abäba , flower, from abbäbä , to blossom ( addis , new; see ḥdṯ ).

 ‌ ʾ bq 

West Semitic noun * ʾ abaq‑ , dust, chaff, whence denominative verb, to be(come) dusty. abacus , from Greek abax , abak‑ , counting board, perhaps from Hebrew ʾ ābāq , dust. 
 ‌ ʾ d 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ ad‑ , father, lord. Adonai , from Hebrew ʾ ădônāy , my lord, from ʾ ādôn , lord ( -ay , my; see -y ).
 Adonis , from Greek Adōnis , from Phoenician * ʾ adōn , lord. Both 1 and 2 from Common Semitic extended form * ʾ adān‑ , lord.

 ‌ ʾ dm 

Central Semitic noun * ʾ adam‑ , human being, perhaps akin to Common Semitic noun *dam‑ , blood, and the root * ʾ dm , red, ground. Adam , from Hebrew ʾ ādām , human being, man, humanity. 
 ‌ ʾ ḏn 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ uḏn‑ , ear. azan , from Arabic ʾ aḏān , call to prayer, from ʾ aḏḏana , to call to prayer, derived stem of ʾ aḏina , to listen, denominative from ʾ uḏn , ear. 
 muezzin , from Arabic mu ʾ aḏḏin , muezzin, active participle of ʾ aḏḏana (see above).

 ‌ ʾ gr 

To hire, rent. agora 2 , from Hebrew ʾ ăgôrâ , payment, coin, from ʾ āgar , to hire. 
 ‌ ʾ ḫ 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ aḫ‑ , brother. Ahab , from Hebrew ʾ aḥ ʾ āb , father's brother, from ʾ aḥ , irregular bound form of ʾ āḥ , brother ( ʾ āb , father; see ʾ b ). 
 Sennacherib , from Akkadian Sîn-aḫḫī-erība , Sin has replaced the (lost) brothers for me, from aḫḫī , oblique plural of aḫu , brother ( erība , he has replaced for me; see r ʾ b ). 
 Esarhaddon , from Akkadian Aššur-aḫa-iddin , Ashur has given a brother, from aḫa , accusative of aḫu (see above; iddin , has given; see ntn ).

 ‌ ʾ ḫr 

(To be) late, behind, in back. Achernar , from Arabic ʾ aḫīr , last, end. 
 ‌ ʾ l 

God. Common Semitic basic form * ʾ il‑ , god. Azazel , from Hebrew ʿ ăzā ʾ zēl , perhaps corrupt for ʿ ăzaz- ʾ ēl , God has been strong (personal name);
 bethel , from Hebrew bêt ʾ ēl , house of God;
 Daniel , from Hebrew dānī ʾ ēl , dānīyē ʾ l , my judge (is) God (alternatively, God has judged);
 Ezekiel , from Hebrew yəḥezqē ʾ l , God has strengthened;
 Gabriel , from Hebrew gabrî ʾ ēl , my strong one (is) God (see gpr );
 Ishmael , from Hebrew yišmā ʿ ē ʾ l , God has heard (see šm ʿ );
 Israel , from Hebrew yiśrā ʾ ēl , God has striven, God has saved;
 Joel , from Hebrew yô ʾ ēl , Yahweh (is) God;
 Michael , from Hebrew mîkā ʾ ēl , who (is) like God?;
 Nathanael , from Hebrew nətan ʾ ēl , God has given (see ntn );
 Raphael , from Hebrew rəpā ʾ ēl , God has healed ( rəpā ʾ , he has healed; see rp ʾ );
 Samuel , from Hebrew šəmû ʾ ēl , name of God (alternatively, the name (is) God; see šm );
 schlemiel , perhaps from Hebrew personal name šəlūmî ʾ ēl , my well-being (is) God. a-m all from Hebrew ʾ ēl , God;
 Elijah , from Hebrew ʾ ēlîyāhû , my God (is) Yahweh, from ʾ ēlî , my God, from ʾ ēl (see above) + -î , my;
 Elisha , from Hebrew ʾ ĕlîšā ʿ , God (is) salvation, from ʾ ĕl , shortened form of ʾ ēl , God (see above; -îšā ʿ , salvation; see wṯ ʿ );
 Elizabeth , from Hebrew ʾ ĕlîšeba ʿ , my God (is) an oath, from ʾ ĕlî , reduced form of ʾ ēlî , my God (see above; -šeba ʿ , oath; see šb ʿ );
 Lazarus , from Hebrew ʾ el ʿ āzār , God has helped, from ʾ el , reduced form of ʾ ēl , God (see above; ʿ āzār , he has helped; see ʿ ḏr ). 

 Babylon , from Akkadian bāb ili , gate of the god, from ilu , god;
 Babel , from Hebrew bābel , from Akkadian bāb ili , Babylon (see above). 

 Enlil , from Sumerian refashioning of Semitic * ʾ ilil , probably "god of gods," reduplication of * ʾ il‑ .

 Central Semitic extended form ʾ ilāh‑ , god. Elohim , from Hebrew ʾ ĕlōhîm , God, plural (used as singular) of ʾ ĕlōah , god. 
 Allah , from Arabic allāh , the god, God, from al‑ , the + ʾ ilāh , god;
 ayatollah , from Arabic ʾ āyatu llāh , sign of God;
 Bahaullah , from Arabic bahā ʾ u llāh , splendor of God; a-c all from Arabic llah , elided form of allāh (see above).

 ‌ ʾ lp 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ alp‑ , ox. aleph , from Hebrew ʾ ālep , aleph;
 alpha , alphabet , from Greek alpha . Both a and b from Phoenician * ʾ alp , ox, first letter of the Phoenician alphabet.

 ‌ ʾ mm 

West Semitic, to go toward, lead. imam , from Arabic ʾ imām , leader, imam, from ʾ amma , to go, lead. 
 ‌ ʾ mn 

West Semitic, to be firm, confirmed, reliable, faithful, have faith, believe. amen , from Hebrew ʾ āmēn , truly, certainly;
 Mammon , from Aramaic māmonā , probably from Mishnaic Hebrew māmôn , probably from earlier *ma ʾ mōn (? "security, deposit"). Both a and b from Hebrew ʾ āman , to be firm.

 ‌ ʾ mr 

To see, know, make known, say. emir ; admiral , from Arabic ʾ amīr , commander, prince, and ʾ amīr al-... , commander of the ... (as in ʾ amīr al-baḥr , commander of the sea), from ʾ amara , to command, order. 
 ‌ ʾ pd 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ ipād‑ , a type of garment. ephod , from Hebrew ʾ ēpôd , ephod, probably akin to Old Assyrian Akkadian epattum , a costly garment. 
 ‌ ʾ pl 

To be(come) late, do later, answer. Assurbanipal , from Akkadian aššur-bāni-apli , Ashur (is) the creator of the heir, from apli , genitive of aplu , heir, from apālu , to be(come) late, come later, come after ( bāni , creator; see bny ). 
 Tiglathpileser , from Hebrew tiglat pil ʾ eser , from Akkadian tukultī-apil-ešarra , my trusted one (is) the heir of Esharra (the main temple of the god Ashur in the Assyrian religious capital of Assur; the "heir of Esharra" is the god Ashur), from aplu , heir (see above; tukultī , my trusted one; see wkl ).

 ‌ ʾ rṣ́ 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ arṣ́‑ , earth. Ardipithecus , from Afar ardi , earth, from Arabic ʾ arḍ . 
 ‌ ʾ rz 

West Semitic noun * ʾ arz‑ , cedar. alerce , from Arabic ʾ arz , cedar. 
 ‌ ʾ šd 

Central Semitic noun * ʾ aš(a)d‑ , lion. Denebola , from Arabic al- ʾ asad , the lion. 
 ‌ ʾ wl 

Central Semitic root meaning "front, first." mohel , from Mishnaic Hebrew môhēl , active participle of māhal , to circumcise, from Aramaic məhal , akin to Biblical Hebrew māl , to circumcise (perhaps originally "to remove the front"), from môl , front, from earlier *ma ʾ ōl . 
 ‌ ʾ wr 

Central Semitic, to be(come) light. Urim and Thummim , from Hebrew ʾ ûrîm , perhaps plural of ʾ ûr , flame, light;
 Uriah , from Hebrew ʾ ûrîyāh , my light (is) Yahweh, from ûrî , my light, from ûr , light + -î , my ( yāh , Yahweh; see hwy ). Both a and b from Hebrew ʾ ôr , to be(come) light.

 ‌ ʾ wy 

Common Semitic noun * ʾ āyat‑ , sign, mark ( *-at‑ , feminine suffix). aya , ayatollah , from Arabic ʾ āya , sign. 
 ‌ ʾ yb 

To be(come) hostile to, hate; in nominal forms, enemy. Job , from Hebrew ʾ iyyôb , perhaps akin to Hebrew ʾ ōyēb , enemy, participle of ʾ āyab , to hate. (Alternatively, ʾ iyyôb may mean "where is the father?"; see ʾ b and ʾ yy. ) 
 ‌ ʾ yy 

Common Semitic interrogative stem * ʾ ayy‑ , which?, where?. Job , from Hebrew ʾ iyyôb , perhaps from an early Northwest Semitic dialectal name meaning "where is the father?", from ʾ iyy , where?, akin to Hebrew ʾ ê , where? ( ʾ ôb , father; see ʾ b. Alternately, ʾ iyyôb may be akin to Hebrew ʾ ōyēb , enemy; see ʾ yb. ) 
 Jezebel , from Hebrew ʾ îzebel , where is the prince?, from î , akin to ê, ʾ ayyē , where? ( zebel , prince; see zbl ).

 ‌ ʾ zr 

Central Semitic, to surround, gird. Mizar , from Arabic mi ʾ zar , covering, apron (compare also the probably denominative derived stem ʾ azzara , to clothe, cover). 
 vizier , from Arabic wazīr , vizier, minister, burdened, either from ʾ āzara , to help, derived stem of ʾ azara , to surround (see above), or from wazara , to carry a burden, take upon oneself (see wzr ).

 ‌ ʿ bd 

Central Semitic, to serve, work; noun * ʿ abd‑ , servant, slave. Obadiah , from Hebrew ʿ ōbadyāh , servant of Yahweh, from ʿ ōbad , alternate form of ʿ ebed , servant, slave. 
 Abednego , from Hebrew ʿ ăbēd-nəgô , probably alteration of ʿ ăbēd-nəbô , servant of Nabu, from ʿ ăbēd , alternate form of ʿ ebed , servant ( nəbô , Nabu, from Akkadian nabû ).

 ‌ ʿ ḏr 

Central Semitic, to help. Ezra , from Hebrew ʿ ezrā ʾ , hypocoristic form of a name such as ʿ azrî ʾ ēl , God (is) my help, from ʿ azr‑ , ʿ ezr‑ , presuffixal form of ʿ ēzer , help ( ʾ ēl , God; see ʾ l ). 
 Lazarus , from Hebrew ʾ el ʿ āzār , God has helped, from ʿ āzār , he has helped, lengthened form of ʿ āzar , to help ( ʾ el , God; see ʾ l ). 
 Hasdrubal , from Latin Hasdrubāl , from Phoenician (Punic) * ʿ azrō-ba ʿ l , his help (is) Baal, from * ʿ azrō , his help, from ʿ azr , help, from * ʿ zr , to help + *-ō , his ( *ba ʿ l , Baal; see b ʿ l ).

 ‌ ʿ gn 

West Semitic, to press, bend. lamejun , from Arabic ʿ ajīn , dough, from ʿ ajina , to knead. 
 ‌ ʿ lm 

Arabic root, to know. ulema , from Arabic ʿ ulamā ʾ , plural of ʿ ālim , wise, learned, active participle of ʿ alima , to know. 
 ‌ ʿ ly 

To ascend, become high, exalted. aliyah , from Hebrew ʿ ălīyâ , ascent, from ʿ ālâ , to ascend. 
 shalom aleichem , from Hebrew ʿ ălêkem , to you, from ʿ al, ʿ ălê , to, toward, upon (a preposition akin to ʿ ālâ , to ascend) + -kem , you (plural). 
 Eli , from Hebrew ʿ ēlî , exalted, probably short for a name meaning "God is exalted" or the like. 
 Enuma Elish , (name of the Babylonian creation epic), from Akkadian enūma elîš , when on high (first words of the epic; enūma , when; see ywm ), from elîš , above, on high, from elû , high, upper, verbal adjective of elû , to be high, tall + -iš , adverbial suffix.

 ‌ ʿ mm 

Common Semitic noun * ʿ amm‑ , paternal kinsman, kin, clan, people. Jeroboam , from Hebrew yārob ʿ ām , the (divine) kinsman increased ( yārob , he increased; see rbb );
 Rehoboam , from Hebrew rəḥab ʿ ām , the (divine) kinsman has increased ( rəḥab , he has increased; see rḥb ). Both a and b from Hebrew ʿ ām , people, clan (earlier also "kinsman"). 

 Ammonite , from Hebrew ʿ ammônî , Ammonite, from ʿ ammôn , Ammon, perhaps from Canaanite * ʿ amm , paternal kinsman, kin. 
 umma , from Arabic ʾ umma , nation, people, community, from Aramaic ʾ umməṯā , from Akkadian ummatu , troop, probably from earlier * ʿ ammatum , feminine of * ʿ amm , paternal kinsman.
 Hammurabi , from Akkadian ḫammurāpi , from Amorite * ʿ ammu-rāpi ʾ , the (divine) kinsman (is) a healer, from * ʿ ammu , kinsman ( *rāpi ʾ , healer; see rp ʾ ).

 ‌ ʿ mr 

Central Semitic, to live, dwell, build; noun * ʿ umr‑ , life. Omri , (king of Israel), from Hebrew ʿ omrî , probably short for * ʿ omrîyāh , my life (is) Yahweh, from ʿ omrî , my life, from * ʿ ōmer (< * ʿ umr‑ ), life. 
 Omar , from Arabic ʿ umar , probably akin to ʿ umr , life;
 imaret , from Arabic ʿ imāra , building. Both a and b from Arabic ʿ amara , to live, dwell, build.

 ‌ ʿ ms 

Central Semitic, to load, carry. Amos , from Hebrew ʿ āmôs , perhaps "carried (by the divinity)," from ʿ āmas , to load, carry. 
 ‌ ʿ qb 

West Semitic, to follow, guard, protect. jack , jacket , Jacob , Jacobin , Jacquerie , James , from Hebrew ya ʿ ăqōb , (God) has protected, from early Northwest Semitic *ya ʿ qub , preterite of * ʿ aqaba , to follow, guard. 
 ‌ ʿ ql 

West Semitic, to bend, bind, confine. agal , from Arabic ʿ iqāl , cord for hobbling a camel, agal, from ʿ aqala , to confine, hobble. 
 ‌ ʿ rb 

To enter, stand surety or bail for, guarantee. arbiter , from Latin arbiter , judge, from Phoenician (Punic) * ʿ arb , surety, guarantee. 
 earnest 2 , from Greek arrabōn , from Canaanite * ʿ irrabōn , pledge, surety, akin to Hebrew ʿ ērābôn , from * ʿ araba , to enter, stand surety for. 
 eruv , from post-Biblical Hebrew ʿ êrûb , eruv, verbal noun of ʿ ērēb , to mix, denominative verb from Hebrew ʿ ēreb , mixture (perhaps < *"an entering among").
 Arabic root form ġrb , to depart. Maghreb , Morocco , from Arabic maġrib , place where the sun sets, west, from ġaraba , to depart, set (of the sun).

 ‌ ʿ rp 

Central Semitic, to reckon, know. tariff , from Arabic ta ʿ rīf , notification, infinitive of ʿ arrafa , to announce, inform, derived stem of ʿ arafa , to know. 
 ‌ ʿ rq 1 

West Semitic, to gnaw, strip. erg 2 , from Maghrebi Arabic ʿ arq , ʿ arg , colloquial pronunciation of Arabic ʿ irq , vein, tract of sand extending along the ground (perhaps < *"something stripped off, strip, strand"). 
 ‌ ʿ rq 2 

Arabic root, to sweat. Perhaps a specialized semantic development of ʿ rq 1 (< *"to become emaciated"? < "to gnaw, strip&;rdquo;). arak , arrack , raki , from Arabic ʿ araq , originally short for ʿ araq al-tamr , literally, sweat of the date (arak originally having been distilled from date wine), from ʿ araq , sweat;
 borage , probably from Arabic bū ʿ araq , from ʾ abū ʿ araq , father of sweat. Both a and b from Arabic ʿ araq , sweat, from ʿ ariqa , to sweat, perspire.

 ‌ ʿ śr 

Common Semitic * ʿ aśr‑ , ten. Ashura , from Arabic ʿ āšūrā ʾ , the tenth of Muharram kept as a fast day by Arabs in pre-Islamic times, Ashura, ultimately (probably via Aramaic * ʿ āsorā ) from Hebrew ʿ āśôr , a set of ten (days, etc.), decade (used in Leviticus to specify the date of Yom Kippur, the tenth of Tishri), from ʿ eśer , ten. 
 ‌ ʿ ṣr 

West Semitic, to press. restrain, retain. Shemini Atzereth , from Hebrew ʿ ăṣeret , assembly, gathering, from ʿ āṣar , to retain. 
 alizarin , probably from Arabic al- ʿ uṣāra , the juice, from ʿ aṣara , to squeeze.

 ‌ ʿ ṣ́d 

To reap, cut. alidade , from Arabic al- ʿ iḍāda , the side, border, region, revolving radius of a circle, alternate form of ʿ aḍud , humerus, from ʿ aḍada , to lop, cut (trees). 
 ‌ ʿ ṯtr 

Common Semitic masculine noun * ʿ aṯtar‑ , feminine * ʿ aṯtart‑ , gods representing the morning and evening stars. Ashtoreth , from Hebrew ʿ aštōret , taboo-deformation (with the vowels of bōšet , shame, shameful thing) of earlier * ʿ ašteret . 
 Astarte , from Greek Astartē , from Phoenician * ʿ aštart; 
 Aphrodite , from Greek Aphrodītē , probably ultimately from Phoenician * ʿ aštart , Astarte (influenced by Greek aphros , foam). 

 Ishtar , from Akkadian ištar; 
 Esther , from Hebrew ʾ estēr , perhaps from Akkadian ištar , Ishtar (or from Persian sitareh , star; see ster- 3 in Appendix I).

 ‌ ʿ ṭr 

West Semitic, to smoke, burn incense. attar , from Arabic ʿ aṭir , aromatic, from ʿ aṭira , to be fragrant. 
 ‌ ʿ wr 

West Semitic, to be(come) blind. average , from Arabic ʿ awārīya , damaged goods, from ʿ awār , blemish, from ʿ awira , to become one-eyed, damaged. 
 ‌ ʿ yn 

Common Semitic noun * ʿ ayn‑ , eye. ayin , from Hebrew ʿ ayin , eye, ayin. 
 ‌ ʿ zz 

To be(come) strong. Azazel , from Hebrew ʿ ăzā ʾ zēl , name of a demon, perhaps corrupt for ʿ ăzaz- ʾ ēl , God has been strong (personal name), from ʿ ăzaz , reduced form of ʿ āzaz , to be strong ( ʾ ēl , God; see ʾ l ). 
 ‌ b 

 Common Semitic preposition bi‑ , in, on, at, with. lamejune , from Arabic laḥm bi-'ajīn , meat with dough, from bi‑ , with. 
 ‌ b ʾ r 

Common Semitic noun *bi ʾ r‑ , well, cistern. Beersheba , from Hebrew bə ʾ ēr šeba ʿ , well of oath, from bə ʾ ēr , well ( šeba ʿ , oath; see šb ʿ ). 
 Beirut , from Arabic bayrūt , from Phoenician *bi ʾ rōt , plural of *bi ʾ r , well.

 ‌ b ʿ l 

Common Semitic noun *ba ʿ l‑ , lord. Baal , from Hebrew ba ʿ al , lord, Baal;
 Beelzebub , from Hebrew ba ʿ al zəbûb , lord (of the) fly, pejorative alteration of ba ʿ al zəbûl , lord prince (name of a Philistine god; see ḏbb and zbl ). 

 Hannibal , from Phoenician (Punic) *ḥannī-ba ʿ l , my grace (is) Baal (see ḥnn );
 Hasdrubal , from Phoenician (Punic) * ʿ azrō-ba ʿ l , his help (is) Baal (see ʿ ḏr ). Both a and b from Phoenician (Punic) *ba ʿ l , lord, Baal. 

 Belshazzar , from Hebrew bēlšaṣṣar , from Akkadian bēl-šar-uṣur , "Bel, protect the king," from bēl , absolute form of bēlu , lord, Bel (Akkadian god; šar , king, and uṣur , protect; see śrr and nṯr ).

 ‌ bdl 

To change, divide, separate. habdalah , from Hebrew habdālâ , separation, from hibdîl , to divide, separate. 
 ‌ bdw 

West Semitic, to be(come) desolate, desert; noun *badw‑ , desert. Bedouin , from Arabic badawīyīn , Bedouins, plural of badawī , nomadic, Bedouin, from badw , desert, nomads, Bedouins. 
 ‌ bġy 

To seek. baggage , from Arabic baġīy , prostitute, from baġā , to seek, to oppress, to act corruptly, to fornicate. 
 ‌ bhm 

West Semitic, to be dumb. behemoth , from Hebrew bəhēmôt , plural of bəhēmâ , animal, beast. 
 ‌ bhw 

Central Semitic, to be(come) empty, deserted. Bahaullah , from Arabic bahā ʾ u llāh , splendor of God, bahā ʾ u , splendor, bound form of bahā ʾ , from bahā , to be(come) empty, beautiful;
 Baha'i , from Arabic bahā ʾ ī , follower of Bahaullah, from bahā ʾ u llāh (see above).

 ‌ bḥr 

Common Semitic noun *baḥr‑ , sea, coast. Bahrain , from Arabic baḥrayn , two seas, dual of baḥr , sea. 
 ‌ bkr 

Common Semitic *bukur‑ , *bikr‑ , *bak(u)r‑ , first-born. albacore , from Arabic al-bakūra , the albacore, akin to bikr , first-born, and bakr , young camel. 
 ‌ bn 

Common Semitic noun *b(i)n‑ , son, and feminine derivative *bint‑ , daughter. Common Semitic *b(i)n‑ . bar mitzvah , from Aramaic bar , bound form of bərā , son;
 Barabbas , from Aramaic bar- ʾ abbā , son of the father (probably a nickname, or a joking name for a bastard; ʾ abbā , father; see ʾ b );
 Barnabas , from Aramaic bar-nəbô , son of Nabu ( nəbô , Nabu, Akkadian deity, from Akkadian nabû ).

 B'nai B'rith , from Hebrew bənê , plural bound form of bēn , son;
 Benjamin , from Hebrew binyāmîn , son of the right hand, from bin‑ , frozen bound form of bēn ( yāmîn , right hand, south; see ymn ). 

 Common Semitic *bint‑ . bat mitzvah , from Hebrew bat (< *batt < *bitt < *bint ), daughter;
 Bathsheba , from Hebrew bat-šeba ʿ (see šb ʿ ).

 bint , from Arabic bint , daughter.

 ‌ bny 

To build, create. Assurbanipal , from Akkadian aššur-bāni-apli , Ashur (is) the creator of the heir, from bāni , bound form of participle of banû , to build ( apli , heir; see ʾ pl ). 
 ‌ brk 

West Semitic, to bless. Probably a metathesized variant of krb. Baruch , from Hebrew bārûk , blessed, passive participle of *bārak , to bless (only attested in derived stem bērēk , to bless). 
 broker , from Arabic al-barka , colloquial variant of al-baraka , the blessing, divine favor, gift, from bāraka , to bless. Compare krb. 

 ‌ brq 

To flash (especially of lightning). emerald , from Greek smaragdos , emerald, probably ultimately from a Semitic source akin to Akkadian barraqtu and Hebrew bāreqet , a kind of gemstone (probably emerald). 
 ‌ brr 

To be(come) clear, pure, white. barrio , from Arabic barrī , open (of land), rural, from barr , open area, akin to barra , to be kind, true, in derived stem barrara , to clear, acquit. 
 birr 2 , from Amharic bərr , coin, silver (< "white metal").

 ‌ bry 

Common Semitic noun *biry‑ , interval, in-between area. B'nai B'rith , from Hebrew bərît , covenant, akin to Akkadian birītu , in-between area, link, from biri , between;
 bris , from Ashkenazic Hebrew brīs , from biblical Hebrew bərît (see above).

 ‌ bśm 

Central Semitic noun *baśam‑ , balsam. balsam , from Greek balsamon . 
 desman , from Medieval Latin bisamum . Both 1 and 2 from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew bōśem, bāśām , Aramaic besmā, busmā , Arabic bašām , all meaning "balsam.".

 ‌ bwb 

Akkadian noun bābu , gate, doorway. Bab , Babism , from Arabic bāb , gate, from Aramaic bābā , from Akkadian bābu .
 Babylon 1 , from Akkadian bāb-ili , Babylon, literally "gate of the god" (probably a folk etymology of a pre-Akkadian place name), from bāb , bound form of bābu , gate ( ili , genitive of ilu , god; see 'l ).

 ‌ byn 

West Semitic, to be separate, clear, distinct; in derived stems, to discern, understand. maven , from Hebrew mēbîn , one with understanding, expert, active participle of hēbîn , to understand, derived stem of bîn , to discern, understand. 
 ‌ byt 

Common Semitic noun *bayt‑ , house. beta; alphabet , from Greek bēta , second letter of the Greek alphabet;
 beth , from Hebrew bêt , house, beth. Both a and b from Phoenician *bēt , house, second letter of the Phoenician alphabet. 

 bethel , from Hebrew bêt ʾ ēl , house of God, from bêt , bound form of bayit , house;
 Bethlehem , from Hebrew bêt-leḥem , house of bread (see lḥm ).

 Beta Israel , from Ge'ez beta ʾ isrā ʾ el , house of Israel, from beta , bound form of bet, house ( ʾ isrā ʾ el , Israel, from Hebrew yiśrā ʾ ēl ; see śry ).

 ‌ dbb 

Also dby. 

Common Semitic noun dubb‑ (also daby‑ ), bear. Dubhe , from Arabic dubb , bear. 
 ‌ dbq 

West Semitic, to cling, adhere. dybbuk , from Mishnaic Hebrew dibbûq , attachment, joining, from Hebrew dibbēq , to make cling, derived stem of dābaq , to cling. 
 ‌ dbr 1 

Central Semitic, various forms meaning "(honey‑)bee." Deborah , from Hebrew dəbôrâ , bee. 
 ‌ dbr 2 

See dpr. 
 ‌ dgn 

Common Semitic noun *dagan‑ , grain. Dagon , from Hebrew dāgôn , from Phoenician *dagōn , grain, storm-god. 
 Mudéjar , from Arabic mudajjan , permitted to remain, Mudéjar, passive participle of dajjana , to allow to remain, derived stem of dajana , to remain (< "to become tame, domesticated," probably denominative from an unattested *dajan , grain). 
 Dagan , from Akkadian dagan , Dagan.

 ‌ dl 

Common Semitic noun *dalt‑ , door ( *-t‑ , feminine suffix). daleth , from Hebrew dālet , from Phoenician *dalt , door, fourth letter of the Phoenician alphabet. 
 delta , deltoid , from Greek delta , from Phoenician *dalt (see above) or from a dialectal variant *dilt .

 ‌ dm 

See ʾ dm. 
 ‌ dpr 

 To turn one's back on (probably denominative from an old word for "back"). West Semitic variant (assimilated) form dbr. Aldebaran , from Arabic ad-dabarān , the following, follower, from dabara , to follow. 
 ‌ drn 

Arabic root, to become dirty. dourine , from Arabic darina , mangy (said of a female camel), from darin , dirty, from darina , to be(come) dirty. 
 ‌ drš 

West Semitic, to seek, examine, study. Midrash , from Hebrew midrāš , exposition, commentary, Midrash, from dāraš , to seek, study. 
 madrasa , from Arabic madrasa , school, from darasa , to study.

 ‌ dwd 

Also wdd. 

To love. David ; Magen David , from Hebrew dāwīd , David, meaning uncertain, either "beloved" or "kinsman," akin to dôd , beloved, father's brother. 
 Jedidiah , from Hebrew yədîdyāh , beloved of Yahweh, from yədîd , bound form of yādîd (< *wadīd‑ ), beloved.

 ‌ dwr 

To turn, circle, dwell. arsenal , from Arabic dār , house (originally a Bedouin encampment with tents arranged in a circle), from dāra , to turn, circle. 
 ‌ dyn 

To judge. Daniel , from Hebrew dānī ʾ ēl , dānīyē ʾ l , my judge (is) God (alternatively, God has judged), from dān , a judge, active participle of dān , to judge;
 Midian , from Hebrew midyān , place of judgment (sense uncertain), from dān (see above). 

 medina , from Arabic madīna , city, from Aramaic mədin(t)ā , jurisdiction, district, province, city, from dān , to judge, adjudicate, administer.

 ‌ ḏ 

or ṯ .

Common Semitic *ḏV̄‑ (or *ṯV̄‑ ), determinative-relative pronoun. cedilla , izzard , zed , zeta , from Greek zēta , alteration (influenced by the following letter ēta , eta) of Phoenician *zēn , seventh letter of the Phoenician alphabet, perhaps from *ḏayna, these two (oblique dual of *ḏV̄‑ ), the original form of the letter being two lines; 
 zayin , from Hebrew zayin, from alteration of Phoenician *zēn (see above). 

 Dhu'l-Hijjah , Dhu'l-Qa'dah , from Arabic ḏū l-ḥijja , the one of the pilgrimage, and ḏū l-qa ʿ da , the one of the sitting, from ḏū , demonstrative pronoun, possessor of.

 ‌ ḏbb 

Common Semitic noun *ḏibb‑, *ḏubāb‑, *ḏubūb‑ , fly. Beelzebub , from Hebrew ba ʿ al zəbûb , lord (of the) fly, from zəbûb , fly (pejorative alteration of ba ʿ al zəbûl , lord prince, name of a Philistine god; see b ʿ l and zbl ). 
 ‌ ḏhb 

Central Semitic noun *ḏahab‑ , gold. dahabeah , from Arabic ḏahabīya , the Golden One (name of the gilded barge of the Muslim rulers of Egypt), from ḏahab , gold. 
 ‌ ḏkr 

To mention, remind, remember. Zechariah , from Hebrew zəkaryāh , Yahweh has remembered, from zəkar , reduced form of zākar , he remembered;
 Yizkor , from Hebrew yizkōr , may he remember, from zākar (see above).

 ‌ ḏkw 

To be(come) clean, pure. zakat , from Arabic zakāt , zakāh , purity, justness, alms, charity, from Aramaic zākutā , innocence, justification, merit, meritorious deed, from zəkā , to be innocent, be worth, give alms, from Canaanite zəkā or Akkadian zakû , to be(come) pure, innocent. 
 ‌ ḏmm 

Central Semitic, to blame, plot. dhimmi , from Arabic ḏimmī , from ḏimma , protected status of a dhimmi, from ḏamma , to blame. 
 ‌ ḏnb 

Common Semitic noun *ḏanab‑ , tail. Deneb ; Denebola , from Arabic ḏanab , tail. 
 ‌ ḏr ʿ 

West Semitic noun *dirā ʿ , arm. draa , from Arabic dirā ʿ , arm. 
 ‌ ḏrw 

To winnow, scatter, disperse. durra , from Arabic ḏura , durra (sorghum), perhaps akin to ḏarā , to winnow, scatter. 
 ‌ ḏwḏ 1 

To stand, stand up, move. mazel tov , schlimazel , from Late Hebrew mazzāl , good luck, from mazzāl , constellation, zodiac, fortune, luck, back-formed singular from plural mazzālôt , signs of the zodiac, from Aramaic, from Akkadian manzaltu , earlier mazzaztum , stand, position, location of a star, from izuzzu , to stand. 
 mezuzah , from Hebrew məzûzâ , doorpost, mezuzah, from *zâz , to move (not attested until Mishnaic Hebrew, but this is probably accidental).

 ‌ ḏwḏ 2 

To divide. zuz , from Mishnaic Hebrew zûz , zuz, from Aramaic zuzā , from Akkadian zūzu , a unit of weight (< "half, division") from zâzu , to divide. 
 ‌ ḏyn 

See zyn. 
 ‌ gb ʾ 

West Semitic, to gather, collect. gabbai , from Medieval Hebrew gabbay , synagogue treasurer, gabbai, from Mishnaic Hebrew, tax collector, local official, from gābā , to collect, from Aramaic gəbā , gəbi . 
 ‌ gbb 

Also kpp. 

To be(come) bent, curved; to cut. kippah , from Mishnaic Hebrew kippâ , arch, vault, yarmulke, from kāpap , to bend, bow.
 jumper 2 , from Arabic jubba , a long garment with wide, open sleeves, from jabba , to cut.

 ‌ gbl 

Central Semitic root, appearing in various nouns denoting "border," "frontier," "mountain." javelina , from Arabic ( ḫinzīr ) jabalī , mountain (swine), from jabal , mountain. 
 ‌ gbr 

See gpr. 
 ‌ gb ʾ 

West Semitic, to gather, collect. gabbai 
 ‌ gdr 

Central Semitic, to wall, build walls; noun *gadir‑ , wall. Cadiz , from Latin Gades , from Phoenician *gadir , wall. 
 ‌ ghd 

Arabic root, to strive. jihad , from Arabic jihād , battle, holy war, from jahada , to strive (sense probably influenced by derived stem jāhada , to fight). 
 mujahid , from Arabic mujāhidīn , plural of mujāhid , fighter, one who fights in a jihad, active participle of jāhada , to fight, derived stem from jahada , to strive.

 ‌ ghl 

West Semitic, to become foolish, ignorant. Medjool date , from Arabic majhūl , unknown, passive participle of jahila , to be ignorant of, not to know. 
 ‌ glb 

West Semitic, to catch, fetch. djellaba , from Arabic jallāba , jallābīya , djellaba, from jallāb , trader, importer;
 jilbab , from Arabic jilbāb , jilbab. Both a and b from jalaba , to attract, bring, fetch, import.

 ‌ gll 

To roll. Galilee , from Latin Galilea , either from Aramaic gəlilā , circuit, district (from gəlal , to roll) or from Hebrew gəlîlâ , circuit, district (from gālal , to roll). 
 Megillah , from Hebrew məgillâ , scroll, roll, from gālal , to roll. 
 Golgotha , from Aramaic gulgultā , skull, from galgel , to roll, derived stem of gəlal , to roll.

 ‌ glm 

Central Semitic, to cut, break off, separate. golem , from Hebrew gōlem , formless mass, unfinished thing, from gālam , to wrap up. 
 ‌ gmd 

Central Semitic, to become hard, congeal, freeze, contract. Jumada , from Arabic jumādā , a month name, from jamada , to freeze. 
 ‌ gml 1 

Common Semitic noun *gamal‑ , camel. camel ; camelopard , from Latin, from Greek kamēlos , from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew gāmāl , Aramaic gamlā , and Arabic jamal , camel. 
 ‌ gml 2 

Common Semitic noun *gaml‑ , throwstick. gamma , from Greek gamma , from Phoenician *gaml , throwstick (?), third letter of the Phoenician alphabet.
 gimel , from Hebrew gîmel , gimel, alteration of Phoenician *gaml (see above).

 ‌ gmr 

To complete, finish, bring to an end. Gemara , from Aramaic gəmārā , completion, from gəmar , to complete. 
 ‌ gnb 

Northwest Semitic, to steal. ganef , from Yiddish, from Hebrew gannāb , thief, from gānab , to steal. 
 ‌ gnn 

West Semitic, to cover, surround. Magen David , from Hebrew māgēn dāwīd , shield of David, from māgēn (< *maginn ), shield, from gānan , to cover, defend. 
 jinni , from Arabic jinnī , demonic, demon, from jinn , demons (< "invisible beings"), from janna , to cover, hide, conceal.

 ‌ gpr 

To be(come) strong, prevail, work. West Semitic variant (assimilated) form gbr. Gabriel , from Hebrew gabrî ʾ ēl , my strong one (is) God, from gabrî , my strong one, from gabr‑ , presuffixal form of geber , strong one, man, from gābar , to be strong ( ʾ ēl , god; see ʾ l ). 
 algebra , from Arabic al-jabr , the might, force, restoration, from jabara , to force, restore, set (bones).

 ‌ grḏ 

Central Semitic noun *guraḏ‑ (exact form uncertain), rodent. jird , from colloquial Maghrebi Arabic jird , rat, jird, from Arabic juraḏ . 
 ‌ grr 

West Semitic, to drag, draw, pull. jar 1 , from Arabic jarra , earthen jar, from jarra , to draw, pull. 
 ‌ gwy 

Central Semitic noun *gāy‑ , tribe. goy , from Hebrew gôy , nation people (usually, and later exclusively, of non-Israelite, and then non-Jewish, people). 
 ‌ gwz 

Central Semitic, to pass through. Betelgeuse , from Arabic yad al-jawzā ʾ , hand of Orion, from al-jawzā ʾ , Gemini, later also Orion, perhaps from jawz , center, middle, from jāza , to pass through ( yad , hand; see yd ). 
 ‌ gy ʾ 

Assumed root of Hebrew gay ʾ , valley. Gehenna , from Hebrew gê ʾ ( ben ) hinnōm , valley of (the son of) Hinnom, from gê ʾ , bound form of gay ʾ , valley ( hinnōm , a man's name; see hnn ). 
 ‌ gyl 

West Semitic, to rejoice. Abigail , from Hebrew ʾ ăbîgayil , my father (is) joy, from *gayil , joy, akin to gîl , rejoicing, joy, from gāl , to rejoice ( ʾ ăbî , my father; see ʾ b ). 
 ‌ gzr 

West Semitic, to cut off, destroy. Algeria , Algiers , from Arabic al-jazā ʾ ir , the islands, Algeria, plural of al-jazīra , the island (< "cut off" from land). 
 ‌ ġdn 

Central Semitic noun *ġadan‑, *ġidn‑ , softness, tenderness, verdure. Eden , from Hebrew ʿ ēden , delight. 
 ‌ ġmr 

Central Semitic noun *ġumr‑ , sheaf. omer ; Lag b'Omer , from Hebrew ʿ ōmer , sheaf, period from the second day of Passover to the first day of Shavuot (from the offering of a sheaf of barley offered on the second day of Passover), unit of measure. 
 ‌ ġng 

West Semitic, to be(come) delighted, delightful. baba ghanouj , from Arabic ġannūj , flirtatious, from ġanija , to flirt. 
 ‌ ġrb 

Common Semitic noun *ġārib‑, *ġurāb‑ , raven. grab 2 , from Arabic ġurāb , raven, swift galley. 
 ‌ ġrp 

West Semitic, to ladle, scoop. carafe , probably from Arabic ġarrāfa , dipper, cup, from ġarafa , to ladle, spoon, scoop. 
 ‌ ġrr 

Also ġwr. 

Central Semitic noun *ġār‑ , *ġarr‑ , *miġarr , cave. realgar , from Arabic rahj al-ġār , powder of the cave, from ġār , cave. 
 ‌ ġrz 

Arabic root, to prick, insert, plant. Megrez , from Arabic maġriz , base, root, from ġaraza , to prick, insert, plant. 
 ‌ ġṭr 

Central Semitic, to surround. gutra , from Arabic ġuṭra , gutra, keffiyeh, perhaps akin to Hebrew ʿ ăṭārâ , crown, from ʿ āṭar , to surround. 
 ‌ ġṭs 

or ġṭš .

Arabic root, to plunge, dive. albatross , from Arabic al-ġaṭṭās , the diver, sea-eagle, from ġaṭasa , to plunge, dive. 
 ‌ ġwl 

Arabic root, to snatch, grab, destroy. Algol , ghoul , from Arabic (al‑)ġūl , (the) desert demon, ogre, ghoul, from ġāla , to snatch, grab, destroy. 
 ‌ ġwr 

See ġrr. 
 ‌ ġzl 

Central Semitic, to spin (yarn or thread). ghazal , from Arabic ġazal , amatory poetry, from ġazila , to court, praise with amatory poetry (perhaps < *"to spin (yarn)"). 
 ‌ ġzw 

Arabic root, to strive, make a raid. ghazi , from Arabic ġāzī , raider, warrior, active participle of ġazā , to strive, make a raid;
 razzia , from Arabic ġazya , dialectal variant of ġazwa , raid, military attack, from ġazā (see above).

 ‌ hbb 

West Semitic, to move, set out, blow (of wind). haboob , from Arabic habūb , strong wind, from habba , to move, depart, rush, blow. 
 ‌ hdg 

Arabic root, to shuffle along, totter. howdah , from Arabic hawdaj , litter, sedan chair, from hadaja , to shuffle along, totter. 
 ‌ hdy 

West Semitic, to lead, extend. Mahdi , from Arabic mahdī , rightly guided (one), Mahdi, passive participle of hadā , to lead. 
 ‌ hgr 

Arabic root, to depart. hegira , from Arabic hijra , emigration, flight, from hajara , to depart. 
 ‌ hlk 

To go. Halacha , from Hebrew hălākâ , rule, tradition, from hālak , to go. 
 ‌ hll 

To shout, boast; in derived stem, to praise. alleluia , hallelujah , from Hebrew halləlû-yāh , praise Yahweh, from halləlû , praise, masculine plural imperative of hillēl , to praise;
 Hallel , from Hebrew hallēl , song of praise, from Hebrew hillēl , to praise. 

 halala , from Arabic halala , a Saudi Arabian coin, akin to hilāl , crescent, from halla , to appear (of the moon).

 ‌ hmz 

Arabic root, to prick, urge on, prod. hamza , from Arabic hamza , graphic sign for the glottal stop, from hamaza , to prick, to urge on, prod. 
 ‌ hnn 

Central Semitic (?), to weep, yearn. Gehenna , from Hebrew gê ʾ ( ben ) hinnōm , valley of (the son of) Hinnom, from hinnōm , a man's name (etymology uncertain; perhaps akin to Arabic hanna , to weep, yearn + nominal ending -ōm ). 
 ‌ hrr 

Northwest Semitic noun *harr‑ , mountain. Armageddon , from Hebrew har məgiddô , mountain region of Megiddo, from har , mountain. 
 ‌ hrs 

Central Semitic, to crush, break. harissa , from Arabic harīsa , a dish of pounded meat and bulgur, from harasa , to pound, crush. 
 ‌ hśm 

Arabic root, to smash, shatter, destroy. Hashemite , from Arabic hāšimī , Hashemite, from hašama , to destroy, smash. 
 ‌ hwy 

Also hyy. 

To fall, happen, be, become. Yahweh , from Hebrew yahweh , assumed ancient pronunciation of the name of the God of Israel, perhaps meaning "he sends down (the hosts of heaven)," causative derived stem of hāwâ , hāyâ , to fall, happen, be. 
 Jehovah , modern mispronunciation (since the 16th century ad) of Yahweh, in which the Hebrew consonants Y(J)-H-W(V)-H were pronounced with the vowels of the Hebrew word ʾ ădōnāy (see ʾ d ), which were added to the Hebrew consonantal text of the Bible to indicate that the latter word was to be read instead of the divine name. 

 Various short forms of Hebrew yahweh (see I above), found mostly in personal names. Jah , from Hebrew yāh , short for yahweh , Yahweh, also appearing in the following personal names: Jedidiah , from Hebrew yədîdyāh , beloved of Yahweh (see dwd );
 Matthew , from Hebrew mattayyāh (< *mattan-yāh ), gift of Yahweh;
 Nehemiah , from Hebrew nəḥemyāh , Yahweh comforted;
 Obadiah , from Hebrew ʿ ōbadyāh , servant of Yahweh;
 Tobit , from Hebrew ṭôbīyāh , my good (is) Yahweh;
 Uriah , from Hebrew ʾ ûrîyāh , my light (is) Yahweh ( ʾ ûrî , my light; see ʾ wr );
 Zechariah , from Hebrew zəkaryāh , Yahweh has remembered;
 Zephaniah , from Hebrew ṣəpanyāh , Yahweh has hidden, Yahweh has treasured. 

 Hezekiah , from Hebrew ḥizqîyāh(û) , my strength (is) Yahweh (see ḥzq );
 Isaiah , from Hebrew yəša ʿ yāhû , salvation of Yahweh;
 Jeremiah , jeremiad , from Hebrew yirməyāhû , Yahweh has established;
 Elijah , from Hebrew ʾ ēlîyāhû , my God (is) Yahweh (see ʾ l ). a-d all from Hebrew yāhû , short form of yahweh , Yahweh. 

 Joab , from Hebrew yô ʾ āb , Yahweh (is) father (see ʾ b );
 Joel , from Hebrew yô ʾ ēl , Yahweh (is) God;
 John , from Hebrew yôḥānān , Yahweh has been gracious;
 Jonathan , from Hebrew yônātān , Yahweh has given (see ntn ). a-d all from Hebrew yô , short form of yahweh , Yahweh. 

 Jehoshaphat , from Hebrew yəhôšāpāṭ , Yahweh has judged ( šāpāṭ , he has judged; see ṯpṭ );
 Joshua , from yəhôšûa ʿ , perhaps "Yahweh (is) lord" ( *šûa ʿ , lord; see ṯw ʿ ) or "Yahweh is salvation" ( *šûa ʿ , salvation; see wṯ ʿ ); 
 Jesus , from Hebrew yēšûa ʿ , shortening of yəhôšûa ʿ , Joshua (see above). Both a and b from yəhô , short form of yahweh , Yahweh.

 ‌ ḥdd 

To be(come) sharp. hudud , from Arabic ḥudūd , plural of ḥadd , edge, limit, divine ordinance, punishment, from ḥadd , to sharpen, delimit. 
 ‌ ḥdṯ 

To be(come) new. Carthage , from Phoenician (Punic) *qart-ḥadašt , new town, from *ḥadašt , feminine singular of *ḥadaš , new ( *qart , town; see qr ). 
 hadith , from Arabic ḥadīṯ , news, report, tradition, from ḥaddaṯa , to report, derived stem of ḥadaṯa , to be new. 
 Addis Ababa , from Amharic addis abäba , new flower, from addis , new, akin to addäsä (< *ḥaddaṯa ), to renew ( abäba , flower; see ʾ bb ).

 ‌ ḥḏr 

Central Semitic, to go around, encompass. mahzor , from Mishnaic Hebrew maḥăzôr , cycle, mahzor, from ḥāzar , to go around, return, repeat. 
 ‌ ḥgb 

Central Semitic, to cover, conceal. hijab , from Arabic ḥijāb , curtain, veil, from ḥajaba , to veil, cover. 
 ‌ ḥgg 

Central Semitic, to make a pilgrimage. Haggai , from Hebrew ḥaggay , perhaps "born on a feast day," from ḥag , pilgrimage-feast, from ḥāgag , to make a pilgrimage, keep a pilgrimage-feast. 
 Dhu'l-Hijjah , from Arabic ḏū l-ḥijja , the one of the pilgrimage;
 haj , from Arabic ḥajj , pilgrimage. Both a and b from Arabic ḥajja , to make a pilgrimage;
 haji , from Arabic ḥājj , pilgrim, active participle of ḥajja (see above).

 ‌ ḥkm 

Central Semitic, to be(come) wise, understand, judge. hakim 1 , from Arabic ḥakīm , wise (man), sage, doctor, from ḥakama , to judge, decide, govern;
 hakim 2 , from Arabic ḥākim , ruling, ruler, governor, active participle of ḥakama (see above).

 ‌ ḥll 

To be(come) clean, pure, holy. Elul , from Hebrew ʾ ělûl , a month name, from Akkadian elūlu , elūnu , name of a festival and of a month corresponding to parts of August and September, perhaps from elēlu (< *ḥalālum ), to be(come) clean, pure, holy. 
 halal , from Arabic ḥalāl , legally permissible, from ḥalla , to undo, free, be permissible.

 ‌ ḥmd 

Central Semitic, to desire, delight in, praise. Muhammad , from Arabic muḥammad , praised, commendable, passive participle of ḥammada , to praise highly, derived stem of ḥamida , to praise, extol. 
 ‌ ḥmr 

Common Semitic noun *ḥimār‑ , donkey. homer 2 , from Hebrew ḥōmer , heap, a unit of capacity (perhaps originally the burden carried by a donkey; akin to ḥămôr , donkey). 
 ‌ ḥnk 

West Semitic, to (make) understand, train. Hanukkah , from Hebrew ḥănukkâ , dedication, from ḥānak , to train, dedicate. 
 ‌ ḥnn 

To be(come) gracious. Ann , Hannah , from Hebrew ḥannâ , grace, from ḥānan , to be(come) gracious. 
 John , ultimately from Hebrew yôḥānān , Yahweh has been gracious, from ḥānān , lengthened form of ḥānan , he has been gracious ( yô , Yahweh; see hwy ). 
 Hannibal , from Phoenician (Punic) *ḥannī-ba ʿ l , my grace (is) Baal, from *ḥannī , my grace, from *ḥann , grace ( *ba ʿ l , lord, Baal; see b ʿ l ).

 ‌ ḥpp 

Central Semitic, to surround, enclose, cover. chuppah , from Hebrew ḥuppâ , covering, canopy, bridal chamber, from ḥāpap , to surround, cover. 
 ‌ ḥpṯ 

Central Semitic, to be mindful of, preserve. hafiz , from Arabic ḥāfiẓ , guardian, one who has memorized the Koran, active participle of ḥafiẓa , to preserve, be mindful of, learn, memorize. 
 ‌ ḥqq 

West Semitic, to cut into, level, make correct, decree. hookah , from Arabic ḥuqqa , small box, pot, or jar, from ḥaqqa , to be true, suitable, fitting. 
 ‌ ḥsd 

Central Semitic, to be kind, ashamed. Hasid , from Hebrew ḥāsîd , pious, from ḥāsad , to be kind. 
 ‌ ḥśś 

Arabic root, to mow. hashish , from Arabic ḥašīš , herbs, hemp, cannabis, hashish, from ḥašša , to mow;
 assassin , from Arabic ḥaššāšīn , plural of ḥaššāš , hashish user, from ḥašīš (see above).

 ‌ ḥṣl 

Arabic root, to occur, obtain, attain, receive. tahsildar , from Arabic taḥṣīl , collection, revenue, infinitive of ḥaṣṣala , to acquire, collect, derived stem of ḥaṣala , to occur, obtain, attain, receive. 
 ‌ ḥṣp 

Central Semitic, to be insolent. chutzpah , from Mishnaic Hebrew ḥuṣpâ , insolence, from ḥāṣap , to be insolent. 
 ‌ ḥwk 

Arabic root, to weave. haik , from Moroccan Arabic ḥā ʾ ik , an outer garment, from classical Arabic, weaver, active participle of ḥāka , to weave. 
 ‌ ḥwl 

West Semitic, to go around, turn, change. hawala , from Arabic ḥawāla , bill of exchange, from ḥāla , to turn, change. 
 ‌ ḥwr 

Central Semitic, to be(come) white. houri , from Arabic ḥūrīya , nymph, houri, from ḥūr , plural (also used as singular) of ʾ aḥwar , feminine ḥawrā ʾ , characterized by the quality ḥawar , intense whiteness of the sclera of the eye in contrast to deep blackness of the iris (compare ḥawira , to have this quality). 
 ‌ ḥyw 

To live. Common Semitic adjective *ḥayy‑ , alive, living. Eve , from Late Latin Ēva , from Hebrew ḥawwâ , living, life, from ḥāyâ , to live. 
 Ea , from Akkadian Ea , from Old Akkadian *ḥayy‑ , living.

 ‌ ḥzq 

To be(come) strong. Ezekiel , from Hebrew yəḥezqē ʾ l , God strengthened, from yəḥezq , reduced form of yəḥazzēq , he strengthened, from ḥizzēq , to strengthen, derived stem of ḥāzaq , to be(come) strong;
 Hezekiah , from Hebrew ḥizqîyāh(û) , my strength (is) Yahweh, from ḥizqî , my strength, from ḥēzeq , strength, from ḥāzaq (see above; yāh(û) , Yahweh; see hwy ).

 ‌ ḥzy 

Central (Common?) Semitic, to see. chazan , from Mishnaic Hebrew and Jewish Aramaic ḥazzān , superintendent, cantor, from Akkadian ḫazannu , administrator, mayor, perhaps from earlier *ḥāziyānum , overseer, active participle of Proto-Akkadian verb *ḥazāyum , to see. 
 ‌ ḫll 

West Semitic, to pierce. challah , from Hebrew ḥallâ , a kind of bread or cake, probably "something perforated," from ḥālal , to pierce. 
 ‌ ḫlp 

To pass, follow. caliph , from Arabic ḫalīfa , successor (to Muhammad), caliph, from ḫalafa , to follow, succeed. 
 ‌ ḫmr 

Arabic root, to cover, conceal. khimar , from Arabic ḫimār , covering, from ḫamara , to cover, conceal. 
 ‌ ḫmš 

Common Semitic *ḫam(i)š‑ , five. khamsin , from colloquial Arabic ḫamsīn , fifty, khamsin, from oblique case of Arabic ḫamsūn , fifty, from ḫams , five. 
 ‌ ḫrb 

Common Semitic noun *ḫar(r)ūb‑ , carob. carob ; algaroba , from Arabic ( al‑)ḫarrūba , (the) carob pod, from ḫarrūb , carob. 
 ‌ ḫrp 

To be early, do (something) early, with associated nouns denoting "early season." kharif , from Arabic ḫarīf , autumn (< "early season"). 
 ‌ ḫsn 

Aramaic root, to be strong. magazine , from Arabic maḫāzin , plural of maḫzan , storeroom, depository, depot, magazine, from ḫazana , to store, from Aramaic ḥassen , to possess, hoard, derived stem of ḥəsan , to be strong. 
 ‌ ḫśy 

Central Semitic, to be fearful, reverent, righteous Essene , from Aramaic ḥasên , plural of ḥasē , righteous, holy. 
 ‌ ḫyr 

To choose. mohair , moire , moiré , from Arabic muḫayyar , choice, select, a fabric, passive participle of ḫayyara , to prefer, derived stem of ḫāra , to choose.
 mukhtar , from Arabic muḫtār , chosen, elected, a mukhtar, passive participle of iḫtāra , to choose, elect, select, derived stem of ḫāra , to choose.

 ‌ ḫzn 

See x̣zy. 
 ‌ k ʿ b 

West Semitic root, to increase, swell. Kaaba , from Arabic ka ʿ ba , cube, cubic structure, from ka ʿ aba to swell, be full (said of breasts). 
 ‌ kbb 1 

East Semitic, to burn, char. shish kebab , from Arabic kabāb , cooked meat in small pieces, probably from Aramaic kabbābā , burning, charring, from kabbeb , to char, roast, probably from Akkadian kabābu , to burn, char. 
 ‌ kbb 2 

West Semitic root, to encircle, overturn. kibbeh , from Arabic kubba , ball, meatball (by association with kabāb , kebab; see kbb 1 ). 
 ‌ khw 

See qhw. 
 ‌ kll 

Also kly. 

To complete. West Semitic *kull‑ , whole, all. Kol Nidre , from Aramaic kol , all. 
 klezmer , from Mishnaic Hebrew kəlê , plural bound form of kəlî , utensil, article, instrument, from kālâ , to complete.

 ‌ kmn 

Common Semitic noun *kammūn‑ , cumin, perhaps from Sumerian gamun , cumin, unless this itself is of Semitic origin. cumin , cymene , from Greek kuminon , probably from a Semitic source akin to Akkadian kam(m)ūnu , Hebrew kammôn , Aramaic kammonā , kammunā , Arabic kammūn , all meaning "cumin." 
 ‌ kms 

Also kns, knš. 

To gather, collect, assemble. Knesset , from Modern Hebrew kneset , from Mishnaic Hebrew kəneset , assembly, from Aramaic kəništā , assembly, from kənaš , to assemble. 
 ‌ knp 

Common Semitic noun *kanap‑ , wing, side. kunefe , from Arabic kunāfa , from kanafa , to flank, surround, provide with an enclosure. 
 ‌ kpp 1 

Common Semitic noun *kapp‑ , palm of the hand. kaph , from Hebrew kap , kaph;
 kappa , from Greek kappa , kappa. Both a and b from Phoenician *kapp , palm of the hand, eleventh letter of the Phoenician alphabet.

 ‌ kpp 2 

See gbb. 
 ‌ kpr 1 

To wipe clean, polish, purify, cover. Yom Kippur , from Hebrew kippûr , atonement, from kippēr , to cover, atone. 
 ‌ kpr 2 

Common Semitic noun *kapar‑ , village. Capernaum , from Hebrew kəpar naḥûm , village of Nahum, from kəpar , bound form of kāpār , village ( naḥûm , Nahum; see nḥm ). 
 giaour , kafir , Kaffir , takfir , takfiri , from Arabic kāfir , unbeliever, infidel (< "villager"), from kafr , village, from Aramaic kaprā , village.

 ‌ kpr 3 

Northwest Semitic noun kupr‑ , henna. cyprinid ; cyprinodont , from Greek kuprīnos , carp, perhaps from kupros , henna (from the fish's color), probably from a Semitic source akin to Ugaritic kpr and Hebrew kōper , henna (perhaps ultimately from kpr 1 in the meaning "to wipe, cover" > "to cover with dye"). 
 ‌ krb 

To praise. Common Semitic root, with West Semitic metathesized variant brk. cherub , from Hebrew kərûb , cherub; akin to Akkadian karābu , to praise, bless. Compare also brk. 
 ‌ kšš 

Also kwš. 

West Semitic, to pound, strike. couscous , cush , cush-cush , from Arabic kuskus , from kaskasa , to crumble, pulverize. 
 ‌ ktb 

West Semitic root, to prick, cut; later, to write. ketubah , from Mishnaic Hebrew kətubbâ , writing, writ, (marriage) contract;
 Tanakh , from Hebrew kətûbôt , the Writings, from plural of kətûbâ , feminine of kətûb , written (passive participle). Both a and b from Hebrew kātab , to write.

 ‌ kṯr 

To succeed, achieve, be(come) suitable, proper. kosher , from Ashkenazic Hebrew kóšer , proper;
 kashrut , from Mishnaic Hebrew kašrût , (ritual) fitness. Both a and b from Hebrew kāšēr , proper, from kāšēr , to succeed, be(come) proper, suitable.

 ‌ kwl 

To contain, hold, measure. Variant (Arabic) root form kyl. maquiladora , from Arabic makīla , measured, a measure of capacity, feminine passive participle of kāla , to measure. 
 ‌ kwn 

To be, be(come) firm, true. Sargon , from Hebrew sargôn , from Akkardian šarru-kīn , the king is true, legitimate, from kīn , predicate form of kīnu , verbal adjective of kânu , to be(come) firm, true ( šarru , king; see śrr ). 
 ‌ kwš 

See kšš. 
 ‌ kx̣l 

Common Semitic noun *kux̣l‑ , also *gux̣l‑ , (powder of) antimony. kohl ; alcohol , from Arabic (al‑)kuḥl , (the) powder of antimony, antimony. 
 ‌ kyl 

See kwl. 
 ‌ l ʾ 

Common Semitic noun *li ʾ ‑ , bull, feminine *li ʾ at‑ , cow. Leah , from Hebrew lē ʾ â , Leah, originally a noun meaning "cow." 
 ‌ l ʾ k 

West Semitic, to send. Malachi , from Hebrew mal ʾ ākî , my messenger, from mal ʾ āk , messenger, from *lā ʾ ak , to send. 
 Malaga , from Latin Malaca, Malacha , from Phoenician *mal ʾ akat‑ , work(place) of (a god whose name has not been preserved), from *l ʾ k , to send, serve, work.

 ‌ lb ʾ 

Common Semitic noun *lab ʾ ‑ , *labī ʾ ‑ , lion. Leo , leonine , lev , lion ; chameleon , codling , 1 , dandelion , Leo Minor , leopard , from Greek leōn , from a Semitic source akin to Akkadian lābu , lab ʾ u , labbu , Ugaritic lb ʾ , Hebrew lābî ʾ , lion, and Arabic feminine lab(u) ʾ a , labwa , lioness; compare also Egyptian rw , Coptic laboi , lion(ess). 
 ‌ lblb 

Also lmlm. 

West Semitic root, to sprout, bud, be(come) soft. lulav , from Mishnaic Hebrew lûlā , sprout, palm branch, from liblēb , to bloom. 
 ‌ lbn 

Central Semitic, to be(come) white; West Semitic noun *lubān(at)‑ , frankincense. Lebanon , from Hebrew ləbānôn , Lebanon, from lābān , white, from lābēn , to be(come) white. 
 benjamin , benzoin , from Arabic lubān , frankincense.

 ‌ ldn 

Common Semitic noun *ladan‑ , labdanum. labdanum , from a Semitic source akin to Akkadian ladinnu, ladunu and Old South Arabian ldn , labdanum. 
 ‌ lḥm 

To eat. Bethlehem , from Hebrew bêt-leḥem , house of bread, from leḥem , bread, from lāḥam , to eat ( bêt , house; see byt ). 
 ‌ lmd 

To learn, be(come) accustomed; in derived stem, to teach, instruct. Talmud , from Mishnaic Hebrew talmûd , learning, from Hebrew lāmad , to learn. 
 Northwest Semitic noun *lamd‑ , ox-goad (?). lambda , from Greek lambda , lambda;
 lamedh , from Hebrew lāmed , lamedh. Both a and b from Phoenician *lamd , ox-goad (?), eleventh letter of the Phoenician alphabet, akin to Hebrew malmād , ox-goad.

 ‌ lwq 

Arabic root, to soften. loco 1 , perhaps from Arabic lawqā ʾ , feminine singular of ʾ alwaq , bent, foolish, from lāqa , to soften. 
 ‌ lwy 

To wind, twist, circle, encircle. leviathan , from Hebrew liwyātān , serpent, dragon, akin to Ugaritic ltn , sea monster. 
 ‌ lwz 

Early Aramaic noun *lawz‑ , almond (tree). lozenge , perhaps ultimately from Early Aramaic noun *lawz‑ , almond (tree). 
 ‌ mḫḫ 

Common Semitic noun *muḫḫ‑ , marrow, brain, skull. nucha , from Arabic nuḫā ʿ , marrow, spinal marrow, spinal cord, probably akin to muḫḫ , marrow, brain, from Common Semitic *muḫḫ‑ , marrow, brain, skull (though the phonological details are obscure). 
 ‌ mlḥ 

Common Semitic noun *milḥ‑ , salt. malachite , from Greek malakhē , molokhē , mallow, probably from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew mallûaḥ , a salt-marsh plant, akin to melaḥ , salt. 
 mallow , mauve , from Latin malva , probably from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew mallûaḥ (see above).

 ‌ mlk 

West Semitic, to rule, dominate, possess, own; Common Semitic noun *malk‑ , ruler, king. Melkite , from Aramaic malkāye , plural of malkāy , royal, royalist, from malkā , king. 
 Melchizedek , from Hebrew malkî-ṣedeq , my king (is) righteousness, from malk , presuffixal form of melek , king + -î , my. 
 Moloch , from Hebrew mōlek , from Canaanite *mulk , perhaps variant of Canaanite *malk , *milk , king. 
 Mameluke , from Arabic mamlūk , owned, slave, Mameluke, passive participle of malaka , to own, possess.

 ‌ mnn 

West Semitic, to be kind, show favor, patronize, disdain. manna , from Aramaic mannā , from Hebrew mān , manna, akin to Arabic mann , favor, gift, honeydew, manna, from manna , to be kind, show favor. 
 ‌ mnw 

To count. mina , from Akkadian manû , a unit of weight, from manû , to count. 
 minyan , from Mishnaic Hebrew minyān , count, number, minyan, from Aramaic minyānā , count, number, from mənā , to count.

 ‌ mr ʾ 

Common Semitic nouns *mar ʾ ‑, *māri ʾ ‑ , man, master, lord, feminine *mar ʾ at‑, *māri ʾ at‑ , woman, mistress, lady. Martha , from Aramaic mārətā , lady, feminine of mārā , lord. 
 ‌ mrr 

To be(come) bitter. Common Semitic noun *murr‑ , bitterness, myrrh. myrrh 1 , myrrh 2 , from Greek murrha , from a Semitic source akin to Akkadian murru , Arabic murr , Hebrew mōr , myrrh. 
 ‌ msr 

West Semitic, to remove, deliver, hand over. Masora , from Hebrew māsôrâ , Masora, from māsar , to hand over, transmit. 
 ‌ mšḥ 

To anoint. Messiah , from Aramaic məšiḥā , anointed (one) (from məšaḥ , to anoint) or Hebrew māšîaḥ , anointed (one) (from māšaḥ , to anoint). 
 massage , masseur , from Arabic masaḥa , to anoint, stroke, rub (or massa , to touch; see mšš ).

 ‌ mšš 

To feel, grope for, touch. massage , masseur , from Arabic massa , to touch (or masaḥa , to anoint, stroke, rub; see mšḥ ). 
 ‌ mṣ́ṣ́ 

West Semitic, to ferment, be(come) sour. matzo , from Hebrew maṣṣâ , unleavened bread. 
 ‌ mt 

Common Semitic noun *mut‑ , man. Methuselah , from Hebrew mətûšelaḥ , man of Shelah (name of a deity), from mətû‑ , archaic bound form of *mōt , man. 
 ‌ mwl 

Hebrew root, to circumcise. mohel , from Mishnaic Hebrew môhēl , active participle māhal , to circumcise, from Aramaic māhal , by-form of Biblical Hebrew māl . 
 ‌ mwt 

To die. checkmate , mate 2 , from Arabic māt , he has died, from earlier māta , to die. 
 ‌ my 1 

Northwest Semitic *mīy‑ , who?. Michael , from Hebrew mîkā ʾ ēl , who is like God? ( kā , like + ʾ ēl , God; see ʾ l );
 Micah , from Hebrew mîkâ , short for mîkā ʾ ēl (see above) or mîkāyāh , who is like Yahweh (see hwy ). Both a and b from Hebrew mî , who?.

 ‌ my 2 

(exact root shape uncertain). Common Semitic noun *mā̆ ʾ ‑ , *mā̆y‑ , water. mem , from Hebrew mēm , mem;
 mu , from Greek mū , patterned to rhyme with nū , nu (see nwn ). Both a and b from Phoenician *mēm , water, thirteenth letter of the Phoenician alphabet, akin to Hebrew mayim , water.

 ‌ myd 

Central Semitic, to sway, move, shake. maidan , from Arabic maydān , city square, open space, racetrack, combat area, from māda , to be moved, sway. 
 ‌ -n 

Common Semitic pronoun suffix * -na/-ni/-nu , we, us, our. bwana , from Arabic ʾ abūnā , our father;
 maulana , from Arabic mawlānā , our master. Both a and b from Arabic -nā , our.

 ‌ n ʿ m 

Central Semitic, to be(come) pleasant, agreeable. Naomi , from Hebrew no ʿ ŏmî , my delight, from nō ʿ am , delight, delightfulness, from nā ʿ ēm , to be(come) pleasant, delightful.
 anemone , perhaps a folk-etymological alteration (influenced by Greek anemos , wind) of an epithet of Adonis (the anemone having sprung from Adonis's blood in Greek myth), from Phoenician *hanna ʿ mon , "the pleasant one," akin to Hebrew na'ămān , a man's name (literally "pleasantness"), and na'ămānîm , a word describing a garden in Isaiah 17:10, perhaps a distortion of an epithet of Adonis.

 ‌ n ʿ r 

West Semitic, to shake, roar. noria , from Arabic nā ʿ ūra , from Aramaic nā ʿ urā , water-wheel, from nə ʿ ar , to shake, roar. 
 ‌ nb ʾ 

To name, proclaim, summon. Tanakh , from Hebrew nābî ʾ , prophet (originally, "one named, summoned by a god"). 
 ‌ nbr 

Ethiopic root, to sit, dwell. minbar ; almemar , from Arabic minbar , pulpit, probably from Ge'ez manbar seat, chair, pulpit, or mənbār , seat, throne, from nabara , to sit, dwell. 
 ‌ nḏr 

West Semitic, to vow, consecrate. Kol Nidre , from Aramaic kol nidrê , all the vows of, from nidrê , plural bound form of nidrā , vow, from nədar , to vow. 
 ‌ ngd 

West Semitic, to become prominent, conspicuous, to drag, lead, travel. Haggadah , from Hebrew haggādâ , narration, telling, from higgîd , to narrate, tell (< *hangida ).
 Aggadah , from Aramaic ʾ aggādā , formed on the model of Hebrew haggādâ , narration, telling (see 1 above).

 ‌ ngś 

West Semitic, to press, oppress, drive. Negus , from Amharic nəgus , from Classical Ethiopic nəguś , king, ruler, verbal adjective of nagśa , to rule, become king. 
 ‌ nhr 

Common Semitic noun *nah(a)r‑ , river. Achernar , from Arabic nahr , river. 
 ‌ nḥm 

Central Semitic, to console, comfort. Nahum , from Hebrew naḥûm , comfort;
 Capernaum , from Hebrew kəpar naḥûm , village of Nahum (see kpr 2 ). 
 Nehemiah , from Hebrew nəḥemyāh , Yahweh comforted, from nəḥem , reduced form of niḥam , he comforted. Both 1 and 2 from Hebrew niḥam , to console, comfort. 
 ‌ npṣ́ 

To shake, shatter. intifada , from Arabic intifāḍa , shudder, awakening, uprising, from intafaḍa , to be shaken, shudder, wake up, derived stem of nafaḍa , to shake. 
 ‌ npṭ 

Common Semitic noun *napṭ‑ , naphtha. naphtha , from Greek naphtha , from a Semitic source akin to Arabic and Ethiopic nafṭ , Aramaic nepṭā , Akkadian napṭu , naphtha. 
 ‌ npy 

To sift. apron , map , mop , napery , napkin , nappe , from Latin mappa , originally napkin, cloth, said by the Roman author Quintilian to be of Punic origin, perhaps from Phoenician (Punic) *mappē , from Common Semitic *manpay‑ or *manpiy‑ , sieve, fine cloth (?). 
 ‌ nqb 

To pierce. Maccabee , from Hebrew maqqebet (< *manqabt‑ ), hammer, from nāqab , to pierce.
 niqab , from Arabic niqāb , veil, from naqaba , to pierce, bore a hole, perforate.

 ‌ nqr 

To bore, pierce. nacre , from Arabic naqqāra , small drum, from naqara , to bore, pierce. 
 ‌ ntn 

To give. Matthew , from Hebrew mattayyāh , from *mattan-yāh , gift of Yahweh, from mattan , bound form of mattān (< *mantan ), gift ( yāh , Yahweh; see hwy );
 Nathan , from nātān , he (God) gave; 
 Jonathan , from Hebrew yônātān , Yahweh has given, from nātān , he gave ( yô , Yahweh; see hwy ). Both a and b from Hebrew nātan , to give;

 Nathanael , from Hebrew nətan ʾ ēl , God has given, from nətan , reduced form of nātan (see above; ʾ ēl , God; see ʾ l ). 

 Esarhaddon , from Akkadian Aššur-aḫa-iddin , Ashur has given a brother, from iddin (< *yandin ), preterite of nadānu , to give ( aḫa , brother; see ʾ ḫ ).

 ‌ nṭy 

Central Semitic, to stretch out, extend, incline. mat 1 , from Late Latin matta , possibly from Phoenician (Punic) *maṭṭē (< *manṭay‑ or *manṭiy‑ ), akin to Hebrew miṭṭâ , bed, couch, from nāṭâ , to stretch out, extend, incline. 
 ‌ nṯm 

Arabic root, to arrange. Nizam , from Arabic niẓām , order, arrangement, from naẓama , to arrange. 
 ‌ nṯr 

To see, watch, observe, guard. Nebuchadnezzar , from Hebrew nəbûkadne ʾ ṣṣar (also nəbûkadre ʾ ṣṣar , whence English by-form Nebuchadrezzar ), alteration of Akkadian nabû-kudurrī-uṣur , Nabu protect the borders ( nabû , Nabu (a god); kudurrī , oblique plural of kudurru , border);
 Belshazzar , from Hebrew bēlšaṣṣar , from Akkadian bēl-šar-uṣur , Bel protect the king ( bēl , lord, Bel (Akkadian deity), and šar , king; see b ʿ l and śrr ). Both a and b from uṣur , protect, singular imperative of naṣāru , to guard, protect. 

 nadir , from Arabic naẓīr ( as-samt ), opposite (of the zenith), from naẓīr , facing, equal, opposite, from naẓara , to see, watch.

 ‌ nwb 

Arabic root, to represent, act as deputy. nabob , from Arabic nuwwāb , plural of nā ʾ ib , deputy, active participle of nāba , to represent, act as deputy. 
 ‌ nwḫ 

To rest, come to rest. almanac , from Arabic munāḫ , halting place, caravan stop, position of the stars, from ʾ anāḫa , to make (a camel) lie down, from nāḫa , to lie down, rest (of camels). 
 ‌ nwn 

Common Semitic noun *nūn‑ , fish. nu , from Greek nū , nu;
 nun 2 , from Mishnaic Hebrew nûn , nun. Both a and b from Phoenician *nūn , fish, fourteenth letter of the Phoenician alphabet.

 ‌ nwr 

To shine, be(come) bright. menorah , from Hebrew mənôrâ , lamp, lampstand, akin to nēr , lamp. 
 kinara , minaret , from Arabic manāra , lamp, lighthouse, minaret, akin to nūr , light.
 Nanna , from Sumerian Nanna , Nannar , from Akkadian nannāru , luminary, from nawāru , to shine.

 ‌ p 

Common Semitic noun *pV̄‑ , mouth. pe , from Hebrew pē , pe;
 pi 1 , from Greek pei, pī , pi. Both a and b from Phoenician *pē , mouth, seventeenth letter of the Phoenician alphabet. 

 Fomalhaut , from Arabic fam , mouth.

 ‌ pdy 

To redeem, ransom. fedayee , from Arabic fidā ʾ ī , one who sacrifices himself, freedom fighter, from fidā ʾ , ransom, sacrifice, from fadā , to ransom, sacrifice. 
 ‌ pll 

To watch over, judge, intercede. tefillin , from Mishnaic Hebrew təpillîn , plural of təpillâ , prayer, from Hebrew hitpallēl , to pray, akin to pillēl , to mediate, judge, both derived stems of *pālal , to beseech. 
 ‌ plš 

To break through, pass through. Falasha , from Amharic fälaša , from fälaš , migrant, active participle of fälläsä , to migrate. 
 ‌ plx̣ 

To cleave, till, work. fellah , from Arabic fallāḥ , peasant, farmer, from falaḥa , to cleave, cultivate, till. 
 ‌ pq ʿ 

Also bq ʿ . 

West Semitic, to split, cleave, open. burqa , from Arabic burqa ʿ , variant of burqu ʿ , perhaps from * buqqu ʿ , from root variant bq ʿ , akin to Arabic faqa ʿ a , to burst (the name of the garment, burqu ʿ , perhaps originally making reference to a split or slit in front of the eyes through which the wearer can see). 
 ‌ pqr 

Common Semitic, to long for. fakir , from Arabic faqīr , poor, from faqura , to be(come) poor. 
 ‌ prd 

West Semitic, to separate. fardel , from Arabic farda , single piece, pack, bundle, from farada , to be(come) separate, segregated, single. 
 ‌ prh 

Ethiopic root, to fear, revere. Rastafarianism , from Amharic täfäri , feared, respected, participle of täfärra , to be feared, respected, derived stem of färra , to fear, respect, akin to Classical Ethiopic farha , to fear, revere. 
 ‌ prš 

Northwest Semitic, to make distinct, to separate. Pharisee , from Aramaic pərišayyā , plural of pəriš , separate, separated, from pəraš , to separate. 
 ‌ prṭ 

Northwest Semitic, to break, rend. prutah , from Mishnaic Hebrew pərûṭâ , a small coin, feminine passive participle of pāraṭ , to break. 
 ‌ psḥ 

Hebrew root, to pass over. Pesach , from Hebrew pesaḥ Passover;
 Pasch , from Aramaic pasḥā , from Hebrew pesaḥ (see above). Both a and b from Hebrew pāsaḥ , to pass over.

 ‌ ptw 

West Semitic, to advise. fatwa , from Arabic fatwā , legal opinion, from a verb *fatā , to advise (attested only in derived denominative forms such as ʾ aftā , to give a formal legal opinion). 
 mufti 1 , from Arabic muftī , one who delivers legal opinions, mufti, active participle of ʾ aftā (see above).

 ‌ pṭr 

To split, separate, detach. haftarah , from Mishnaic Hebrew hapṭārâ , conclusion, from hipṭîr , to conclude, dismiss, derived stem of Hebrew pāṭar , to separate, remove, release. 
 Eid al-Fitr , from Arabic fiṭr , breaking a fast;
 iftar , from Arabic ʾ ifṭār , verbal noun of ʾ afṭara , to break a fast. Both a and b from Arabic faṭara , to split, break, break a fast.

 ‌ pwl 

Northwest Semitic noun *pawl‑ , broad bean. ful , from Arabic fūl , broad beans, from Aramaic pōlā , broad bean. 
 ‌ q ʿ d 

Central Semitic, to bend, sit. Dhu'l-Qa'dah , from Arabic ḏū l-qa ʿ da , the one of the sitting (perhaps referring to staying at home instead of going to war, since this is the first of the months in which fighting is forbidden), from qa ʿ da , sitting;
 al-Qaeda , from Arabic al-qā ʿ ida , the foundation, the base. Both a and b from qa ʿ ada , to sit.

 ‌ qbl 

Common Semitic noun *qabl‑ , front, whence West Semitic denominative verb qbl , to receive. cabal , kabbalah , from Hebrew qabbālâ , received doctrine, tradition, from qibbēl , to receive. 
 gabelle , from Arabic qabāla , tax, tribute;
 Kabyle , from Arabic qabā ʾ ilu , plural of qabīla , tribe. Both a and b from Arabic qabila , to receive. 

 qiblah , from Arabic qibla , the direction of the Kaaba, toward which Muslims face when praying, akin to qabila , to receive (compare the probably denominative derived stem qābala , to face).

 ‌ qbṣ́ 

West Semitic, to collect, gather. kibbutz , from Hebrew qibbûṣ , gathering, from qibbēṣ , to gather, derived stem of qābaṣ , to gather. 
 ‌ qbw 

Also qww. 

West Semitic, to collect. mikvah , from Hebrew miqwâ , reservoir, or miqwe , collection (especially of water), immersion pool, both from qāwâ , to collect, perhaps akin to Aramaic (Syriac) qbā , to collect (of liquids), Ethiopic qabawa , to be distended (of the stomach). 
 ‌ qdm 

Common Semitic noun *qadm‑ , front, east, earlier time, with denominative verb, to precede, be in front. cadmium , Cadmus , from Greek Kadmos , from Phoenician *qadm , front, east. 
 ‌ qdš 

To be(come) holy, sacred. Kiddush , from Mishnaic Hebrew qiddûš , sanctification, purification, from Hebrew qiddēš , to consecrate, sanctify, derived stem of qādaš , to be(come) holy, sacred. 
 Kaddish , from Aramaic qaddiš , holy, sacred, from qədaš , to be(come) holy, sacred (so called after the first words of the prayer: yitgaddal wə-yitqaddaš šəmeh rabbā , may His (God's) great name be exalted and kept holy).

 ‌ qhr 

Arabic root, to conquer, vanquish. Cairo , from Arabic al-qāhira , the conquering one, feminine active participle of qahara , to conquer, vanquish. 
 ‌ qhw 

Also khw. 

Central Semitic, to be(come) weak, dim, dull, dark. café , cafeteria , caffeine , coffee , ultimately from Arabic qahwa , coffee, wine (originally perhaps "dark stuff"), akin to Arabic kahiya , to be(come) weak, Aramaic kəhā , qəhā , Hebrew kāhâ , qāhâ , to be(come) dim, faint, dull. 
 ‌ qly 

To burn, roast. alkali ; hyperkalemia , hypokalemia , from Arabic ( al‑ ) qily , the ashes, lye, potash, from qalā , to fry, roast. 
 ‌ qmṣ 

Central Semitic, to enclose. camisole , chemise , chemisette , kameez , from Late Greek kamision , probably from a Semitic source akin to Ugaritic qmṣ , a garment, Arabic qamīṣ , shirt, both akin to Hebrew qāmaṣ , to enclose with the hand, grasp. 
 camise , from Arabic qamīṣ , shirt.

 ‌ qnw 

Common Semitic noun *qanaw‑ , reed. canasta , cane , canistel , canister , canna , cannelloni , cannelure , cannoli , cannon , cannula , canyon ; cannellini bean , from Greek kanna , reed, from a Semitic source akin to Akkadian qanû , Aramaic qanyā , Hebrew qāne , all meaning "reed." 
 canon 1 , canon 2 , from Greek kanōn , bar, from the same Semitic source as Greek kanna above or a related one.

 ‌ qpl 

West Semitic, to close, enclose. coffle , from Arabic qāfila , caravan, feminine active participle of qafala , to close, also a denominative verb, to return. 
 ‌ qr 

Also qry. 

West Semitic *qry , to meet; noun *qart‑ , *qary(at)‑, *qiryat‑ , village, town ( *-(a)t‑ , feminine suffix). Carthage , from Latin Carthāgō , from Phoenician (Punic) *qart-ḥadašt , new town, from *qart , town ( *ḥadašt , new; see ḥdṯ ). 
 ‌ qr ʾ 

 To call (out), read, summon. Koran , from Arabic (al‑)qur ʾ ān , (the) reading, Koran, from qara ʾ a , to read, recite. 
 ‌ qrb 

To be(come) near, draw near. corban , from Hebrew qorbān , offering, from hiqrîb , to bring near, present, offer;
 kiruv , from Mishnaic Hebrew qîrûb , bringing near, rapprochement, from Hebrew qērēb , to bring near. Both a and b derived stems of qārab , to approach. 

 carboy , from Arabic qarrāba , big jug, from qarraba , to bring near, derived stem of qaruba , to be(come) near.

 ‌ qrm 

West Semitic, to gnaw, glean. macramé , from Arabic miqrama , bedcover, thin curtain, veil, from qarama , to gnaw, nibble. 
 ‌ qry 

See qr. 
 ‌ qsm 

West Semitic, to divide, distribute, assign, ordain, practice divination; noun *qasm‑ , *qism‑ , divination. kismet , from Arabic qisma , portion, lot, destiny, fate, from qasama , to divide, distribute, assign, foreordain. 
 ‌ qṣb 

To cut, cut off. Casbah , from Arabic dialectal qaṣba , citadel, fortified area of cities in northwest Africa, from qaṣaba , to cut up. 
 ‌ qṣ́y 

West Semitic, to judge, decree, rule. alcalde , from Arabic al-qāḍī , the decisive one, judge, active participle of qaḍā , to settle, decree, judge. 
 ‌ qṭn 

To be(come) thin, fine, small. cotton , from Arabic quṭn , quṭun , cotton, perhaps akin to Akkadian qatānu , to be(come) thin, fine (of textiles), or perhaps borrowed from an unknown source. 
 ‌ qwd 

West Semitic, to lead. alcaide , from Spanish, from Arabic al-qā ʾ id , the leader, active participle of qāda , to lead. 
 ‌ qwm 

West Semitic, to (a)rise, stand (up). sycamine , from Greek sūkamīnos , mulberry tree, from a Semitic source akin to Qatabanian sqmt (probably to be read * suqāmat , planted (< "made to stand"), feminine passive causative adjective of * qāma , to stand), whence also Arabic sawqām , a type of fig tree, and Aramaic šiqmâ and Hebrew *siqāmâ , sycamore fig ( Ficus sycomorus ).
 sycamore , from Greek sūkomoros , sycamore fig, perhaps folk-etymological alteration of a word borrowed from the same Semitic source as above (influenced by Greek sūkon , fig, and moron , black mulberry).

 ‌ qww 

See qbw. 
 ‌ r ʾ b 

To replace, rectify. Sennacherib , from Akkadian Sîn-aḫḫī-erība , Sin has replaced the (lost) brothers for me, from erība , he has replaced for me, from erīb , preterite of râbu , to replace + -a , for me ( aḫḫī , brothers; see ʾ ḫ ). 
 ‌ r ʾ š 

Common Semitic noun *ra ʾ š‑ , head, top. resh , from Hebrew rêš , resh, from Aramaic rēš or dialectal Phoenician *rēš , head, twentieth letter of the alphabet. 
 rho , from Greek rho , from Phoenician *rōš , head, twentieth letter of the Phoenician alphabet. 
 Rosh Hashanah , from Hebrew rō ʾ š haš-šānâ , beginning of the year, from rō ʾ š , head, top, beginning. 
 ras el hanout , from Arabic ra ʾ s , head, top.
 Rastafarianism , from Amharic ras , head, chief, prince.

 ‌ r ʾ y 

West Semitic, to see. rai , perhaps from dialectal Arabic ( hā ar‑ ) ray , (here is the) view, from ra ʾ y , view, opinion, from ra ʾ ā , to see. 
 ‌ r ʿ y 

To graze (of flocks), to pasture, tend (flocks). rayah , from Arabic ra ʿ īya , flock, parish, subjects, a subject, from ra ʿ ā , to graze, pasture, tend. 
 ‌ rb ʿ 

Common Semitic * ʾ arba ʿ ‑ , four, Central Semitic noun *rub ʿ ‑ , fourth, quarter, and other derived forms of various patterns. arroba , from Arabic ar-rub ʿ , the quarter.
 rabi , Rabi , from Arabic rabī ʿ , fourth part, spring. 
 rubaiyat , from Arabic rubā ʿ ī , quatrain, from rubā ʿ , by fours.

 ‌ rbb 

Also rby. 

To be(come) much, many, great. rabbi , Reb 2 , rebbe , from Hebrew and Aramaic rabbî , my master, from rab(b) , master, chief, from rab , to be(come) much, many, great ( î , my; see -y );
 rabbinical , probably from Aramaic rabbin , plural of rab(b) , master (see above). 

 Jeroboam , from Hebrew yārob ʿ ām , the (divine) kinsman increased, from yārob , archaic preterite of rābab , to be(come) many, much ( ʿ ām , kinsman; see ʿ mm ). 
 rebec , from Arabic rabāb , rebec, from rabba , to be master, control.

 ‌ rbṭ 

Arabic root, to bind, tie. marabout 1 , from Arabic murābiṭ , posted, stationed, marabout, participle of rābaṭa , to be posted, derived stem of rabaṭa , to bind, tie. 
 ‌ rby 

See rbb. 
 ‌ rgb 

Central Semitic, to fear. Rajab , from Arabic rajab , a month name, from rajaba , to fear, revere. 
 ‌ rgl 

West Semitic noun *rigl‑ , *ragl‑ , foot. Rigel , from Arabic rijl , foot. 
 ‌ rgm 

To say, speak, call, shout, contest, lay claim to. dragoman , from Arabic tarjumān , translator, from Aramaic targəmānā , from Akkadian targumannu , interpreter, either from Akkadian ragāmu , to speak, call, contest, or from an earlier Semitic verb in a derived stem, *t-rgm , to speak to one another, translate. 
 Targum , from Mishnaic Hebrew targûm , translation, from Aramaic targəmā (< *targumā ), back-formation from targəmānā (see above).

 ‌ rḥ 

Common Semitic noun *raḥt‑ , hand, palm of the hand ( *-t‑ , feminine suffix). racket 1 , from Arabic rāḥat , bound form of rāḥa , palm of the hand. 
 ‌ rḥb 

West Semitic, to be(come) wide, large. Rehoboam , from Hebrew rəḥab ʿ ām , the (divine) kinsman has increased, from rəḥab , reduced form of rāḥab , to be(come) wide, large, to increase ( ʿ ām , kinsman; see ʿ mm ). 
 ‌ rḫl 

Common Semitic noun *raḫil‑ , ewe. Rachel , from Hebrew rāḥēl , ewe. 
 ‌ rmṣ́ 

West Semitic, to burn, be(come) scorched. Ramadan , from Arabic ramaḍān , from ramaḍ , parchedness, from ramiḍa , to be(come) scorched. 
 ‌ rmy 

To throw, throw down, set down, establish. Jeremiah , jeremiad , from Hebrew yirməyāhû , Yahweh has established, from yirm(ə) , he has established, old preterite of rāmâ , to establish, cast. 
 ‌ rp ʾ 

West Semitic, to heal, mend. Hammurabi , from Akkadian ḫammurāpi , from Amorite * ʿ ammu-rāpi ʾ , the (divine) kinsman (is) a healer, from *rāpi ʾ , participle of *rapa ʾ a , to heal ( * ʿ ammu , kinsman; see ʿ mm ). 
 Raphael , from Hebrew rəpā ʾ ēl , God has healed, from rəpā ʾ , he has healed, reduced form of rāpā ʾ , to heal ( ʾ ēl , God; see ʾ l ).

 ‌ rqq 

To be(come) thin, fine, soft, tender. Merak , from Arabic marāqq , tender areas of the lower abdomen, loins, from raqqa , to be(come) thin, tender. 
 ‌ rṣ ʿ 

Arabic root, to adhere. intarsia , from Arabic tarṣī ʿ , inlaying, setting, infinitive of raṣṣa ʿ a , to inlay, derived stem of raṣi ʿ a , to adhere. 
 ‌ rwm 

West Semitic, to be(come) high, exalted. Abraham , from Hebrew ʾ abrāhām , the (divine) father is exalted, from rāhām , alternate form of rām , exalted, participle of rām , to be(come) high, exalted, rise. 
 ‌ rwy 

West Semitic, to drink one's fill. Ruth , from Hebrew or Moabite rût , meaning uncertain, perhaps akin to rāwâ , to drink one's fill. 
 ‌ rym 

East Semitic, to give. marionette , marry 2 , Mary , Miriam ; marigold , from Hebrew miryām , Miriam, meaning uncertain, perhaps "gift" (akin to Akkadian riāmu , to give) or "beloved" (of Egyptian origin). 
 ‌ rzm 

Arabic root, to bundle. ream 1 , from Arabic rizma , bundle, from razama , to bundle. 
 ‌ rzz 

Arabic root, to fix, stick, insert. mortise , perhaps from Arabic murtazz , fastened, participle of irtazza , to be fixed (in place), derived stem of razza , to fix, stick, insert. 
 ‌ sdr 

To arrange, put in order. Seder , from Hebrew sēder , order, arrangement, Seder, akin to Mishnaic Hebrew sādar , to arrange, order. 
 siddur , from Mishnaic Hebrew siddûr , arrangement, from siddēr , to arrange, derived stem of sādar (see above).

 ‌ sgd 

or śgd .

Aramaic root, to bow down, worship. masjid , mosque , from Arabic masjid , mosque, from Aramaic *masgid , place of worship, from səged , to bow down, worship. 
 ‌ skk 

To close, plug, weave together. Sukkot , from Hebrew sukkôt , plural of sukkâ , booth, from sākak , to weave together, screen, cover. 
 sequin , from Arabic sikka , coin, die, from sakka , to close, to coin, mint.

 ‌ smd 

East Semitic, to grind (groats). semolina , simnel , from Latin simila , ultimately (perhaps via Greek semidālis , fine wheaten flour) from a Semitic source akin to Aramaic səmidā , fine flour, Arabic samīd , semolina, both probably from Akkadian samīdu , a type of groats, from samādu , to grind into groats. 
 ‌ smk 

To support. samekh , from Hebrew sāmek , samekh, from Phoenician *samk , support (?), fifteenth letter of the Phoenician alphabet;
 sigma , from Greek sīgma , sigma, altered from Phoenician *samk (see above).

 ‌ smq 

or śmq .

Aramaic root, to be(come) red. sumac , from Arabic summāq , sumac, from Aramaic summāq , dark red, from səmeq , to be(come) red. 
 ‌ spr 

West Semitic, to measure, count. sofer , from Hebrew sōpēr , scribe, active participle of sāpar , to count. 
 ‌ sq ʿ 

See ṣq ʿ . 
 ‌ swd 1 

Central Semitic, to discuss, take counsel. sayyid , from Arabic sayyid , chief, lord, master, from sāda , to be(come) chief, predominate, rule. 
 ‌ swd 2 

See šwd. 
 ‌ ś ʿ b 

Arabic root, to gather, disperse. Sha'ban , from Arabic ša ʿ bān , a month name, perhaps "dispersal," from ša ʿ aba , to gather, disperse. 
 ‌ śbk 

Central Semitic, to entwine, weave, insert. sambuca 1 , from Aramaic sabbəkā , sambuca, from səbak , to fasten, cling. 
 xebec , from Arabic šabbāk , type of small ship, from šabaka , to entwine, fasten.

 ‌ śgd 

See sgd. 
 ‌ śkm 

Arabic root, to bridle. hackamore , from Arabic šakīma , bit of a bridle, from šakama , to bridle. 
 ‌ śmḫ 

To be(come) proud, lofty, joyful. Simchat Torah , from Hebrew śimḥat , bound form of śimḥâ , joy, rejoicing, from śāmēaḥ , to rejoice. 
 ‌ śmm 

East Semitic noun *śamm‑ , plant, herb. sesame , sesamoid , from Greek sēsamē , sēsamon , from a Semitic source akin to Ugaritic ššmn , Phoenician ššmn , Aramaic šumšəmā , Arabic simsim , all probably from Akkadian šamaššammū , sesame, back-formation from *šaman šammammī, oil of plants, from šammī , genitive plural of šammu , plant ( šaman, bound form of šamnu , oil; see šmn. ). It is possible that the Akkadian form represents a folk etymology for an original form šamšamu , from a root *šmšm .
 simoom , from Arabic samūm , hot wind, simoom, from samma , to poison, denominative from samm , poison, from Aramaic sammā , drug, from or akin to Akkadian šammu (see above).

 ‌ śmq 

See smq. 
 ‌ śqq 

Common Semitic noun *śaqq‑ , sack. sac 1 , saccade , sachet , sack 1 , sack 2 , satchel ; cul-de-sac , haversack , knapsack , rucksack , from Greek sakkos , coarse cloth, article made from coarse cloth, from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew śaq , Akkadian saqqu , sack. 
 ‌ śr ʿ 

To set, set up, erect, prescribe. shari'a , from Arabic šarī ʿ a , law, from šara ʿ a , to ordain, prescribe. 
 ‌ śrb 

West Semitic, to drink, absorb. sherbet , sorbet , from Arabic šarba , a sip, drink;
 shrub 2 , from Arabic šurb , a drinking, drink;
 syrup , from Arabic šarāb , a drink, beverage. a-c all from Arabic šariba , to drink.

 ‌ śrp 1 

To burn. seraph , back-formation from plural seraphim , from Hebrew śərāpîm , plural of śārāp , fiery serpent, seraph, from śārap , to burn. 
 ‌ śrp 2 

Arabic root, to be noble, highborn. sherif , from Arabic šarīf , noble, highborn, from šarufa , to be noble, highborn. 
 ‌ śrq 

 West Semitic, to be(come) red, rise (of the sun); noun *śarq‑ , rising (of the sun), east. Saracen , sarsen , sirocco , from Arabic šarq , east, sunrise, from šaraqa , to rise, shine. 
 ‌ śrr 

Common Semitic noun *śarr‑ , prince, king. Sarah , from Hebrew śārâ , princess, feminine of śar , prince. 
 Sargon , from Hebrew sargôn , from Akkadian šarru-kīn , the king is true, legitimate, from šarru , king ( kīn , true; see kwn );
 Belshazzar , from Hebrew bēlšaṣṣar , from Akkadian bēl-šar-uṣur , Bel protect the king, from šar , late form of šarru , king ( bēl , Bel (Akkadian god), and uṣur , protect; see b ʿ l and nṯr ).

 ‌ śry 

West Semitic, to strive, strive for, save, protect. Israel ; Beta Israel , from Hebrew yiśrā ʾ ēl , God has striven, God has saved, from yiśrā , he has striven, saved, archaic preterite of śārâ , to strive, persevere. 
 ‌ śṭn 

Northwest Semitic, to be(come) hostile, accuse. Satan , from Hebrew śāṭān , adversary, Satan, from śāṭan , to accuse, act as adversary;
 shaitan , from Arabic šayṭān , Satan, from Ethiopic śayṭān , from Aramaic sāṭānā , from Hebrew śāṭān (see above).

 ‌ śṭṭ 

To tear apart, split. chott , from Arabic šaṭṭ , bank, coast, strand, from šaṭṭa , to exceed, deviate. 
 ‌ śwl 

Arabic root, to rise. Shawwal , from Arabic šawwāl , a month name, from šāla , to rise. 
 ‌ śwr 

West Semitic, to consult. shura , from Arabic šūrā , consultation, from šāwara , to consult. 
 ‌ śy ʿ 

Central Semitic, to assist. Shia , Shiite , from Arabic šī ʿ a , followers, disciples, faction (meaning influenced by Aramaic si ʿ ā , absolute form of si ʿ tā , troop, company), from šā ʿ a , to spread, become known. 
 ‌ śyḫ 

To grow, grow up, grow old. sheikh , from Arabic šayḫ , old man, chief, from šāḫa , to grow old;
 sheikha , from Arabic šayḫa , feminine of šayḫ (see above).

 ‌ š ʾ l 

To ask. Saul , from Hebrew šā ʾ ûl , asked, requested, passive participle of šā ʾ al , to ask. 
 ‌ šb ʿ 

Common Semitic *šab ʿ ‑ , seven. Shavuot , from Hebrew šābû ʿ ôt , plural of šābûa ʿ , week, from šeba ʿ , seven;
 shiva , from Hebrew šib ʿ â , seven, feminine of šeba ʿ (see above). 

 Bathsheba , from Hebrew batšeba ʿ , daughter of an oath ( bat , daughter; see bn );
 Elizabeth , from Hebrew ʾ ĕlîšeba ʿ , my God (is) an oath ( ʾ ĕlî , my God; see ʾ l );
 Beersheba , from Hebrew bə ʾ ēr šeba ʿ , well of oath ( bə ʾ ēr , well; see b ʾ r ). a-c all from -šeba ʿ , oath, from *šāba ʿ , to swear, possibly denominative from šeba ʿ , seven (? < "to bind oneself with sevens" in swearing oaths).

 ‌ šbḫ 

To settle, become still. sabkha , from Arabic šabaḫa , sabḫa , salt marsh, sabkha, from šabiḫa , to rest. 
 ‌ šbt 

Central Semitic, to cease, rest. Sabbath , sabbatical , Shabbat , from Hebrew šabbāt , Sabbath, from šābat , to cease, rest;
 Shabbos , from Ashkenazic Hebrew pronunciation of šabbāt (see above).

 ‌ šbṭ 

To strike, beat. Shevat , from Hebrew šəbāṭ , a month name, from Akkadian šabāṭu , name of a month corresponding to parts of January and February, perhaps akin to šabāṭu , to strike, hit. 
 ‌ šdd 

To draw, pull, plug, obstruct, despoil. sudd , from Arabic sudd , obstruction, from sadda , to plug, obstruct. 
 ‌ šg ʿ 

To rage, be(come) mad. meshuga , meshugaas , from Hebrew məšugga ʿ , mad, participle of šugga ʿ , to be(come) mad. 
 ‌ šgḥ 

or šgḫ .

Hebrew root of uncertain meaning. mashgiach , from Hebrew mašgîaḥ , overseer, inspector, from hišgîaḥ , to gaze, look, inspect, derived stem of *šāgaḥ . 
 ‌ šḥl 

To sharpen, scrape off, peel. Swahili , from Arabic sawāḥilī , of the coast, Swahili, from sawāḥil , plural of sāḥil , coast, active participle of saḥala , to scrape off, smooth, plane;
 Sahel , from sāḥil , coast, active participle of saḥala , to scrape off, smooth, plane.

 ‌ škn 

Central Semitic, to dwell. Shekhinah , from Mishnaic Hebrew šəkînâ , dwelling-place, tabernacle, divine presence, from Hebrew šākan , to dwell. 
 ‌ škr 

Common Semitic noun *šikar‑ , intoxicating drink. cider , from Greek sikera , from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew šēkār , Akkadian šikaru , intoxicating drink. 
 ‌ šlm 

To be whole, sound; Common Semitic noun *šalām‑ , well-being, welfare, peace. shalom; ; shalom aleichem , from Hebrew šālōm , well-being, peace, from šālēm , to be safe, sound;
 Absalom , from Hebrew ʾ abšālōm , my father (is) peace (see ʾ b ). 

 schlemiel , perhaps from the Hebrew personal name šəlūmî ʾ ēl , my well-being (is) God, from šəlūm , well-being, variant bound form of šālôm (see above; ʾ ēl , God; see ʾ l ). 
 Solomon , from Hebrew šəlōmōh , his (God's) peace, from šəlōm , bound form of šālôm (see above). 
 Salome , from a Hebrew personal name akin to šəlōmît , Shelomith (biblical name), from šālôm (see above). 
 salaam , from Arabic salām , well-being, peace, from salima , to be safe, sound. 
 Islam , from Arabic ʾ islām , submission, from ʾ aslama , to surrender, resign oneself;
 Muslim , Mussulman , from Arabic muslim , one who surrenders, active participle of ʾ aslama (see above). Both a and b from Aramaic (Syriac) ʾ ašlem , to make peace, surrender, derived stem of šlem , to be whole.

 ‌ šlp 

West Semitic root, to precede, line up. Salafi , from Arabic salafī , of the forbears, of the predecessors, from salaf , forbear, predecessor. 
 ‌ šlṭ 

To dominate, rule, have power over. soldan , sultan , from Arabic sulṭān , power, authority, ruler, sultan, from Aramaic šulṭānā , power, authority, rule, ruler, from šəlaṭ , to dominate, rule, prevail;
 sultana , from Arabic sulṭāna , feminine of sulṭān (see above).

 ‌ šm 

Common Semitic noun *š(i)m‑ , name. Samuel , from Hebrew šəmû ʾ ēl , name of God (alternatively, the name (is) God), from šəmû , archaic form of šēm , name. 
 ‌ šm ʿ 

To hear. schmooze , perhaps from Hebrew šəmû ʿ â , report, rumor, feminine passive participle of šāma ʿ , to hear;
 Shema , from Hebrew šəma ʿ , hear, imperative of šāma ʿ , to hear (see above);
 Ishmael , from Hebrew yišmā ʿ ē ʾ l , God heard, from yišma ʿ , archaic preterite of šāma ʿ , to hear (see above; ʾ ēl , God; see ʾ l ).

 ‌ šmn 

Common Semitic noun *šamn‑ , oil, fat. Gethsemane , from Greek Gethsēmani , from Hebrew gat šemen , oil press, from šemen , oil ( gat , press; see wgn ). 
 sesame , sesamoid , from Greek sēsamē , sēsamon , sesame, from a Semitic source akin to Ugaritic ššmn , Phoenician ššmn , Aramaic šumšəmā , Arabic simsim , all meaning "sesame" and all probably from Akkadian šamaššammū , sesame, back-fromation from *šaman šammī , oil of plants, from šaman , bound form of šamnu , oil ( šammī , genitive plural of šammu , plant; see śmm ). It is possible that the Akkadian form represents a folk etymology for an original form šamšamu , from a root *šmšm ).

 ‌ šmš 

Common Semitic noun *šamš‑ , sun. Samson , from Hebrew šimšôn , Samson, from šemeš , sun. 
 Shamash , from Akkadian šamaš , absolute form of šamšu , sun, sun-god.

 ‌ šmšm 

See šmm, šmn. 
 ‌ šn 

Common Semitic noun *šan(a)t‑ , year ( *-(a)t‑ , feminine suffix). Rosh Hashanah , from Hebrew šānâ , year. 
 ‌ šnn 

Common Semitic noun *šinn‑ , tooth; denominative verb, to sharpen. shin 2 , from Hebrew šîn , from Phoenician *šinn , tooth, twenty-first letter of the Phoenician alphabet, akin to Hebrew šēn , tooth. (The use of the word for "tooth" for this letter is the result of folk etymology and is based on the shape of the letter, which resembles a row of pointed teeth. The letter originally depicted a composite bow, a powerful kind of bow that is made of layers of different materials such as horn and wood and usually has the tips curving away from the archer when unstrung. The earlier name of the letter was * šann < * ṯann, "composite bow.").
 Sunna , from Arabic sunna , customary practice, tradition, from sanna , to sharpen, shape, prescribe;
 Sunni , from Arabic sunnī , Sunni, from sunna (see above).

 ‌ špr 

To send a message, send on a journey. safari , from Arabic safarīya , journey, from safar , departure, journey, akin to the denominative verb sāfara , to travel. 
 ‌ šq ʿ 

See ṣq ʿ . 
 ‌ šqṣ 

To be(come) wild, detestable. Exact preform uncertain; other possible reconstructions are *šqṣ́ , *šqṯ , *ṯqṣ , and *ṯqṣ́ . shegetz , shiksa , from Hebrew šeqeṣ , blemish, something detestable (compare denominative derived stem verb šiqqēṣ , to detest). 
 ‌ šqy 

To water, give to drink. acequia , from Arabic as-sāqiya , the irrigation ditch, feminine active participle of saqā , to water, give to drink. 
 ‌ šry 

To loosen, remove, begin. Tishri , from Hebrew tišrî , a month name, from Akkadian tašrītu , beginning, name of a month corresponding to parts of September and October, from šurrû , to begin, derived stem of *šarû , to begin. 
 ‌ šw ʾ 

Central Semitic, to be(come) evil, devastated, empty. Shoah , from Hebrew šô ʾ â , devastation, calamity. 
 ‌ šwd 

or swd .

Arabic root, to be(come) black. soda , perhaps from Arabic suwayd , soda, soda-plant, or suwayda , a type of saltwort, perhaps akin to ʾ aswad , black. 
 ‌ šwr 

Northwest Semitic noun *šūr‑ , wall. sura , from Arabic sūra , sura, from Aramaic šurā , absolute form of šurətā , line, row. 
 ‌ šwy 

Central Semitic, to be(come) even, equal. Shiviti , from Hebrew šiwwîtî , I have set (first word of Psalm 16:8), from šiwwâ , to set, place, derived stem of *šāwâ , to be(come) even. 
 schwa , from Hebrew šəwā ʾ , schwa, probably from Aramaic (Syriac) ( nuqzē ) šwayyā , even (points), plural passive participle of šwā , to be even, equal.

 ‌ ṣbr 

Common Semitic noun *ṣabar‑ , aloe. sabra , perhaps from Yiddish sabre , member of the first group of Jewish groups to arrive in Palestine beginning in the 19th century or one of their descendants, probably from Palestinian Arabic ṣab(i)ra , singulative of ṣab(i)r , prickly pear (also the source of Modern Israeli Hebrew ṣābār , prickly pear, sabra); akin to Arabic ṣabir , ṣabr , aloe. 
 ‌ ṣdq 

West Semitic, to be(come) just, righteous. Melchizedek , from Hebrew malkî-ṣedeq , my king (is) righteousness, from ṣedeq , righteousness;
 Zedekiah , from Hebrew ṣidqîyāhû , my righteousness (is) Yahweh, from ṣidqî , my righteousness, from ṣidq‑ , presuffixal form of ṣedeq , righteousness ( yāhû , Yahweh; see hwy ). Both a and b from ṣādaq , to be(come) just, righteous. 

 Sadducee , from Mishnaic Hebrew ṣədûqî , Sadducee, after ṣādôq , Zadok, just, righteous, high priest in the time of David and Solomon, from ṣādaq (see above).

 ‌ ṣḥb 

West Semitic, to be(come) pressed, constrained, associated. sahib , from Arabic ṣāḥib , companion, master, participle of ṣaḥiba , to be(come) friends. 
 ‌ ṣḥl 

Also ṣḥn. 

West Semitic noun, dish, bowl, pan. saganaki , from Arabic ṣaḥn , dish, bowl. 
 ‌ ṣḥq 

See ṣ́ḥq. 
 ‌ ṣlḥ 

West Semitic, to prosper, be(come) good, better, useful. garam masala , from Arabic maṣāliḥ , plural of maṣlaḥa , benefit, good, from ṣalaḥa , to be(come) good, useful, in derived stem ʾ aṣlaḥa , to improve, make suitable. 
 ‌ ṣn ʿ 

West Semitic, to be(come) strong, do (something) skillfully, build, produce, make. arsenal , from Arabic aṣ-ṣinā ʿ a , the manufacture, industry, or from dār aṣ-ṣinā ʿ a , place of manufacture, from ṣinā ʿ a manufacture, industry, from ṣana ʿ a , to make, produce. 
 ‌ ṣpn 

Northwest Semitic, to hide. Zephaniah , from Hebrew ṣəpanyāh , Yahweh has hidden, Yahweh has treasured, from ṣəpan , reduced form of ṣāpan , he has hidden. 
 ‌ ṣpp 

Also ṣpṣp and ṣwp. 

To press down, cover, overlay. sofa , from Arabic ṣuffa , sofa, from Aramaic ṣippā , absolute form of ṣippətā , a mat, perhaps akin to ṣippā , ṣuppā , carded wool;
 Sufi , from Arabic ṣūfī , (man) of wool, from ṣūf , wool, perhaps from Aramaic ṣippā, ṣuppā , carded wool (see above). Both a and b perhaps from Akkadian ṣuppu , solid, massive, compacted (textile), verbal adjective of ṣuppu , to press down, rub down a horse, derived stem of *ṣâpu . 

 ‌ ṣpr 1 

Arabic root, to be(come) empty, vacant. cipher , zero; decipher , from Arabic ṣifr , empty (translation of Sanskrit śūnyam , cipher, dot), from ṣafira , to be(come) empty, vacant;
 Safar , from Arabic ṣafar , Safar, probably from ṣafira (see above).

 ‌ ṣpr 2 

Central Semitic, to be(come) yellow. zaffer , perhaps from Arabic ṣufr , yellow copper, brass, from ʾ aṣfar , yellow. 
 ‌ ṣpṣp 

See ṣpp. 
 ‌ ṣq ʿ 

Arabic root, to be(come) white, covered with frost. moussaka , from colloquial Egyptian Arabic musaqqa ʿ a , chilled, moussaka, feminine passive participle of Egyptian colloquial saqqa ʿ a , to chill, variant of ṣaqqa ʿ a , denominative from ṣaq ʿ a , cold (weather), frost, from ṣaqi ʿ a , be(come) white, covered with frost. 
 ‌ ṣrp 

To burn, smelt, refine. silver , probably ultimately from Akkadian ṣarpu , refined, silver, verbal adjective of ṣarāpu , to refine. 
 ‌ ṣrr 

Central Semitic, to be(come) narrow, restricted, distressed, to bind, tie. tsuris , from Hebrew ṣārâ , distress, from ṣārar , to be(come) narrow, to bind. 
 ‌ ṣwn 

West Semitic, to protect. Zion , from Hebrew ṣiyyôn , probably originally meaning "stronghold, fortress", and derived from a root akin to Arabic ṣāna , to protect. 
 ‌ ṣwp 

See ṣpp. 
 ‌ ṣwy 1 

Also wṣy. Central Semitic, to command, order. mitzvah; bar mitzvah , bat mitzvah , from Hebrew miṣwâ , commandment, from ṣiwwâ , to command. 
 ‌ ṣy 

Common Semitic reduplicated form *ṣīṣīt‑ , tassel, fringe ( *-t‑ , feminine suffix). tzitzit , from Hebrew ṣîṣīt , tassel, fringe. 
 ‌ ṣ́b ʾ 

To wage war; Common Semitic noun *ṣ́ab(a) ʾ ‑ , army, troop. Sabaoth , from Hebrew ṣəbā ʾ ôt , plural of ṣābā ʾ , army, from ṣābā ʾ , to wage war. 
 ‌ ṣ́ḥq 

or ṣḥq .

To laugh. Isaac , from Hebrew yiṣḥāq , he laughed, archaic preterite of ṣāḥaq , to laugh. 
 ‌ ṣ́ḥw 

Also ṣḥw, ṣḥy, ṣḥḥ. 

West Semitic, to be(come) bright, dazzling. Eid al-Adha , from Arabic ʾ aḍḥā , sacrifice, from ḍaḥā , to become visible (from the fact that the sacrifice is performed soon after sunrise). 
 ‌ ṣ́rb 

West Semitic, to strike, hit. drub , perhaps from dialectal Arabic ḍrab , to hit, from ḍaraba , to hit. 
 ‌ ṣ́rw 

Central Semitic *ṣ́arw‑ , *ṣ́urw‑ , an aromatic resin. storax , from Greek sturax , perhaps from a Semitic source akin to Ugaritic ẓurwu , Hebrew ṣŏrî , Sabaean ḍrw , Arabic ḍarw , ḍirw , all meaning "aromatic resin." 
 ‌ ṣ́yq 

To be(come) narrow, constricted. souk , from Arabic sūq , market, from Aramaic šuqā , street, market, from Akkadian sūqu , street, from sâqu , to be(come) narrow, tight. 
 ‌ thm 

Common Semitic noun *tihām‑ , sea. Tiamat , from Akkadian tiāmat , absolute form of tiāmtu , sea. 
 ‌ tḥt 

West Semitic *taḥt‑ , under, under part. tush 3 , from Hebrew taḥat , under, under part. 
 ‌ tll 

Common Semitic noun *till‑ , *tall‑ , mound, tell. Tel Aviv , from Hebrew tēl ʾ ābîb , barley tell, from tēl , tell ( ʾ ābîb , barley; see ʾ bb ). 
 tell 2 , from Arabic tall , tell.

 ‌ tmm 

Central Semitic, to be(come) complete, finished. Urim and Thummim , from Hebrew tummîm , plural of tōm , completion, integrity, from tam , to be(come) complete, finished. 
 ‌ tmr 

Common Semitic noun *tam(a)r‑ , palm-tree, dates. Tamar , from Hebrew tāmār , palm-tree. 
 tamarind , from Arabic tamr hindī , dates of India, from tamr , dates.

 ‌ tw ʾ m 

Common Semitic noun *taw ʾ am‑ , twin. Thomas , from Aramaic tāmā or Hebrew tô ʾ ām , twin. 
 ‌ tww 

Central Semitic noun *taww‑ , mark, sign. tau , from Greek tau , tau;
 tav , from Hebrew tāw , tav. Both a and b from Phoenician *taww , mark, twenty-second letter of the Phoenician alphabet.

 ‌ ṯ 

See ḏ. 
 ‌ ṯ ʿ lb 

Common Semitic noun *ṯa ʿ lab‑ , fox. salep , from Arabic ṯa ʿ lab , fox. 
 ‌ ṯmny 

Common Semitic *ṯamāni‑ , eight. Shemini Atzereth , from Hebrew šəmînî , eighth, from šəmōne , eight. 
 Heshvan , from Hebrew ḥešwān , a month name, short for marḥešwān , from Akkadian (w)araḫsamnu , the eighth month of the Babylonian calendar, from samnu , eighth, from samāne , eight.

 ‌ ṯn 

Common Semitic *ṯn‑ , two; derived verb *ṯny , to repeat. Adar Sheni , from Hebrew šēnî , second. 
 Mishnah , from Mishnaic Hebrew mišnâ , repetition, instruction, from šānâ , to repeat.

 ‌ ṯpṭ 

To judge, administer. Jehoshaphat , from Hebrew yəhôšāpāṭ , Yahweh has judged, from šāpāṭ , he has judged, lengthened form of šāpaṭ , to judge ( yəhô , Yahweh; see hwy ). 
 ‌ ṯql 

To weigh. shekel , from Hebrew šeqel , weight, unit of weight, from šāqal , to weigh. 
 Ashkelon , scallion , shallot , from Hebrew ʾ ašqəlôn , Ashkelon, from earlier ʾ aṯqalōn , from a Canaanite source perhaps originally meaning "scales, balance" or "weighing place" (Ashkelon having been an important center of commerce in ancient times).
 metical , from Arabic mitqāl , colloquial variant of miṯqāl , weight, unit of weight, from ṯaqula , to be(come) heavy.

 ‌ ṯqṣ, ṯqṣ́ 

See šqṣ. 
 ‌ ṯw ʿ 

Common Semitic ṯū ʿ ‑ , lord. Joshua , from Hebrew yəhôšûa ʿ , perhaps "Yahweh (is) lord," from *šûa ʿ , lord). Alternatively, "Yahweh (is) salvation" ( šûa ʿ , salvation; see wṯ ʿ ). 
 ‌ ṭb ʿ 

To sink. Tevet , from Hebrew ṭēbēt , a month name, from Akkadian ṭebētu , name of a month corresponding to parts of December and January, perhaps akin to ṭebû , to sink. 
 ‌ ṭḥn 

To grind (flour). tahini , from Arabic ṭaḥīna , tahini, from ṭaḥīn , flour, from ṭaḥana , to grind. 
 ‌ ṭḥp 

Root of uncertain meaning in South Semitic noun *ṭaḥ(a)f , the love grass Eragrostis tef , teff. teff , from Amharic ṭef , akin to classical Ethiopic and South Arabian ṭaḥ(a)f , teff. 
 ‌ ṭlb 

West Semitic, to seek, request, claim. Taliban , from Arabic ṭālib , seeker, student, from ṭalaba , to seek. 
 ‌ ṭrḥ 

To insert, throw, burden, toil. matelassé , mattress , from Arabic maṭraḥ , place where something is thrown;
 tare 2 , from Arabic ṭarḥ , rejection, subtraction, deduction. Both a and b from Arabic ṭaraḥa , to throw, throw away.

 ‌ ṭrp 

Central Semitic, to tear, pluck, seize. tref , from Hebrew ṭərēpâ , torn flesh, from ṭārap , to tear, pluck. 
 ‌ ṭw ʿ 

Central Semitic, to obey. mutawa , from Arabic muṭṭawwi ʿ , volunteer, one following the noncompulsory practices recommended in the shari'a, active participle of iṭṭawwa ʿ a , to volunteer, contracted form of taṭawwa ʿ a , to volunteer, reflexive of ṭawwa ʿ a , to make obedient, factative of ṭā ʿ a , to be obedient. 
 ‌ ṭwq 

Arabic root, to be able, be capable, sustain, support. pataca , from Arabic ṭāqa , window, from ṭāqa , to be able, be capable, sustain, in derived stem ṭawwaqa , to surround, enclose. (The name of the coin, ʾ abū ṭaqa , "father of a window," derives from a scene on early piasters picturing the columns of Hercules, mistaken for windows.) 
 czardas , from Arabic ṭāq , arch.

 ‌ ṭyb 

To be(come) good, pleasant. mazel tov , from Late Hebrew mazzāl ṭôb , good luck, from ṭôb , good, from ṭôb , to be(come) good;
 Tobit , from Hebrew ṭôbīyāh , my good (is) Yahweh, from ṭôbī , my good ( yāh , Yahweh; see hwy ).

 ‌ ṭyr 

Central Semitic, to fly. Altair , from Arabic ( an-nasr ) aṭ-ṭā ʾ ir , the flying (eagle), from ṭā ʾ ir , flying, active participle of ṭāra , to fly. 
 ‌ ṯ̣ll 

To be(come) dark, shaded; *ṯill‑ , shade, shadow. tallit , from Mishnaic Hebrew ṭallît , cover, shawl, from ṭillēl , to cover, from Aramaic ṭallel , to cover, denominative from ṭəlāl , shade. 
 ‌ w 

Common Semitic conjunction *wa‑ , and. Veadar , from Hebrew wa- ʾ ădār , and Veadar, from wə‑ , wa‑ , and. 
 ‌ w ʿ d 

Central Semitic, to fix a time; noun * ʿ id(at)‑ , fixed time, appointment, meeting ( *-at‑ , feminine suffix). Eid ; Eid al-Adha , Eid al-Fitr , from Arabic ʿ īd , feast, from Aramaic ʿ ed , day of assembly, feast-day, from ʿ ad , to fix a time. 
 ‌ wbl 

See ybl. 
 ‌ wdd 

See dwd. 
 ‌ wdy 

West Semitic, to put, place, cast. wadi , from Arabic wādi , valley, ravine, river bed, akin to wadā , to pay blood money, in derived stem ʾ awdā , to cut off, kill. 
 ‌ wgn 

Central Semitic, to beat, press; noun *gint‑ , oil or wine press ( *-t‑ , feminine suffix). Gath , from Hebrew gat (< *gatt < *gitt < *gint ), a press, from *gint; 
 Gethsemane , from Greek Gethsēmani , from Hebrew gat šemen , oil press ( šemen , oil; see šmn ).

 ‌ wkl 

To trust, rely. Tiglathpileser , from Hebrew tiglat pil ʾ eser , from Akkadian tukultī-apil-ešarra , my trusted one (is) the heir of Esharra, from tukultī , my trusted one, from tukultu , trust, object of trust, from takālu , to trust, alteration of earlier wakālum ( apil , heir; see ʾ pl ). 
 ‌ wly 

Central Semitic, to be(come) near, associated, in charge. maulana , mullah , from Arabic mawlā , master, patron, friend;
 vilayet , from Arabic wilāya , province. Both a and b from Arabic waliya , to be(come) near, adjacent, be in charge, manage, govern.

 ‌ wq ʿ 

Arabic root, to fall. Vega , from Arabic ( an-nasr al‑)wāqi ʿ , (the) falling (eagle), from wāqi ʿ , falling, active participle of waqa ʿ a , to fall. 
 ‌ wrḫ 

Common Semitic noun *warḫ‑ , moon, month. Heshvan , from Hebrew ḥešwān , a month name, short for marḥešwān , from Akkadian (w)araḫsamnu , name of a month corresponding to parts of October and November, eighth month of the Babylonian calendar, from (w)arḫu , month. 
 ‌ wrw 

To lead, guide, cast, throw. Torah ; Simchat Torah , from Hebrew tôrâ (< *tawrawat‑ ), direction, instruction, law, from hôrâ (< *hawriwa ), to throw, shoot, direct, teach, derived stem of yārâ (< *warawa ), to throw, shoot. 
 ‌ wsm 

To be(come) fitting, suitable. mazuma , from Medieval Hebrew məzummān , fixed currency, from Mishnaic Hebrew məzummān , fixed, passive participle of zimmēn , to arrange, arrange a meal, invite, denominative from Hebrew zəmān , appointed time, season, from Aramaic zəmān , zəman , time;
 Sivan , from Hebrew sîwān , a month name. Both a and b from Akkadian simānu , season, time, name of a month corresponding to parts of May and June, from (w)asāmu , to be(come), fitting, suitable. 

 monsoon , from Arabic mawsim , season, from wasama , to mark, wasuma , to be(come) beautiful.

 ‌ wsp 

Central Semitic, to add, enlarge, increase. Joseph , from Hebrew yôsēp (< *yawsip ), he increased, archaic preterite of hôsîp , to add, increase, derived stem of yāsap , to add, increase. 
 ‌ wṣl 

West Semitic, to connect, join. muslin , from Arabic mawṣil , place of joining, from waṣala , to join. 
 ‌ wṣy 

See ṣwy 1 . 
 ‌ wtp 

West Semitic, to insert, assign. Tophet , from Hebrew tōpet , a placename, perhaps originally "assignation" (of a child to be sacrificed there to a deity). 
 ‌ wṯ ʿ 

West Semitic, to help, deliver, save. Joshua , from Hebrew yəhôšûa ʿ , Yahweh (is) salvation, from *šûa ʿ , salvation. Alternatively, "Yahweh (is) lord" ( šûa ʿ , salvation; see ṯw ʿ ). 
 Jesus , from Hebrew yēšûa ʿ , short for yəhôšûa ʿ , Joshua (see above);

 Elisha , from Hebrew ʾ ĕlîšā ʿ , God (is) salvation, from *yāšā ʿ , salvation (exact form uncertain; related to yēša ʿ , salvation, see below; ʾ ĕl , God, see ʾ l ). Both a and b from *yāša ʿ , to save (< *waṯa ʿ a );
 Hosanna , from Hebrew hôša ʿ -nā ʾ , from hôša ʿ , deliver, save, imperative of hôšîa ʿ , to deliver, save (< *hawṯi ʿ a ), derived stem of *yāša ʿ (see above; nā ʾ , injunctive particle); 
 Hosea , from Hebrew hôšēa ʿ , salvation, from hôšîa ʿ (see above). 

 Isaiah , from Hebrew yəša ʿ yāhû , salvation of Yahweh, from yəša ʿ , reduced form of yēša ʿ , salvation ( yāhû , Yahweh; see hwy ).

 ‌ wṯb 

To sit, dwell. moshav , from Hebrew môšāb , seat, dwelling;
 yeshiva , from Hebrew yəšîbâ , sitting, session, academy. Both a and b from yāšab (< *waṯaba ), to sit, dwell. 

 ‌ wzr 

Arabic root, to carry (a burden), take upon oneself. vizier , from Arabic wazīr , vizier, minister, burdened, from wazara , to carry (a burden), take upon oneself, or from ʾ āzara , to help (see ʾ zr ). 
 ‌ x̣lb 

Common Semitic noun *x̣alab‑ , milk. galbanum , from Greek khalbanē , of Northwest Semitic origin (compare Hebrew ḥelbənâ , Aramaic ḥelbānitā , galbanum, from *ḥalab , milk). 
 mahaleb , from Arabic maḥlab , mahaleb, from ḥalaba , to milk.

 ‌ x̣lw 

To be(come) sweet, pleasant, agreeable, merry. halvah , from Arabic ḥalwā , confection, from ḥaluwa , to be(come) sweet, pleasant. 
 ‌ x̣ml 

To plan, carry. hamal , from Arabic ḥammāl , porter, from ḥamala , to carry. 
 ‌ x̣ny 

To bend, incline. ras el hanout , from Arabic ḥānūt , shop, from Aramaic ḥānūtā , arched chamber, cell, shop, from ḥənā , to bend. 
 ‌ x̣rb 

Common Semitic noun *x̣arb‑ , plough, blade, dagger. mojarra , from Arabic muḥarrab , sharpened, from ḥarraba , to sharpen, denominative from ḥarba , lance, spear.
 Central Semitic denominative verbal root * ḥrb , to wage war, attack, smite. mihrab , from Arabic miḥrāb , recess, prayer niche, probably from Old South Arabian (Sabaean) mḥrb , part of a temple, from ḥrb , to fight, to perform a certain ritual in a temple. 

 ‌ x̣rm 

To separate, ban, prohibit. harmattan , possibly from Arabic ḥarām , evil thing;
 Marrano , probably from Arabic maḥram , something forbidden;
 harem , from Arabic ḥarīm , sanctuary, inviolable place, harem. a-c all from Arabic ḥarama , to exclude, deny, prohibit;
 ihram , from Arabic ʾ iḥrām , state of ritual purity of pilgrims to Mecca, infinitive of ʾ aḥrama , to enter ihram, derived stem of ḥarama (see above);
 Muharram , from Arabic muḥarram , forbidden, passive participle of ḥarrama , to declare sacred or unlawful, forbid, derived stem of ḥarama (see above).

 ‌ x̣rṣ́ 

To be(come) yellow, gold(en). chryso- , from Greek khrūsos , gold, from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew ḥārûṣ , gold. 
 ‌ x̣ṣṣ 

To cut, divide, diminish. mechitza , from Mishnaic Hebrew məḥiṣṣâ , partition, from Hebrew ḥāṣaṣ , to divide. 
 ‌ x̣zy 

To see. chazan , from Mishnaic Hebrew and Jewish Aramaic ḥazzān , superintendent, cantor, from Akkadian ḫazannu , administrator, mayor, perhaps from earlier *ḫāziyānum , overseer, active participle of Proto-Akkadian verb *ḫazāyum , to see. 
 ‌ -y 

Common Semitic pronoun suffix * -ī/-ya , my. Adonai , from Hebrew ʾ ădônāy , my lord, from -ay , my ( ʾ ādôn , lord; see ʾ d ).
 rabbi , from Hebrew and Aramaic rabbî , my master, from -ay , my ( rab(b) , lord; see rbb ).

 ‌ ybl 

or wbl .

Canaanite noun *yōbil‑ , ram, ram's horn. jubilee , from Hebrew yôbēl , ram, ram's horn, jubilee (the latter probably originally "year of the ram's horn"). 
 ‌ yd 

Common Semitic noun *yad‑ , hand. iota , jot , from Greek iōta , iota;
 yodh , from Hebrew yōd , yodh. Both a and b from Phoenician *yōd , hand, tenth letter of the Phoenician alphabet. 

 yad , from Hebrew yād , hand.
 Betelgeuse , ultimately from Arabic yad al-jawzā ʾ , hand of Gemini, from yad , hand.

 ‌ yd ʿ 

To know. Mandean , from Mandean mandaya , having knowledge, from manda , from earlier Aramaic manda ʿ , madda ʿ , knowledge, infinitive of yəda ʿ , to know. 
 ‌ ymn 

West Semitic noun *yamīn‑ and East Semitic noun *yamin‑ , right, right hand, south (on the right-hand side when facing east). Benjamin , from Hebrew binyāmîn , son of the right hand, from yāmîn , right (hand), south. (The Israelite tribal name binyāmîn should perhaps instead be understood as the "southerner" and to be compared to a people called "sons of the right/south" in Akkadian texts of the time of Hammurabi.) 
 Yemen , from Arabic yaman , right side, south, Yemen.

 ‌ ywm 

Common Semitic noun *yawm‑ , day. Yom Kippur , from Hebrew yôm , day. 
 Enuma Elish , (the name of the Babylonian creation epic), from Akkadian enūma elîš , when on high (first words of the epic), from enūma , when, from ina , in, on + ūma , adverbial accusative of ūmu , day ( elîš , on high; see ʿ ly ).

 ‌ ywn 

Northwest Semitic noun *yawn‑ , feminine *yawnat‑ , dove. Jonah , from Hebrew yônâ , dove. 
 ‌ zbl 

To carry, raise, exalt; Northwest Semitic noun *zabūl‑ , prince. Jezebel , from Hebrew ʾ îzebel , where is the prince?, from zebel , akin to zəbûl , Zebul, a name meaning "prince" ( ʾ î , where; see ʾ yy );
 Beelzebub , from Hebrew ba ʿ al zəbûb , lord (of the) fly, pejorative alteration of ba ʿ al zəbûl , lord prince, name of a Philistine god (see b ʿ l and ḏbb ).

 ‌ zhr 

Central Semitic, to shine, be splendid. Zohar , from Hebrew zōhar , brightness, glow, from hizhâr , to shine.
 hazard , perhaps from Arabic zahr , gaming die, perhaps from zahr , flowers (the sides of some medieval dice perhaps being painted with images of flowers), from zahara , to shine, be radiant.

 ‌ zmr 

To make music. klezmer , from Mishnaic Hebrew zemer , music, song, from zāmar , to make music. 
 ‌ zqr 

East Semitic, to build high. ziggurat , from Akkadian ziqqurratu , temple tower, from zaqāru , to build high. 
 ‌ zyn 

or ḏyn .

Root of uncertain meaning. cedilla , izzard , zed , zeta , from Greek zēta , alteration (influenced by the following letter ēta , eta) of Phoenician *zēn , seventh letter of the Phoenician alphabet;
 zayin , from Hebrew zayin , from alteration of Phoenician *zēn (see above).

 Indo-European & Semitic Roots Appendices
 Thousands of entries in the dictionary include etymologies that trace their origins back to reconstructed proto-languages. You can obtain more information about these forms in our online appendices:
 Indo-European Roots 
 Semitic Roots 
 The Indo-European appendix covers nearly half of the Indo-European roots that have left their mark on English words. A more complete treatment of Indo-European roots and the English words derived from them is available in our Dictionary of Indo-European Roots .

 American Heritage Dictionary Products
 The American Heritage Dictionary, 5th Edition

 The American Heritage Dictionary of Idioms

 The American Heritage Roget's Thesaurus

 Curious George's Dictionary

 The American Heritage Children's Dictionary

 CONTACT US 
 Customer Service 
 Make Me An Author 
 Ebooks Help with Glose Reader 
 ABOUT US 
 Company Profile 
 Leadership Team 
 Corporate Social Responsibility 
 HarperCollins Careers 
 HarperCollins Imprints 
 HarperGreen 
 Social Media Directory 
 Accessibility 
 FOR READERS 
 Browse Reading Guides 
 FOR AUTHORS 
 Submit a Manuscript 
 Report Piracy 
 Agent Portal 
 MEDIA 
 Publicity Contacts 
 Press Room 
 SERVICES 
 HarperCollins Speakers Bureau 
 Library Services 
 Academic Services 
 Desk & Exam Copies 
 Review Copies 
 OpenBook API 
 Marketing Partnerships 
 COVID-19 RESOURCES & PERMISSIONS 
 Permissions for Adult Online Readings 
 Permissions for Kids Online Readings 
 SALES & RIGHTS 
 Booksellers & Retailer Ordering 
 HarperCollins Catalogs 
 Permissions 
 Subsidiary Rights 
 Media Rights and Content Development 
 GLOSE APP 
 iPhone 
 Android 

 GLOBAL DIVISIONS 
 HarperCollins US 
 HarperCollins Canada 
 HarperCollins Christian 
 HarperCollins Australia 
 HarperCollins India 
 HarperCollins UK 

 Terms of Use  • 

 Terms of Sale  • 

 Your Ad Choices  • 

 Privacy Policy  • 

 California Privacy Policy 
 Do Not Sell My Personal Information 
 Copyright 2022 HarperCollins Publishers All rights reserved.
 *This website is best viewed in Chrome, Firefox, Microsoft Edge, or Safari. Some characters in pronunciations and etymologies cannot be displayed properly in Internet Explorer.