URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fence
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:04:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fence - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fence - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fence 

 fence (n.) 

 early 14c., "action of defending, resistance; means of protection, fortification," shortening of defens (see defense ). The same pattern also yielded fend , fender ; and obsolete fensive "defensive" (late 16c.). Spelling alternated between -c- and -s- in Middle English. Sense of "enclosure" is first recorded mid-15c. on notion of "that which serves as a defense." Sense of "dealer in stolen goods" is thieves' slang, first attested c. 1700, from notion of such transactions taking place under defense of secrecy.

 To be figuratively on the fence "uncommitted" is from 1828, perhaps from the notion of spectators at a fight, or a simple literal image: "A man sitting on the top of a fence, can jump down on either side with equal facility." [Bartlett, "Dictionary of Americanisms," 1848].
 also from early 14c. 

 fence (v.) 

 early 15c., "defend" (oneself); mid-15c. as "protect with a hedge or fence;" from fence (n.). From 1590s as "fight with swords," from the noun in this sense (1530s); see fencing . From 1610s as "knowingly buy or sell stolen goods." Related: Fenced .
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to fence 

 defense (n.) 

 c. 1300, "action of guarding or shielding from attack or injury; act of defending by fighting; a fortified place of refuge," from Old French defense , from Latin defensus , past participle of defendere "ward off, protect" (see defend ). It also arrived (without the final -e ) from Old French defens , from Latin defensum "thing protected or forbidden," neuter past participle of defendere .

 Middle English defens was assimilated into defense , but not before it inspired the alternative spelling defence , via the same tendency that produced hence ( hennis ), pence ( penies ), dunce ( Duns ). Webster made the -se form standard in U.S., but British has preferred defence , and compare fence (n.).

 Meaning "a speech or writing intended to repel or disprove a charge or accusation" is from late 14c., as is the sense of "method adopted by one against whom a lawsuit has been brought." Meaning "science of defense against attack" (in fencing, boxing, etc.) is from c. 1600. Used by 1935 as a euphemism for "national military resources," but the notion (non-euphemistic) was in Middle English: man of defense "warrior," ship of defense "warship." Defenses "natural weapons of an animal" is by 1889. Defense mechanism in psychology is from 1913.

 fencing (n.) 

 mid-15c., "defending, act of protecting or keeping (something) in proper condition" (short for defencing ); 1580s in the sense "art of using a sword or foil in attack and defense" (also fence-play ); verbal noun from fence (v.). Meaning "putting up of fences" is from 1620s; that of "an enclosure" is from 1580s; meaning "receiving stolen goods" is from 1851 (see fence (n.)); meaning "materials for an enclosure" is from 1856.

 Despite the re-enactment in 1285 of the Assize of Arms of 1181, fencing was regarded as unlawful in England. The keeping of fencing schools was forbidden in the City of London, "as fools who delight in mischief do learn to fence with buckler, and thereby are encouraged in their follies."

 fend 
 fender 
 fencer 
 fencible 
 unfenced 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fend 

 c. 1300, "defend, guard; protect; put up a fight; excuse or justify; forbid, bar," shortening of defend. From mid-14c. as "make a defense" and (usually with off (adv.)) "ward off, beat off, keep at a distance." Developed a meaning "make provision, give care" in Scottish English (

 argue 

 c. 1300, "to make reasoned statements to prove or refute a proposition," from Old French arguer "maintain an opinion or view; harry, reproach, accuse, blame" (12c.), ultimately from Latin arguere "make clear, make known, prove, declare, demonstrate" (from  a suffixed form of

 contend 

 mid-15c., "engage in rivalry, compete," from Old French contendre and directly from Latin contendere "to stretch out; to shoot, hurl, throw; strive after mentally; measure or try one's strength with, fight, vie with," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefi

 closure 

 late 14c., "a barrier, a fence," from Old French closure "enclosure; that which encloses, fastening, hedge, wall, fence,"...also closture "barrier, division; enclosure, hedge, fence, wall" (12c., Modern French clôture), from Late Latin clausura...

 hatch 

 "opening, grated gate, half-door," Old English hæc (genitive hæcce) "fence, grating, gate," from Proto-Germanic *hak- (source...also of Middle High German heck, Dutch hek "fence, gate"), a word of uncertain origin....

 hedge 

 Old English hecg "hedge," originally any fence, living or artificial, from West Germanic *hagjo (source also of Middle Dutch...Old High German hegga, German Hecke "hedge"), from a verb *hagjanan, from PIE root *kagh- "to catch, seize; wickerwork, fence..." (source also of Latin caulae "a sheepfold, enclosure," Gaulish caio "circumvallation," Welsh cae "fence, hedge")....

 quay 

 quai) "sand bank," from Gaulish caium (5c.), from Old Celtic *kagio- "to encompass, enclose" (source also of Welsh cae "fence..., hedge," Cornish ke "hedge"), from PIE root *kagh- "to catch, seize; wickerwork, fence" (see hedge (n.))....

 fight 

 Old English feohtan "to combat, contend with weapons, strive; attack; gain by fighting, win" (intransitive; class III strong verb; past tense feaht, past participle fohten), from Proto-Germanic *fe(u)hta (source also of Old High German fehtan, German fechten, Middle Dutch and Dut

 conserve 

 "to keep safe, preserve from loss or decay," late 14c., from Old French conserver (9c.), from Latin conservare "to keep, preserve, keep intact, guard," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + servare "keep watch, maintain" (from PIE root *ser

 converse 

 mid-14c., "to move about, live, dwell; live or behave in a certain way" (senses now obsolete), from Old French and French converser "to talk, open communication between," also "to live, dwell, inhabit, reside" (12c.), and directly from Latin conversari "to live, dwell, live with,

 Share fence 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fence Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fence">Etymology of fence by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fence. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fence Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fence," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fence. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fence." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fence. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fence." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fence (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fence 
 femme 
 femme fatale 
 femoral 
 femur 
 fen 
 fence 
 fencer 
 fencible 
 fencing 
 fend 
 fender 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix