URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fever
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:21:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fever - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fever - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fever 

 fever (n.) 

 earlier also feaver , late Old English fefor , fefer "fever, temperature of the body higher than normal," from Latin febris "fever," related to fovere "to warm, heat," which is probably from PIE root *dhegh- "burn" (source also of Gothic dags , Old English dæg "day," originally "the heat;" Greek tephra "ashes;" Lithuanian dāgas "heat," Old Prussian dagis "summer;" Middle Irish daig "fire"); but some suggest a reduplication of a root represented by Sanskrit *bhur- "to be restless."

 The Latin word was adopted into most of the Germanic languages (German Fieber , Swedish feber , Danish feber ), but not Dutch. English spelling was influenced by Old French fievre .

 An alternative word for "fever" was Old English hrið , hriðing (which is cognate with Old High German hritto , Irish crith , Welsh cryd , Lithuanian skriečiù, skriesti ); Latin febris also was glossed by bryneadl . The extended sense of "intense nervous excitement" is from 1580s. Also as a verb in Old English, feferian .

 Entries linking to fever 

 day (n.) 

 Old English dæg "period during which the sun is above the horizon," also "lifetime, definite time of existence," from Proto-Germanic *dages- "day" (source also of Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Dutch dag , Old Frisian di, dei , Old High German tag , German Tag , Old Norse dagr , Gothic dags ), according to Watkins, from PIE root *agh- "a day." He adds that the Germanic initial d- is "of obscure origin." But Boutkan says it is from PIE root *dhegh- "to burn" (see fever ). Not considered to be related to Latin dies (which is from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine").

 Meaning originally, in English, "the daylight hours;" it expanded to mean "the 24-hour period" in late Anglo-Saxon times. The day formerly began at sunset, hence Old English Wodnesniht was what we would call "Tuesday night." Names of the weekdays were not regularly capitalized in English until 17c.

 From late 12c. as "a time period as distinguished from other time periods." From day to day was in late Old English; day-by-day "daily" is from late 14c.; all day "all the time" is from late 14c.  Day off "day away from work" is attested from 1883; day-tripper first recorded 1897. The days in nowadays , etc. is a relic of the Old English and Middle English use of the adverbial genitive.

 All in a day's work "something unusual taken as routine" is by 1820. The nostalgic those were the days is attested by 1907. That'll be the day , expressing mild doubt following some boast or claim, is by 1941. One of these days "at some day in the near future" is from late 15c. One of those days "a day of misfortune, day when nothing goes right" is by 1924.

 The locals have no alibi with the exception that it must have been one of those "days" that comes to every ball club when every player strives to out do the other in an attempt to lose the game. ["Columbus 11, Ulysses 3," Ulysses (Neb.) Dispatch, Aug. 7, 1924] 

 febrifuge (n.) 

 "medicine that reduces fever," 1680s, from French fébrifuge , literally "driving fever away," from Latin febris (see fever ) + fugare "cause to flee, put to flight, drive off, chase away, rout," also used in reference to banishment and exile, derived verb from fuga "flight," which is reconstructed to be from a suffixed form of PIE root *bheug- (1) "to flee" (see fugitive (adj.)).

 febrile 
 feverish 
 feverous 
 foment 
 fomites 
 hay fever 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 foment 

 early 15c., "apply hot liquids," from Old French fomenter "apply hot compress (to a wound)" (13c.), from Late Latin fomentare, from Latin fomentum "warm application, poultice," contraction of *fovimentum, from fovere "to warm; cherish, encourage" (see fever). Extended sense of "s

 fomites 

 "inanimate objects that, when contaminated with or exposed to infectious agents, can retain and transfer the disease," plural of fomes (1650s), which is from medical Latin fomes (used in this sense first by Fracastoro, 16c., probably on the notion of "fuel"), from Latin fomes, fo

 pyrexia 

 "fever, a higher bodily temperature than is normal," 1769, medical Latin, from Greek pyrexis "feverishness," from pyressein "to be feverish, to be ill of fever," from pyretos "fever, burning heat" (related to pyr "fire," from PIE root *paewr- "fire") + abstract noun ending -ia. F

 typhus 

 acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785, from medical Latin,...from Greek typhos "stupor caused by fever," literally "smoke," from typhein "to smoke," related to typhos "blind," typhon...Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever "typhus," and the name was adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769....eruption, or expressive of the locality in which it appeared, as "Camp," "Jail," "Hospital," or "Ship Fever" (Murchison)...

 quartan 

 "having to do with the fourth," especially of attacks of an intermittent fever, etc., "occurring every fourth day" (by inclusive..., (feuer) quartain, from Old French (fievre) quartaine or cartaine and directly from Latin (febris) quartana, "quartan (fever...Also as a noun, "an ague or fever which recurs on the fourth (third) day," late 14c....

 quotidian 

 Quotidian fever "intermittent fever" is from late 14c....

 malaria 

 1740, "unwholesome air, air contaminated with the poison producing intermittent and remittent fever," from Italian mal'aria...By 1866 it had come to be used of the disease itself (earlier malaria fever, by 1814)....

 symptom 

 "a departure from normal function or form as an expression or evidence of a disease," late 14c., sinthoma, from Medieval Latin sinthoma "symptom of a disease," altered from Late Latin symptoma, from Greek symptoma "a happening, accident, disease," from stem of sympiptein "to befa

 anticipation 

 late 14c., "foreshadowing," from Latin anticipationem (nominative anticipatio) "preconception, preconceived notion," noun of action from past-participle stem of anticipare "take (care of) ahead of time," literally "taking into possession beforehand," from anti, an old form of ant

 keen 

 c. 1200, kene, from Old English cene "bold, brave, fearless," in later Old English "clever, prudent, wise, intelligent," common Germanic (cognate with Old Norse kænn "skillful, wise," Middle Dutch coene "bold," Dutch koen, Old High German kuon "pugnacious, strong," German kühn "b

 Share fever 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fever Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fever">Etymology of fever by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fever. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fever Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fever," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fever. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fever." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fever. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fever." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fever (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fever 
 feud 
 feudal 
 feudalism 
 feuillemorte 
 feuilleton 
 fever 
 feverfew 
 feverish 
 feverous 
 few 
 fewmet 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix