URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mane
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:24:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mane - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mane - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mane 

 mane (n.) 

 "growth of long hair on the back of the neck and shoulders," characteristic of the horse, lion, and some other animals, Old English manu "mane of a horse," from Proto-Germanic *mano , from PIE *mon- "neck, nape of the neck" (source also of Sanskrit manya "nape of the neck," Old English mene "necklace," Latin monile "necklace," Welsh mwng "mane," Old Church Slavonic monisto , Old Irish muin "neck").

 Germanic cognates include Old Norse mön , Old Frisian mana , Middle Dutch mane , Dutch manen , Old High German mana , German Mähne "mane." The Scandinavian languages have the word in a diminutive form (Danish manke , Swedish manke ).

 Extended use, of a person's hair, is from late 14c.

 Entries linking to mane 

 manilla (2) 

 also manilio , "metal (usually copper) ring or arm-bracelet sold or bartered by European traders among African peoples," 1550s, from Spanish manilla , from Latin monilia , plural of monile "collar, necklace," from PIE *mon- "neck, nape of the neck" (source also of mane ). Influenced in Spanish by Spanish mano "hand."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 palomino 

 "horse with a light brown or cream coat and a pale mane and tail," 1899, (earlier palomino horse), from American Spanish...

 chameleon 

 Perhaps the large head-crest on some species was thought to resemble a lion's mane....

 pony 

 The Shetland breed of ponies are stoutly built, active and hardy, with very full mane and tail, and of gentle, docile disposition...

 lion 

 late 12c., from Old French lion "lion," also figuratively "hero" (12c.), from Latin leonem (nominative leo) "lion; the constellation Leo," from Greek leon (genitive leontos), a word from a non-Indo-European language, perhaps Semitic (compare Hebrew labhi "lion," plural lebaim; Eg

 loin 

 early 14c., "side of the body of an animal used for food;" late 14c., "side of the lower torso of a human body," from Old French loigne "hip, haunch, lumbar region," from Vulgar Latin *lumbea, from *lumbea caro "meat of the loin," from fem. of *lumbeus, from Latin lumbus "loin," 

 human 

 mid-15c., humain, humaigne, "human," from Old French humain, umain (adj.) "of or belonging to man" (12c.), from Latin humanus "of man, human," also "humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined, civilized." This is in part from PIE *(dh)ghomon-, literally "earthl

 man 

 "a featherless plantigrade biped mammal of the genus Homo" [Century Dictionary], Old English man, mann "human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero;" also "servant, vassal, adult male considered as under the control of another person," from Proto-Germanic *mann- (source

 hair 

 Old English hær "hair, a hair," from Proto-Germanic *hēran (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old High German har, Old Frisian her, Dutch and German haar "hair"), perhaps from PIE *ghers- "to stand out, to bristle, rise to a point" (source also of Lithuanian šerys "bristle;" s

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 avarice 

 c. 1300, "inordinate desire of gaining and possessing wealth," fifth of the seven deadly sins, from Old French avarice "greed, covetousness" (12c.), from Latin avaritia "greed, inordinate desire," from avarus "greedy, grasping," adjectival form of avere "crave, long for, be eager

 Share mane 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mane Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mane">Etymology of mane by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mane. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mane Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mane," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mane. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mane." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mane. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mane." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mane (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mane 
 mandragora 
 mandrake 
 mandrel 
 mandrill 
 Mandy 
 mane 
 -mane 
 man-eater 
 manege 
 manes 
 maness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix