URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/shanty
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:38:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Shanty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Shanty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of shanty 

 shanty (n.1) 

 "rough cabin, hut, mean dwelling," 1820, said to be from Canadian French chantier "lumberjack's headquarters," in French, "timber-yard, dock," from Old French chantier "gantry," from Latin cantherius "rafter, frame" (see gantry ). Shanty Irish in reference to the Irish underclass in the U.S., is from 1928 (title of a book by Jim Tully).
 also from 1820 

 shanty (n.2) 

 "sea song with a boisterous chorus," sung by sailors during heavy work to enable them to hoist or heave together in time with the song, 1867, an alternative spelling of chanty (n.).
 also from 1867 

 Entries linking to shanty 

 chanty (n.) 

 1856, also shanty , chantey "song with a boisterous chorus, sung by sailors while heaving or hoisting anything heavy;" probably an alteration of French chanter "to sing," from Latin cantare "to sing" (from PIE root *kan- "to sing"). Perhaps the immediate source is French chantez , imperative of chanter . The purpose was to enable them to pull or heave together in time with the song.

 gantry (n.) 

 also gauntree , 1570s, "four-footed stand for a barrel," probably from Old North French gantier (Old French chantier , 13c., "store-room, stock-room"), from Latin cantherius "rafter, frame," also "a gelding," from Greek kanthelios "pack ass," which is related to kanthelion "rafter," of unknown origin. The connecting notion in all this seems to be framework for carrying things. Meaning "frame for a crane, etc." is from 1810. Railway signal sense attested by 1889. Derivation from tree (n.) + gawn "small bucket," an obsolete 16c. contraction of gallon , might be folk-etymology.

 shantytown (n.) 

 also shanty town , "community or settlement of mean or rough dwellings," 1836, American English, from shanty (n.1) + town .

 A few miles from Williamsburg [Pennsylvania], there was a canal opening, and a little village of huts called Shantytown inhabited by the Irishmen who work on the canal. [William O'Bryan, "A Narrative of Travels in the United States of America," London, 1836. A footnote to the sentence reads, "A Shanty is a temporary dwelling, made of coarse boards just so as to shelter them from wind and rain."]

 Often, as here, the name of a specific place. Several early references are to a Menominee village in Wisconsin.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hovel 

 mid-14c., "roofed passage, vent for smoke," later "shed for animals" (mid-15c.), of unknown origin. The proposal that it is a diminutive of Old English hof "dwellings, farm" is "etymologically and chronologically inadmissible" [OED]. Meaning "shed for human habitation; rude or mi

 hut 

 1650s, from French hutte "a cottage" (16c.), from Middle High German hütte "cottage, hut," probably from Proto-Germanic *hudjon-, which is related to the root of Old English hydan "to hide," from PIE *keudh-, from root *(s)keu- "to cover, conceal." Apparently first in English as 

 shack 

 "very roughly built house or cabin," 1878, American English and Canadian English, originally in reference to temporary dwellings made by homesteaders while securing a claim, a word of unknown origin. Perhaps it is from Mexican Spanish jacal (from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xacalli "wooden

 shelter 

 1580s, "structure affording protection," also figurative; 1590s, "state of being sheltered;" a word of disputed origin, possibly an alteration of Middle English sheltroun, sheltron, sheldtrume "roof or wall formed by locked shields," also "group of soldiers in tight battle format

 sea 

 Middle English se, seo, from Old English sæ, "sheet of water, sea, lake, pool," from Proto-Germanic *saiwa- (source also of Old Saxon seo, Old Frisian se, Middle Dutch see, Dutch zee, German See, Swedish sjö), of unknown origin, outside connections "wholly doubtful" [Buck], and a

 grief 

 early 13c., "hardship, suffering, pain, bodily affliction," from Old French grief "wrong, grievance, injustice, misfortune, calamity" (13c.), from grever "afflict, burden, oppress," from Latin gravare "make heavy; cause grief," from gravis "weighty" (from PIE root *gwere- (1) "he

 adolescent 

 mid-15c., "youth, young person, one who is growing up," from French adolescent (15c.) or directly from Latin adolescentem/adulescentem (nominative adolescens/adulescens) "young man or woman, a youth," noun use of an adjective meaning "growing, near maturity, youthful." The adject

 conspicuous 

 1540s, "open to view, catching the eye," from Latin conspicuus "visible, open to view; attracting attention, striking," from conspicere "to look at, observe, see, notice," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + specere "to look at" (from PIE

 left 

 c. 1200, "opposite of right," probably from Kentish and northern English forms of Old English *lyft "weak; foolish" (in lyft-adl "lameness, paralysis"). Compare East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof "weak, worthless"). Sense of "opposite of right" is from the left being usually 

 Friday 

 sixth day of the week, Old English frigedæg "Friday, Frigga's day," from Frige, genitive of *Frigu (see Frigg), Germanic goddess of married love. The day name is a West Germanic translation of Latin dies Veneris "day of (the planet) Venus," which itself translated Greek Aphrodite

 Share shanty 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/shanty Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/shanty">Etymology of shanty by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of shanty. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/shanty Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of shanty," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shanty. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of shanty." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shanty. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of shanty." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/shanty (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near shanty 
 shanghai 
 Shangri-La 
 shank 
 Shannon 
 shantung 
 shanty 
 shantytown 
 shape 
 shapeable 
 shapeless 
 shapely 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix