URL: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/paradise
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: paradise - Wiktionary, the free dictionary

paradise - Wiktionary, the free dictionary 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Community portal 
 Requested entries 
 Recent changes 
 Random entry 
 Help 
 Glossary 
 Contact us 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Beginning

 1 
 English 

 Toggle English subsection 

 1.1 
 Alternative forms 

 1.2 
 Etymology 

 1.3 
 Pronunciation 

 1.4 
 Noun 

 1.4.1 
 Derived terms 

 1.4.2 
 Descendants 

 1.4.3 
 Translations 

 1.4.4 
 See also 

 1.5 
 Proper noun 

 1.6 
 Verb 

 1.7 
 References 

 1.8 
 Anagrams 

 2 
 Latin 

 Toggle Latin subsection 

 2.1 
 Noun 

 3 
 Middle English 

 Toggle Middle English subsection 

 3.1 
 Proper noun 

 3.2 
 Noun 

 4 
 Old English 

 Toggle Old English subsection 

 4.1 
 Pronunciation 

 4.2 
 Noun 

 5 
 Yoruba 

 Toggle Yoruba subsection 

 5.1 
 Etymology 

 5.2 
 Pronunciation 

 5.3 
 Noun 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 paradise 

 46 languages 

 العربية 
 Azərbaycanca 
 বাংলা 
 Čeština 
 Deutsch 
 Ελληνικά 
 Esperanto 
 Español 
 Eesti 
 فارسی 
 Suomi 
 Français 
 Magyar 
 Հայերեն 
 Ido 
 Íslenska 
 Italiano 
 日本語 
 Қазақша 
 ಕನ್ನಡ 
 한국어 
 Kurdî 
 Limburgs 
 Malagasy 
 Македонски 
 മലയാളം 
 မြန်မာဘာသာ 
 Nederlands 
 Occitan 
 Oromoo 
 Polski 
 Português 
 Русский 
 Sängö 
 Simple English 
 Српски / srpski 
 Svenska 
 Kiswahili 
 தமிழ் 
 తెలుగు 
 ไทย 
 Українська 
 اردو 
 Tiếng Việt 
 粵語 
 中文 

 Entry 

 Discussion 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 

 Print/export

 Create a book 
 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wiktionary, the free dictionary

 See also: Paradise 

 English
 [ edit ] 

 Alternative forms
 [ edit ] 

 paradize ( obsolete ) 

 Etymology
 [ edit ] 

 From Middle English paradis , paradise , paradys , from Late Old English paradīs , borrowed from Old French paradis , from Latin paradīsus , from Ancient Greek παράδεισος ( parádeisos ) , ultimately from Proto-Iranian *paridayjah . Doublet of parvis . Displaced Old English neorxnawang .

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 ( Received Pronunciation ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈpæɹədaɪs/ 

 ( Standard Southern British ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈpaɹədɑjs/ 

 ( US , Canada ) 
 ( without the Mary – marry – merry merger ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈpæɹədaɪs/ 

 ( Mary – marry – merry merger ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈpɛɹədaɪs/ 
 Audio ( US ) : ( file ) 

 ( Scotland ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈpaɾədʌɪs/ 

 ( Australia ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈpæɹədɑes/ 

 ( New Zealand ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈpɛɹədɑes/ 

 Rhymes: -æɹədaɪs 

 Hyphenation: par‧a‧dise 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 paradise ( countable and uncountable , plural paradises ) 

 ( chiefly religion ) The place where sanctified souls are believed to live after death.
 Synonyms: Heaven , heaven 
 Living in paradise comes with a price. 

 1611 , The Holy Bible,   [ … ] ( King James Version ), London: [ … ] Robert Barker ,   [ … ] , →OCLC , Luke 23:43 : And Jesus said unto him [the malefactor], Verily I say unto thee, Today shalt thou be with me in paradise . 

 1791 , Charlotte Lennox , “Hermione”, in London ‎ [2] , volume 1, William Lane, page 123 : This employment I considered as the only satisfaction I could offer to the memory of your unfortunate mother, and I flatter myself that if she could look down, it would give her angelic mind pleasure even in paradise , to behold me instilling into the minds of her children, sentiments congenial with her own. 

 1828 , Thomas Keightley , The Fairy Mythology , volume I, London: William Harrison Ainsworth, page 71 : The imagination of the Hindoo paints his Swergas as "profuse of bliss," and all the joys of sense are collected in the Paradise of the Mussulman. 

 1839 , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , “ [ Miscellaneous. ] w:The Village Blacksmith.”, in Ballads and Other Poems , 2nd edition, Cambridge, Mass.: [ … ] John Owen, published 1842 , →OCLC , stanzas 5–6, page 101 : He hears his daughter's voice, / Singing in the village choir, / And it makes his heart rejoice. / It sounds to him like her mother's voice, / Singing in Paradise ! 

 2004 , Marilynne Robinson , Gilead , London: Virago, published 2005 , page 189 : I believe the soul in Paradise must enjoy something nearer to a perpetual adulthood than to any other state we know. 

 2010 , BioWare , Mass Effect 2 ( Science Fiction ), Redwood City: Electronic Arts, →OCLC , PC, scene: Kruban: Kruban is a tidally-locked Venusian hothouse, its surface perpetually obscured by clouds of sulfur and carbon dioxides. The first group of krogan brought into orbit by the salarian uplift teams requested a trip to Kruban. The salarians at first thought the krogan were confused about the nature of Kruban's environment; the planet is named for a krogan mythological paradise in which honorable warriors feast on the internal organs of their enemies. In fact, krogan astronomers had correctly deduced the nature of Kruban in the years before the global holocaust. 

 ( figuratively ) A very pleasant place , such as a place full of lush vegetation .
 Synonyms: earthly paradise , heaven 
 Near-synonym: rose garden 
 an island paradise in the Caribbean 

 1610–1611 (date written) , William Shakespeare , “ The Tempest ”, in Mr. William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies   [ … ] ( First Folio ), London: [ … ] Isaac Iaggard , and Ed [ ward ] Blount , published 1623 , →OCLC , [ Act IV, scene i ] : Let me live here ever;
So rare a wonder’d father and a wife
Makes this place Paradise . 

 1789 , Olaudah Equiano , chapter 6, in The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano ‎ [3] , volume 1, London: for the author, page 243 : The reader cannot but judge of the irksomeness of this situation to a mind like mine, in being daily exposed to new hardships and impositions, after having seen many better days, and been as it were, in a state of freedom and plenty; added to which, every part of the world I had hitherto been in, seemed to me a paradise in comparison of the West Indies. 

 1968 , Bessie Head , chapter 8, in When Rain Clouds Gather ‎ [4] , New York: Simon & Schuster, published 1969 , page 114 : “Each household will have to have a tap with water running out of it all the year round,” he said. “And not only palm trees, but fruit trees too and flower gardens. It won’t take so many years to turn Golema Mmidi into a paradise . [ … ] ” 

 1994 , Ira Steven Behr, “The Maquis, Part II”, in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine , season 2, episode 21 , spoken by Benjamin Sisko (Avery Brooks): On Earth, there is no poverty, no crime, no war. You look out the window of Starfleet Headquarters and you see paradise. Well, it's easy to be a saint in paradise , but the Maquis do not live in paradise. 

 ( figuratively ) An ideal place for a specified type of person, activity, etc.
 a shoppers’ paradise 

 1883 , Mark Twain [pseudonym; Samuel Langhorne Clemens], chapter 40, in Life on the Mississippi , Boston, Mass.: James R[ipley] Osgood and Company , →OCLC : And at this point, also, begins the pilot’s paradise : a wide river hence to New Orleans, abundance of water from shore to shore, and no bars, snags, sawyers, or wrecks in his road. 

 2019 December 17, Howard Davies, “Will the UK really turn into 'Singapore-on-Thames' after Brexit?”, in The Guardian ‎ [5] , →ISSN : But the idea that Singapore is a deregulated paradise is not borne out by reality, as anyone who has tried to dispose of a piece of used chewing gum there will know. 

 ( figuratively ) A very pleasant experience .
 c. 1603–1604 (date written) , William Shakespeare , “ Measure for Measure ”, in Mr. William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies   [ … ] ( First Folio ), London: [ … ] Isaac Iaggard , and Ed [ ward ] Blount , published 1623 , →OCLC , [ Act III, scene i ] : The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise 
To what we fear of death. 

 1847 October 16, Currer Bell [pseudonym; Charlotte Brontë ], chapter VIII, in Jane Eyre.   [ … ] , volume II, London: Smith, Elder, and Co. ,   [ … ] , →OCLC , page 214 : [ … ] sitting by him, roused from the nightmare of parting—called to the paradise of union—I thought only of the bliss given me to drink in so abundant a flow. 

 1979 , Bernard Malamud , chapter 2, in Dubin’s Lives ‎ [6] , New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, page 62 : He poured the last of the wine as Fanny, her face composed as she stroked his leg, after a paradise of expectation touched his aroused organ. 

 ( architecture , obsolete ) An open space within a monastery or adjoining a church , such as the space within a cloister , the open court before a basilica , etc. [ 1 ] 

 ( obsolete ) A churchyard or cemetery .

 ( slang ) The upper gallery in a theatre .

 A cake, often as a paradise slice.
 1832 , Letitia Elizabeth Landon , Heath's Book of Beauty, 1833 , The Knife, page 127 : She was learned in decocting all kinds of herb-tea, infallible in curing burns, sprains, and scalds; and not a few pennyworths of gingerbread and paradise (for the latter she was very famous) went among her young customers, for which the till was never the richer. 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 another day in paradise 
 bird of paradise 
 disparadise 
 disparadised 
 earthly paradise 
 eastern paradise whydah 
 emparadise 
 Fishermans Paradise 
 fool's paradise 
 grain of paradise 
 grains of paradise 
 imparadise 
 long-tailed paradise whydah 
 magnificent bird of paradise 
 paradisaic 
 paradisaical 
 paradisal 
 paradisean 
 paradise bird 
 paradise crane 
 paradise-crow 
 paradise duck 
 paradisefish 
 paradise flycatcher 
 Paradise Island 
 paradise nut 
 paradise on earth 
 paradise on Earth 
 paradise parrot 
 paradise pie 
 paradise shelduck 
 paradise skipper 
 paradise sugar 
 paradise syndrome 
 paradise tree 
 paradisiac 
 paradisiacal 
 paradisial 
 paradisian 
 paradisic 
 paradisical 
 paradol 
 Surfers Paradise 
 trouble in paradise 
 unparadise 
 workers' paradise 

 Descendants
 [ edit ] 

 → Fijian: parataisi 

 → Māori: pararaiia 

 → Niuean: parataiso 

 → Tokelauan: palataiho 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 heaven

 Afrikaans: paradys   (af) 

 Albanian: parajsë   (sq)   f , xhenet   (sq)   m 

 Altai:
 Southern Altai: учмак ( učmak ) 

 Arabic: جَنَّة   (ar)   f ( janna ) , سَمَاوَات   pl ( samāwāt ) , فِرْدَوْس   (ar)   m or f ( firdaws ) 
 Hijazi Arabic: فِردوس   m ( firdōs ) , جَنَّة   f ( janna ) 

 Aramaic:
 Classical Syriac: ܦܪܕܝܣܐ   m ( pardaysā ) , ܫܡܝܐ   c ( šəmayyā ) 
 Jewish Aramaic: פַּרְדֵּיסָא   m ( pardêsā ) 

 Armenian: դրախտ   (hy) ( draxt ) 

 Asturian: paraísu   m 

 Azerbaijani: cənnət   (az) , behişt 

 Baluchi: جنت ( jannat ) 

 Bashkir: ожмах ( ojmax ) , йәннәт ( yännät ) 

 Belarusian: рай   m ( raj ) , нябёсы   n   pl ( njabjósy ) 

 Bengali: জান্নাত   (bn) ( jannat ) , ফেরদৌস ( pherdōus ) , নন্দন   (bn) ( nondon ) 

 Bulgarian: рай   (bg)   m ( raj ) , небеса́   (bg)   n   pl ( nebesá ) 

 Burmese: နိဗ္ဗာန်   (my) ( nibban ) , ကောင်းကင်ဘုံ   (my) ( kaung:kangbhum ) 

 Catalan: paradís   (ca)   m 

 Chechen: ялсамани ( jalsamani ) 

 Cheyenne: séano 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 天堂   (zh) ( tiāntáng ) , 樂園  / 乐园   (zh) ( lèyuán ) , 天國  / 天国   (zh) ( tiānguó ) , 樂土  / 乐土   (zh) ( lètǔ ) 

 Comorian:
 Maore Comorian: pev̄o 
 Ngazidja Comorian: mpvepvo   class 9 

 Czech: ráj   (cs)   m , nebesa   (cs)   n   pl 

 Danish: paradis   n , himmel   (da)   c 

 Dutch: paradijs   (nl)   n , hemel   (nl)   m ( heaven, sky ) 

 Esperanto: paradizo   (eo) 

 Estonian: paradiis   (et) 

 Faroese: paradis   n 

 Fijian: parataisi 

 Finnish: taivas   (fi) , paratiisi   (fi) 

 French: paradis   (fr)   m , cieux   (fr)   m   pl 
 Middle French: paradis   m 
 Old French: paradiz   m 

 Frisian:
 West Frisian: paradys 

 Galician: paraíso   (gl)   m 

 Georgian: სამოთხე ( samotxe ) 

 German: Paradies   (de)   n , Himmel   (de)   m ( heaven, sky ) 

 Gothic: 𐍅𐌰𐌲𐌲𐍃   m ( waggs ) 

 Greek: παράδεισος   (el)   m ( parádeisos ) 
 Ancient Greek: παράδεισος   m ( parádeisos ) 

 Greenlandic: paratiisi 

 Hawaiian: paradaiso 

 Hebrew: גַּן עֵדֶן   (he)   m ( gan éden ) 

 Hindi: वैकुण्ठ   (hi)   m ( vaikuṇṭh ) , स्वर्ग   (hi)   m ( svarg ) , देवलोक   (hi)   m ( devlok ) 

 Hungarian: paradicsom   (hu) 

 Icelandic: himinn   (is)   m , paradís   (is)   f 

 Indonesian: surga   (id) , firdaus   (id) 

 Ingrian: raaju 

 Irish: parthas   m 

 Italian: paradiso   (it)   m 

 Japanese: 天国   (ja) ( てんごく, tengoku ) , 天堂   (ja) ( てんどう, tendō ) , 極楽   (ja) ( ごくらく, gokuraku ) ( Buddhist ) , 楽園   (ja) ( らくえん, rakuen ) 

 Kashubian: rôj   m 

 Kazakh: жәннат ( jännat ) , бейіш ( beyiš ) , жұмақ ( jumaq ) , ұжмақ ( ujmaq ) 

 Khmer: ឋានសួគ៌ ( thaan suə ) , សួគ៌   (km) ( suə ) 

 Korean: 천당(天堂)   (ko) ( cheondang ) , 천국(天國)   (ko) ( cheon'guk ) , 낙원(樂園)   (ko) ( nagwon ) , 락원(樂園)   (ko) ( ragwon ) ( North Korea ) 

 Kyrgyz: бейиш   (ky) ( beyiş ) 

 Lao: ທິວ ( thiu ) , ທິວະ ( thi wa ) , ພິມານ ( phi mān ) , ວິມານ ( wi mān ) , ສວງ ( sūang ) , ສວັນ ( suan ) , ສະຫວັນ ( sa huan ) 

 Latin: paradisus   m 

 Latvian: paradīze   f 

 Lezgi: женнет ( žennet ) 

 Lithuanian: rojus   (lt)   m 

 Macedonian: рај   (mk)   m ( raj ) , не́беса   n   pl ( nébesa ) 

 Malay: syurga   (ms) , firdaus , jannah 

 Maltese: ġenna   f , paradijs   f 

 Māori: pararaiha 

 Marathi: वैकुंठ   n ( vaikuṇṭha ) , स्वर्ग   n ( svarga ) , देवलोक   n ( devlok ) 

 Mongolian:
 Cyrillic: диваажин   (mn) ( divaažin ) 

 Niuean: parataiso 

 Nogai: еннет ( yennet ) 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: paradis   n , himmel   (no)   m 
 Nynorsk: paradis   n 

 Old Church Slavonic:
 Cyrillic: раи   m ( rai ) , небеса   n   pl ( nebesa ) 

 Old East Slavic: раи   m ( rai ) 

 Old English: neorxnawang   m , heofon   m or f 

 Old Galician-Portuguese: parayso   m 

 Old Tupi: tupãrorypaba , orypaba 

 Pashto: جنت   (ps)   m ( janat ) , فردوس   m ( ferdaws ) , هسک   (ps)   m ( hask ) 

 Persian:
 Dari: پَرْدیس   (fa) ( pardēs ) , فِرْدَوْس   (fa) ( firdaws ) , بِهِشْت   (fa) ( bihišt ) , جَنَّت   (fa) ( jannat ) 
 Iranian Persian: پَرْدیس   (fa) ( pardis ) , فِرْدُوس   (fa) ( ferdows ) , بِهِشْت   (fa) ( behešt ) , جَنَّت   (fa) ( jannat ) 
 Middle Persian: 𐭥𐭧𐭱𐭲𐭩 ( wahišt ) 

 Polish: raj   (pl)   m , niebiosa   (pl)   n   pl 

 Portuguese: paraíso   (pt)   m 

 Romanian: rai   (ro)   n , paradis   (ro)   n 

 Russian: рай   (ru)   m ( raj ) , небеса́   (ru)   n   pl ( nebesá ) 

 Sami:
 Northern Sami: paradiijás 

 Samoan: parataiso 

 Sanskrit: स्वर्ग   (sa)   m ( svarga ) 

 Serbo-Croatian:
 Cyrillic: ра̑ј   m , небѐса   n   pl 
 Latin: rȃj   (sh)   m , nebèsa   (sh)   n   pl 

 Slovak: raj   m , nebesia   n   pl , nebesá   n   pl 

 Slovene: raj   (sl)   m , nebesa   (sl)   n   pl 

 Somali: janno 

 Spanish: paraíso   (es)   m 

 Swahili: paradiso 

 Swedish: paradis   (sv)   n , himmel   (sv)   c 

 Tagalog: paraiso   (tl) , langit   (tl) 

 Tajik: фирдавс   (tg) ( firdavs ) , биҳишт   (tg) ( bihišt ) , ҷаннат ( jannat ) 

 Tatar: җәннәт   (tt) ( cännät ) 

 Telugu: వైకుంఠము   (te) ( vaikuṇṭhamu ) 

 Thai: สวรรค์   (th) ( sà-wǎn ) , พาราไดซ์ 

 Tongan: palataisi 

 Turkish: cennet   (tr) 
 Ottoman Turkish: جنت ( cennet ) , اوچماق ( uçmak ) , فردوس ( firdevs ) 

 Turkmen: jennet   (tk) 

 Udmurt: узьмаг ( uźmag ) 

 Ukrainian: рай   (uk)   m ( raj ) , небеса́   n   pl ( nebesá ) 

 Urdu: جَنَّت   f ( jannat ) , فِرْدَوس   m ( firdaus ) , بِہِشْت   m ( bihiśt ) , بَہِشْت   m ( bahiśt ) 

 Uyghur: جەننەت ( jennet ) , بىيىش ( biyish ) 

 Uzbek: firdavs   (uz) , jannat   (uz) 

 Vietnamese: thiên đường   (vi) ( 天堂 )

 Waray-Waray: paraiso 

 Welsh: gwynfa   f , paradwys   f 

 Yakut: ырай ( ïray ) 

 very pleasant place

 Armenian: դրախտ   (hy) ( draxt ) 

 Asturian: paraísu   m 

 Catalan: paradís   (ca)   m 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 樂園  / 乐园   (zh) ( lèyuán ) 

 Dutch: paradijs   (nl)   n 

 Finnish: paratiisi   (fi) 

 French: paradis   (fr)   m 

 Galician: paraíso   (gl)   m 

 German: Paradies   (de)   n 

 Hebrew: גַּן עֵדֶן   (he)   m ( gan éden ) 

 Hindi: स्वर्ग   (hi)   m ( svarg ) , वैकुंठ   (hi)   m ( vaikuṇṭh ) 

 Japanese: 楽園   (ja) ( らくえん, rakuen ) , パラダイス   (ja) ( paradaisu ) 

 Korean: 낙원(樂園)   (ko) ( nagwon ) , 락원(樂園)   (ko) ( ragwon ) ( North Korea ) , 파라다이스   (ko) ( paradaiseu ) 

 Macedonian: рај   (mk)   m ( raj ) 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: paradis   n 
 Nynorsk: paradis   n 

 Old English: neorxnawang   m 

 Portuguese: paraíso   (pt)   m 

 Russian: рай   (ru)   m ( raj ) 

 Spanish: paraíso   (es)   m 

 Tagalog: paraiso   (tl) 

 Urdu: فِرْدَوس   m ( firdaus ) , جَنَّت   f ( jannat ) 

 very pleasant experience

 Bashkir: рәхәт ( räxät ) , ләззәт ( läzzät ) 

 Finnish: paratiisi   (fi) 

 Hebrew: גן עדן   (he)   m ( gan éden ) 

 Macedonian: рај   (mk)   m ( raj ) 

 Russian: рай   (ru)   m ( raj ) , кайф   (ru)   m ( kajf ) ( slang ) , ништя́к   (ru)   m ( ništják ) ( slang ) 

 The translations below need to be checked and inserted above into the appropriate translation tables. See instructions at Wiktionary:Entry layout § Translations . 

 Translations to be checked

 Dutch: (please verify ) paradijs   (nl)   n 

 Esperanto: (please verify ) paradizo   (eo) 

 French: (please verify ) paradis   (fr)   m 

 German: (please verify ) Paradies   (de)   n 

 Icelandic: (please verify ) paradís   (is)   f 

 Indonesian: (please verify ) Sorga 

 Interlingua: (please verify ) paradiso (1, 2, 3)

 Italian: (please verify ) paradiso   (it)   m 

 Kurdish:
 Northern Kurdish: (please verify ) biheşt   (ku)   f , (please verify ) cenet   (ku)   f , (please verify ) îrem   (ku)   f 

 Swedish: (please verify ) paradis   (sv)   n 

 See also
 [ edit ] 

 Abraham's bosom 
 Arcadia 
 Avalon 
 Eden 
 happy hunting ground 
 kingdom come 
 neverland 
 nirvana 
 Shangri-La 
 sweet hereafter 
 utopia 

 Proper noun
 [ edit ] 

 paradise 

 ( Abrahamic religions ) Alternative letter-case form of Paradise ( “ Heaven ” ) .

 ( Abrahamic religions ) Alternative letter-case form of Paradise ( “ the Garden of Eden ” ) .
 c. 1594 (date written), William Shakespeare , “ The Comedie of Errors ”, in Mr. William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies   [ … ] ( First Folio ), London: [ … ] Isaac Iaggard , and Ed [ ward ] Blount , published 1623 , →OCLC , [ Act IV, scene iii ] : Not that Adam that kept the Paradise but that Adam that keeps the prison: 

 1667 , John Milton , “Book IX”, in Paradise Lost.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] [ Samuel Simmons ], and are to be sold by Peter Parker   [ … ] ; [ a ] nd by Robert Boulter   [ … ] ; [ a ] nd Matthias Walker,   [ … ] , →OCLC ; republished as Paradise Lost in Ten Books:   [ … ] , London: Basil Montagu Pickering   [ … ] , 1873 , →OCLC , lines 17-18 : Up into Heav’n from Paradise in hast 
Th’ Angelic Guards ascended, 

 1776 , Thomas Paine , Common Sense ‎ [7] , Philadelphia, page 1: Government like dress is the badge of lost innocence; the palaces of kings are built on the ruins of the bowers of paradise . 

 1850 , [ Alfred, Lord Tennyson ], “Canto XXIV”, in In Memoriam , London: Edward Moxon ,   [ … ] , →OCLC , page 41 : If all was good and fair we met,
⁠This earth had been the Paradise 
⁠It never look’d to human eyes
Since Adam left his garden yet. 

 1851 November 14, Herman Melville , chapter 132, in Moby-Dick; or, The Whale , 1st American edition, New York, N.Y.: Harper & Brothers ; London: Richard Bentley , →OCLC : I feel deadly faint, bowed, and humped, as though I were Adam, staggering beneath the piled centuries since Paradise . 

 Verb
 [ edit ] 

 paradise ( third-person singular simple present paradises , present participle paradising , simple past and past participle paradised ) 

 To place (as) in paradise.
 Synonym: imparadise 
 1623 , Giles Fletcher , The Reward of the Faithfull ‎ [8] , London: Benjamin Fisher, Part 2, Chapter 1, p. 141 : Man himselfe [ … ] euen then, when hee was first paradis’d in the Garden of pleasure, yet had something to doe in it, and was not suffered to walke idlely vp & downe like a Loyterer [ … ] 

 1632 , Thomas Heywood , The Iron Age ‎ [9] , London, act IV, scene 1: Hadst thou seene
Her, in whose breast my heart was paradis’d ,
Kist, courted, and imbrac’d. 

 1652 , Edward Benlowes , Theophila, or, Loves Sacrifice, London: Henry Seile and Humphrey Moseley, Canto 7, stanza 81, p. 105, [10] 
 Yet dy’dst T HOU not, but that (Spîrit quickned) free 
 T HOU might’st Saints Paradised see, 
 Rejoyc’d Assurance give to Them rejoyc’d in T HEE ! 

 1763 , uncredited translator, “An Epistle of M. de Voltaire , upon his arrival at his estate near the Lake of Geneva, in March, 1755” in Francis Fawkes and William Woty (eds.), The Poetical Calendar, London: J. Coote, Volume 12, p. 48, [11] 
 [ … ] blest thro’ every hour 
 With blissful change of pleasure and of power, 
 Couldst thou, thus paradis’d , from care remote, 
 Rush to the world, and fight for Peter’s boat? 

 1995 , Anthony Burgess , Byrne ‎ [12] , New York: Carroll & Graf, Part 2, p. 63 : [ … ] A near-nude dance of dates,
Brilliant in darkness — 1617,
Then 1500, and so back, gyrates
To reach — harsh braking on the Time Machine —
To 1321, anno felice 
For Dante , paradised with Beatrice . 

 ( obsolete ) To transform into a paradise.
 1593 , Gabriell Haruey [ i.e. , Gabriel Harvey ], Pierces Supererogation: Or A New Prayse of the Old Asse. A Preparative to Certaine Larger Discourses, Intituled Nashes S. Fame , London: [ … ] Iohn Wolfe , →OCLC ; republished as John Payne Collier , editor, Pierces Supererogation: Or A New Prayse of the Old Asse.   [ … ] (Miscellaneous Tracts. Temp. Eliz. & Jac. I; no. 8 ), [ London ] : [ s.n. ] , [ 1870 ] , →OCLC , page 177 : [ … ] come all the daintieſt dainties of this toungue, and doe homage to your verticall ſtarre, that hath all the ſoveraine influences of the eloquent and learned conſtellations at a becke, and paradiſeth the earth with the ambroſiall dewes of his incomprehenſible witt! 

 1613 , Thomas Heywood , “Epithalamion” in A Marriage Triumphe Solemnized in an Epithalamium, London: Edward Marchant, [13] 
 She enters with a sweet commanding grace, 
 Her very presence paradic’d the place: 

 1828 , Ann Willson, letter to her brother, in Familiar Letters of Ann Willson, Philadelphia: Wm. D. Parrish & Co., 1850, pp. 84-85, [14] 
 Then let us individually aim at paradising the world, and these efforts, though feeble, would doubtless be blessed to ourselves [ … ] 

 ( obsolete , rare ) To affect or exalt with visions of happiness.
 Synonyms: entrance , bewitch 
 1606 , John Marston , Parasitaster, or The Fawn , London: W. Cotton, Act IV, [15] #*: O we had first some long fortunate greate Politicians that were so sottishlie paradized as to thinke when popular hate seconded Princes displeasure to them, any vnmerited violence could seeme to the world iniustice,

 References
 [ edit ] 

 ^ A Glossary of Terms used in Grecian, Roman, Italian, and Gothic Architecture, Oxford: John Henry Parker, 4th edition, enlarged, 1845, p. 270: “P ARADISE . A small private apartment or study; also the garden of a convent: the name was likewise sometimes given to an open court, or area in front of a church, and occasionally to the cloisters , and even to the whole space included within the circuit of a convent.” [1] 

 Anagrams
 [ edit ] 

 Paradesi 

 Latin
 [ edit ] 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 paradīse 

 vocative singular of paradīsus 

 Middle English
 [ edit ] 

 Proper noun
 [ edit ] 

 paradise 

 alternative form of Paradys 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 paradise 

 alternative form of paradys 

 Old English
 [ edit ] 

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 IPA ( key ) : /ˈpɑ.rɑ.diː.se/ 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 paradīse 

 dative singular of paradīs 

 Yoruba
 [ edit ] 

 Etymology
 [ edit ] 

 Borrowed from English paradise .

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 IPA ( key ) : /k͡pá.ɾá.dí.sè/ 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 párádísè 

 paradise 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=paradise&oldid=92551889 "

 Categories : English terms inherited from Middle English 
 English terms derived from Middle English 
 English terms inherited from Old English 
 English terms derived from Old English 
 English terms derived from Old French 
 English terms derived from Latin 
 English terms derived from Ancient Greek 
 English terms derived from Proto-Iranian 
 English doublets 
 English 3-syllable words 
 English terms with IPA pronunciation 
 English terms with audio pronunciation 
 Rhymes:English/æɹədaɪs 
 Rhymes:English/æɹədaɪs/3 syllables 
 English lemmas 
 English nouns 
 English uncountable nouns 
 English countable nouns 
 en:Religion 
 English terms with usage examples 
 English terms with quotations 
 en:Architecture 
 English terms with obsolete senses 
 English slang 
 English proper nouns 
 English verbs 
 English terms with rare senses 
 en:Afterlife 
 Latin non-lemma forms 
 Latin noun forms 
 Middle English variant lemmas 
 Old English terms with IPA pronunciation 
 Old English non-lemma forms 
 Old English noun forms 
 Yoruba terms borrowed from English 
 Yoruba terms derived from English 
 Yoruba terms with IPA pronunciation 
 Yoruba lemmas 
 Yoruba nouns 

 Hidden categories: Pages with entries 
 Pages with 5 entries 
 English links with manual fragments 
 Quotation templates to be cleaned 
 Entries with translation boxes 
 Terms with Afrikaans translations 
 Terms with Albanian translations 
 Terms with Southern Altai translations 
 Terms with Arabic translations 
 Terms with Hijazi Arabic translations 
 Terms with Classical Syriac translations 
 Terms with Aramaic translations 
 Terms with Armenian translations 
 Terms with Asturian translations 
 Terms with Azerbaijani translations 
 Terms with Baluchi translations 
 Terms with Bashkir translations 
 Terms with Belarusian translations 
 Terms with Bengali translations 
 Terms with Bulgarian translations 
 Terms with Burmese translations 
 Terms with Catalan translations 
 Terms with Chechen translations 
 Terms with Cheyenne translations 
 Terms with Mandarin translations 
 Terms with Maore Comorian translations 
 Terms with Ngazidja Comorian translations 
 Terms with Czech translations 
 Terms with Danish translations 
 Terms with Dutch translations 
 Terms with Esperanto translations 
 Terms with Estonian translations 
 Terms with Faroese translations 
 Terms with Fijian translations 
 Terms with Finnish translations 
 Terms with French translations 
 Terms with Middle French translations 
 Terms with Old French translations 
 Terms with West Frisian translations 
 Terms with Galician translations 
 Terms with Georgian translations 
 Terms with German translations 
 Terms with Gothic translations 
 Terms with Greek translations 
 Terms with Ancient Greek translations 
 Terms with Greenlandic translations 
 Terms with Hawaiian translations 
 Terms with Hebrew translations 
 Terms with Hindi translations 
 Terms with Hungarian translations 
 Terms with Icelandic translations 
 Terms with Indonesian translations 
 Terms with Ingrian translations 
 Terms with Irish translations 
 Terms with Italian translations 
 Terms with Japanese translations 
 Terms with Kashubian translations 
 Terms with Kazakh translations 
 Terms with Khmer translations 
 Terms with Korean translations 
 Terms with Kyrgyz translations 
 Terms with Lao translations 
 Terms with Latin translations 
 Terms with Latvian translations 
 Terms with Lezgi translations 
 Terms with Lithuanian translations 
 Terms with Macedonian translations 
 Terms with Malay translations 
 Terms with Maltese translations 
 Terms with Māori translations 
 Terms with Marathi translations 
 Terms with Mongolian translations 
 Terms with Niuean translations 
 Terms with Nogai translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Bokmål translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Nynorsk translations 
 Terms with Old Church Slavonic translations 
 Terms with Old East Slavic translations 
 Terms with Old English translations 
 Terms with Old Galician-Portuguese translations 
 Terms with Old Tupi translations 
 Terms with Pashto translations 
 Terms with Dari translations 
 Terms with Persian translations 
 Terms with Iranian Persian translations 
 Middle Persian terms with non-redundant manual transliterations 
 Terms with Middle Persian translations 
 Terms with Polish translations 
 Terms with Portuguese translations 
 Terms with Romanian translations 
 Terms with Russian translations 
 Terms with Northern Sami translations 
 Terms with Samoan translations 
 Terms with Sanskrit translations 
 Terms with Serbo-Croatian translations 
 Terms with Slovak translations 
 Terms with Slovene translations 
 Terms with Somali translations 
 Terms with Spanish translations 
 Terms with Swahili translations 
 Terms with Swedish translations 
 Terms with Tagalog translations 
 Terms with Tajik translations 
 Terms with Tatar translations 
 Terms with Telugu translations 
 Terms with Thai translations 
 Terms with Tongan translations 
 Terms with Turkish translations 
 Terms with Ottoman Turkish translations 
 Terms with Turkmen translations 
 Terms with Udmurt translations 
 Terms with Ukrainian translations 
 Terms with Urdu translations 
 Terms with Uyghur translations 
 Terms with Uzbek translations 
 Terms with Vietnamese translations 
 Terms with Waray-Waray translations 
 Terms with Welsh translations 
 Terms with Yakut translations 
 Mandarin terms with redundant transliterations 
 Requests for review of Dutch translations 
 Requests for review of Esperanto translations 
 Requests for review of French translations 
 Requests for review of German translations 
 Requests for review of Icelandic translations 
 Requests for review of Indonesian translations 
 Terms with Interlingua translations 
 Requests for review of Interlingua translations 
 Requests for review of Italian translations 
 Terms with Northern Kurdish translations 
 Requests for review of Northern Kurdish translations 
 Requests for review of Swedish translations 

 This page was last edited on 11 September 2026, at 19:15.

 Definitions and other text are available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 

 Privacy policy 

 About Wiktionary 

 Disclaimers 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 paradise 

 46 languages 

 Add topic