URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mother
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:45:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mother - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mother - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mother 

 mother (n.1) 

 "female parent, a woman in relation to her child," Middle English moder , from Old English modor , from Proto-Germanic *mōdēr (source also of Old Saxon modar , Old Frisian moder , Old Norse moðir , Danish moder , Dutch moeder , Old High German muoter , German Mutter ), from PIE *mater- "mother" (source also of Latin māter , Old Irish mathir , Lithuanian motė , Sanskrit matar- , Greek mētēr , Old Church Slavonic mati ). Watkins writes that this is "[b]ased ultimately on the baby-talk form *mā- (2); with the kinship term suffix *-ter-. " The spelling with -th- dates from early 16c., though that pronunciation is probably older (compare father (n.)).

 The sense of "that which has given birth to anything" is from late Old English; as a familiar term of address to an elderly woman, especially of the lower class, by c. 1200.

 Mother Nature as a personification is attested from 1550s (in a translation of More's Utopia ); mother earth as an expression of the earth as the giver of life is from 1580s. Mother tongue "one's native language" is attested from late 14c. Mother country "a country in relation to its colonies" is from 1580s. Mother-love "such affection as is shown by a mother" is by 1854. Mother-wit "native wit, common sense" is from mid-15c.

 Mother of all ________ (1991), is Gulf War slang, from Saddam Hussein's use in reference to the coming battle; it is an Arabic idiom (as well as an English one); Ayesha, second wife of Muhammad, is known as Mother of Believers ; the figure is attested in English in 19c. (Virginia is called mother of commonwealths from 1849). Mother Carey's chickens is late 18c. sailors' nickname for storm petrels, or for snowflakes.

 mother (v.) 

 early 15c., intransitive, "be a mother;" 1540s, transitive, "to be the mother of;" from mother (n.1). Meaning "to take care of act as a mother to" is from 1863. Related: Mothered ; mothering .
 also from early 15c. 

 mother (n.2) 

 "a thick substance concreting in liquors; the lees or scum concreted" [Johnson], 1530s, probably from Middle Dutch modder "filth, dregs," from PIE *meu- (see mud ).
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to mother 

 father (n.) 

 Middle English fader , from Old English fæder "he who begets a child, nearest male ancestor;" also "any lineal male ancestor; the Supreme Being," and by late Old English, "one who exercises parental care over another," from Proto-Germanic *fader (source also of Old Saxon fadar , Old Frisian feder , Dutch vader , Old Norse faðir , Old High German fatar , German vater ; in Gothic usually expressed by atta ).

 This is from the PIE root *pəter- "father" (source also of Sanskrit pitar- , Greek pater , Latin pater , Old Persian pita , Old Irish athir "father"), which is presumably from baby-speak sound "pa." The ending formerly was regarded as an agent-noun affix. The classic example of Grimm's Law, where PIE "p-" becomes Germanic "f-."

 The spelling with -th- (15c.) reflects a phonetic shuffle in Middle English that turned -der to -ther in many words, perhaps reinforced in this case by Old Norse forms; the spelling caught up to pronunciation in 1500s (compare mother (n.), weather (n.), together , hither , gather ; the converse also occurred, transforming burthen , spither , murther , etc. into their modern forms).

 As a title of various Church dignitaries from c. 1300; the meaning "creator, inventor, author" is from mid-14c.; that of "anything that gives rise to something else" is from late 14c. As a respectful title for an older man, recorded from 1550s. Father-figure is from 1954. Fathers "leading men, elders" is from 1580s.

 My heart leaps up when I behold

  A rainbow in the sky:

 So was it when my life began;

 So is it now I am a man;

 So be it when I shall grow old,

  Or let me die!

 The Child is father of the Man;

 I could wish my days to be

 Bound each to each by natural piety.

 [Wordsworth, 1802]

 mothering (n.) 

 "motherly care," 1868, verbal noun from mother (v.). Earlier it was used in reference to the rural custom of visiting one's parents with presents on Mid-Lent Sunday (1640s).

 mud 
 Alma Mater 
 Demeter 
 endometrium 
 godmother 
 grandmother 
 magna mater 
 maternal 
 maternity 
 matricide 
 matriculate 
 matrimony 
 matrix 
 matron 
 matronymic 
 matter 
 metronymic 
 metropolitan 
 See All Related Words (32) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 maternal 

 late 15c., "of or pertaining to a mother or motherhood; characteristic of mothers," from Old French maternel (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *maternalis, from Latin māternus "maternal, of a mother," from māter "mother" (see mother (n.1)). From 1650s as "inherited or derived from a moth

 maternity 

 1610s, "quality or condition of being a mother," from French maternité "motherhood" (15c.), from Medieval Latin maternitatem (nominative maternitas) "motherhood," from Latin māternus "of a mother," from māter "mother" (see mother (n.1)). Used from 1893 as a quasi-adjective in ref

 matriculate 

 1570s, "insert (a name) in a register or official list," especially "to admit (a student) to a college by enrolling his name on the register," from Late Latin matriculatus, past participle of matriculare "to register," from Latin mātricula "public register," diminutive of mātrix 

 Maia 

 Maia, one of the Pleiades, is from Greek Maia, daughter of Atlas, mother of Hermes, literally "mother, good mother, dame;...foster-mother, nurse, midwife," said by Watkins to be from infant babbling (see mamma)....

 nacre 

 1590s, "type of shellfish that yields mother-of-pearl," from French nacre (Old French nacaire, 14c.), from Italian naccaro...Meaning "mother-of-pearl" is from 1718....The French adjectival form nacré was applied in English to decorative objects iridescent like mother of pearl (1895)....

 mamma 

 "mother," a word used especially by children and infants, 1570s, representing the native form of the reduplication of *ma...- that is nearly universal among the Indo-European languages (Greek mamme "mother, grandmother," Latin mamma, Persian mama..., Russian and Lithuanian mama "mother," German Muhme "mother's sister," French maman, Welsh mam "mother")....

 nun 

 of address to elderly persons, perhaps from children's speech, reminiscent of nana (compare Sanskrit nona, Persian nana "mother...," Greek nanna "aunt," Serbo-Croatian nena "mother," Italian nonna, Welsh nain "grandmother;" see nanny)....

 a.m. 

 also a.m., 1762 in reference to hours, an abbreviation of Latin ante meridiem "before noon" (q.v.). Synonymous with "morning" by 1776. AM as a type of radio wave broadcast, 1921, abbreviation of amplitude modulation (see amplitude). Affixed to a name, an abbreviation of artium ma

 am 

 first-person singular present indicative of be (q.v.); Old English eom "to be, to remain," (Mercian eam, Northumbrian am), from Proto-Germanic *izm(i)-, from PIE *esmi- (source also of Old Norse emi, Gothic im, Hittite esmi, Old Church Slavonic jesmi, Lithuanian esmi), first-pers

 make 

 Old English macian "to give being to, give form or character to, bring into existence; construct, do, be the author of, produce; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform," from West Germanic *makōjanan "to fashion, fit" (source also of Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia "

 Share mother 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mother Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mother">Etymology of mother by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mother. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mother Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mother," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mother. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mother." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mother. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mother." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mother (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mother 
 mote 
 motel 
 motet 
 moth 
 mothball 
 mother 
 Mother Goose 
 Mother Hubbard 
 mother lode 
 motherboard 
 motherfucker 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix