URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/grab
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:24:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Grab - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Grab - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of grab 

 grab (v.) 

 "seize forcibly or roughly," 1580s, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grabben "to grab," from Proto-Germanic *grab- , *grap- (source also of Old English græppian "to seize," Old Saxon garva , Old High German garba "sheaf," literally "that which is gathered up together"), from PIE *ghrebh- (1) "to seize, reach" (source also of Sanskrit grbhnati "seizes," Old Persian grab- "seize" as possession or prisoner, Old Church Slavonic grabiti "to seize, rob," Lithuanian grėbti "to rake"). Sense of "to get by unscrupulous methods" was reinforced by grab game , a kind of swindle, attested from 1846. Related: Grabbed ; grabbing .
 also from 1580s 

 grab (n.) 

 1777, "thing grabbed;" 1824, "act of grabbing, a sudden grasp or seizing" from grab (v.). Up for grabs attested from 1945 in jive talk.
 also from 1777 

 Entries linking to grab 

 garbage (n.) 

 "refuse, filth," 1580s; earlier "giblets, refuse of a fowl, waste parts of an animal (head, feet, etc.) used for human food" (early 15c., in early use also gabage , garbish , garbidge ), of unknown origin; OED says probably from Anglo-French "like many other words found in early cookery books." In its sense of "waste material, refuse" it has been influenced by and partly confused with garble (q.v.) in its older sense of "remove refuse material from spices;" Middle English had the derived noun garbelage but it is attested only as the action of removing the refuse, not the material itself.

 Perhaps the English word originally is from a derivative of Old French garbe / jarbe "sheaf of wheat, bundle of sheaves," though the sense connection is difficult. This word is from Proto-Germanic *garba- (source also of Dutch garf , German garbe "sheaf"), from PIE *ghrebh- (1) "to seize, reach" (see grab (v.)).

 "In modern American usage garbage is generally restricted to mean kitchen and vegetable wastes" [Craigie]. Used figuratively for "worthless, offensive stuff" from 1590s. Garbage can is from 1901. Garbage collector "trash man" is from 1872; Australian shortening garbo attested from 1953. Garbology "study of waste as a social science" is by 1976; garbologist is from 1965.

 grab-bag (n.) 

 "miscellaneous mixture," 1867, originally the name of a carnival game (1854) consisting of a bag full of items to be obtained by thrusting the hand within, the privilege of doing so having previously been bought; from grab + bag (n.).

 grabble 
 grabby 
 grasp 
 satyagraha 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 grasp 

 mid-14c., "to reach, grope, feel around," possibly a metathesis of grapsen, from Old English *græpsan "to touch, feel," from Proto-Germanic *grap-, *grab- (source also of East Frisian grapsen "to grasp," Middle Dutch grapen "to seize, grasp," Old English grapian "to touch, feel, 

 satyagraha 

 Indian form of passive resistance, 1920, in writings of Gandhi, from Sanskrit satyagraha "insistence on truth," from satya "truth, truthfulness" (from sat- "existing, true, virtuous," from PIE root *es- "to be") + agraha "pertinacity," from gṛbhṇāti, gṛhṇāti "he seizes" (from PIE

 seize 

 mid-13c., seisen, "take possession, take possession of" (land, goods, etc.) by force or authority, from Old French seisir "to take possession of, take by force; put in possession of, bestow upon" (Modern French saisir), from Late Latin sacire (8c.), which generally is held to be 

 option 

 De Vaan derives it from Proto-Italic *opeje- "to choose, grab," from PIE *hopeie- "to choose, grab," and compares Hittite...epp/app- "to take, grab," Sanskrit apa, Avestan apa "has reached."...

 ample 

 which is related to ampla "handle, grip; opportunity," from Proto-Italic *amlo- "seizable," from a PIE root meaning "to grab...

 snatch 

 The meaning "a sudden grab" is from 1570s, also "a short fit of vigorous action;" hence the sense in weight-lifting (1928...

 Edith 

 Late Old English, in its grab-bag of alliterative pairings, had edye men and arme "rich men and poor."...

 post 

 "a timber of considerable size set upright," from Old English post "pillar, doorpost," and from Old French post "post, upright beam," both from Latin postis "door, post, doorpost," in Medieval Latin "a beam, rod, pole," which is perhaps from Vulgar Latin *por- "forth," a variant 

 spot 

 c. 1200, "moral stain;" by mid-14c. as "speck, stain left by something on a surface;" probably at least in part from a variant of Old English splott "a spot, blot, patch (of land)," and partly from or related to Middle Dutch spotte "spot, speck." Other cognates are East Frisian s

 stop 

 Middle English stoppen, "obstruct (a passage) with a physical barrier; close up by filling, stuffing, or plugging," from Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian "to stop up, stifle"), a general West Germanic word, cognate with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low Germ

 Share grab 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/grab Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/grab">Etymology of grab by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of grab. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/grab Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of grab," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/grab. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of grab." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/grab. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of grab." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/grab (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near grab 
 gow 
 gowk 
 gown 
 goy 
 goyim 
 grab 
 grab-bag 
 grabble 
 grabby 
 grace 
 graceful 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix