URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/protein
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:58:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Protein - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Protein - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of protein 

 protein (n.) 

 1844, from French protéine , coined 1838 by Dutch chemist Gerhard Johan Mulder (1802-1880), perhaps on suggestion of Berzelius, from Greek prōteios "the first quality," from prōtos "first" (see proto- ) + -ine (2).

 Originally a theoretical substance thought to be a constituent of food essential to life, further studies of the substances he was working with overthrew this, but the words protein and proteid continued to be used in international work on the matter and also for other organic compounds; the modern use as a general name for a class of bodies arose in German. The confusion became so great a committee was set up in 1907 to sort out the nomenclature, which it did, giving protein its modern meaning ("class of organic compounds forming an important part of all living organisms") and banishing proteid .
 also from 1844 

 Entries linking to protein 

 protease (n.) 

 type of enzyme, 1898, from protein + -ase . Related: Proteolysis .

 proteinuria 

 "presence of abnormal levels of protein in the urine," 1911, Modern Latin, from French protéinurie ; see protein + urine + abstract noun ending -ia .

 -ine 
 proto- 
 *per- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nylon 

 It has also been defined as a "Man made protein-like chemical product (polyamide) which may be formed into fibers, bristles...

 gluten 

 1630s, "a sticky substance," from French gluten "sticky substance" (16c.) or directly from Latin gluten (glutin-) "glue" (see glue (n.)). Used 16c.-19c. for the part of animal tissue now called fibrin; used since 1803 of the nitrogenous part of the flour of wheat or other grain; 

 egg 

 "the body formed in the females of all animals (with the exception of a few of the lowest type) in which by impregnation the development of the fetus takes place," mid-14c., egge, mostly in northern England dialect, from Old Norse egg, from Proto-Germanic *ajja(m) (source also of

 milk 

 "opaque white fluid secreted by mammary glands of female mammals, suited to the nourishment of their young," Middle English milk, from Old English meoluc (West Saxon), milc (Anglian), from Proto-Germanic *meluk- "milk" (source also of Old Norse mjolk, Old Frisian melok, Old Saxon

 tame 

 c. 1200, of persons, "in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior;" mid-13c., of animals, "domesticated, reclaimed from wildness," also, of persons, "meek, gentle-natured, compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities," from oblique forms of Old Engl

 team 

 Old English team "descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft animals yoked together," from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (source also of Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam "bridle; progeny, line of descent," Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, Germa

 meat 

 Middle English mēte, from Old English mete "food, nourishment, sustenance" (paired with drink), "item of food; animal food, fodder," also "a meal, repast," from Proto-Germanic *mati (source also of Old Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats

 macromolecule 

 1886, "molecule consisting of several molecules," a sense now obsolete, from macro- + molecule. Apparently coined in "On Macro-molecules, with the Determinations of the Form of Some of Them," by Anglo-Irish physicist G. Johnstone Stoney (1826–1911). Originally of crystals. Meanin

 genius 

 late 14c., "tutelary or moral spirit" who guides and governs an individual through life, from Latin genius "guardian deity or spirit which watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation; wit, talent;" also "prophetic skill; the male spirit of a gens," originally "genera

 idle 

 Old English idel "empty, void; vain; worthless, useless," from Proto-West Germanic *idla- (source also of Old Saxon idal, Old Frisian idel "empty, worthless," Old Dutch idil, Old High German ital, German eitel "vain, useless, mere, pure"), a word of unknown origin. Subsequent dev

 Share protein 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/protein Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/protein">Etymology of protein by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of protein. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/protein Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of protein," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/protein. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of protein." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/protein. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of protein." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/protein (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near protein 
 protectionist 
 protective 
 protector 
 protectorate 
 protege 
 protein 
 proteinuria 
 protero- 
 Proterosaurus 
 Proterozoic 
 protest 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix