URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/spit
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Spit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Spit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of spit 

 spit (v.1) 

 [expectorate] Old English spittan (Anglian), spætan (West Saxon), "expel (saliva) from the mouth," transitive and intransitive, past tense *spytte , from Proto-Germanic *spitjan , from PIE *sp(y)eu- (of imitative origin; see spew (v.)).

 Not the usual Old English word; spætlan (see spittle ) and spiwan are more common; all are considered to be from the same root. To spit (especially at someone) as a gesture of contempt is in Old English. Related: Spat ; spitting . Also compare spitting image .

 spit (n.1) 

 [saliva], early 14c., "fluid secreted by the glands of the mouth," from spit (v.1). By 1650s as "an act of spitting."

 The meaning "the very likeness, exact image" in modern use is attested from 1805 (compare spitting image , under the verb); compare French craché in same sense. Spit-curl , "lock of hair curled and lying flat on the temple" (1831), was originally colloquial or vulgar. The military phrase spit and polish indicating precise correctness (often derogatory) is recorded by 1895.
 also from early 14c. 

 spit (n.2) 

 [sharp-pointed rod or bar for roasting meat], late Old English spitu "a spit" in cooking, from Proto-Germanic *spituz , (source also of Middle Dutch and Dutch spit , Swedish spett (which perhaps is from Low German), Old High German spiz , German Spieß "roasting spit," German spitz "pointed" (from PIE *spei- "sharp point;" see spike (n.1)).

 This is also the word meaning "sandy point or long, narrow shoal running from a shore into a sea" (1670s). Old French espois , Spanish espeto "spit," Italian spiedo , spiede "a spear" are Germanic loan-words.

 spit (v.2) 

 [put on a spit, thrust with a spit] c. 1200, spiten , from late Old English sputtian "to spit" (for cooking), from spit (n.2). The meaning "pierce with a weapon, transfix, impale" is from early 15c. Related: Spitted ; spitting . Nares' Glossary has spit-frog "a small sword."
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to spit 

 spew (v.) 

 Middle English speuen, "vomit, throw up, spit or cough up," also figurative, from Old English spiwan "spew, spit," from Proto-Germanic *spiewan- (source also of Old Saxon spiwan , Old Norse spyja , Old Frisian spiwa , Middle Dutch spijen , Dutch spuwen , Old High German spiwan , German speien , Gothic spiewan "to spit"), probably of imitative origin (compare Latin spuere ; Greek ptuein , Doric psyttein ; Old Church Slavonic pljuja , Russian plevati ; Lithuanian spiauti ).

 Also in Old English as a weak verb, speowan , spiwian ; the weak form predominated from Middle English. The general sense of "eject or cast out as if by vomiting" is by 1590s. The intransitive sense is by 1660s. Related: Spewed ; spewing .

 spike (n.1) 

 "large nail," usually of iron, mid-14c., perhaps from or related to a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse spik "splinter," Middle Swedish spijk "nail," from Proto-Germanic *spikaz (source also of Middle Dutch spicher , Dutch spijker "nail," Old English spicing "large nail," Old English spaca , Old High German speihha "spoke").

 In older sources this is reconstructed to be from a PIE root *spei- "sharp point," source also of Latin spica "ear of corn," spina "thorn, prickle, backbone," and perhaps pinna "pin;" Greek spilas "rock, cliff;" Lettish spile "wooden fork;" Lithuanian speigliai "thorns," spitna "tongue of a buckle;" Old English spitu "spit." But de Vaan finds only the Germanic, Latin, and perhaps Lithuanian words connected and offers no further etymology.

 The English word also might be influenced by and partly a borrowing of Latin spica (see spike (n.2)), from the same root. The general sense of "short, sharp point; pointed projection" is by 1718. The slang meaning "needle" is from 1923. The meaning "pointed stud in athletic shoes" is from 1832. The electrical sense of "pulse of short duration" is from 1935. Spike-heel as a type of women's shoe is attested by 1929.

 spitting image 
 spittle 
 sandspit 
 spat 
 spitball 
 spitfire 
 spittoon 
 Spitz 
 turn-spit 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 spittle 

 "saliva, spit, mucous substance secreted by the saliva glands," late 15c., probably an alteration (by influence of spit (n.1)) of Middle English spetel, spotel, from Old English spætl, spatl, from Proto-Germanic *spait- (source also of Old English spætan "to spit"), from PIE root

 sprinkle 

 "scatter drops or particles," late 14c., sprenklen (implied in sprynklid), frequentative of sprenge (see spring (v.), also see -el (3)); cognate with or influenced by Dutch sprenkelen, Low German sprenkeln, German sprenkeln; and the nouns Middle Dutch, Middle Low German sprenkel 

 patter 

 "make a quick succession of small taps," 1610s, frequentative of pat (v.). Related: Pattered; pattering. As a noun, "a quick succession of small sounds," by 1844. Phrase patter of tiny (or little) feet, suggestive of the presence or expectation of a child, is by 1858, in an anony

 obelisk 

 stone column with a pyramidal apex," 1560s, from French obélisque (16c.) and directly from Latin obeliscus "obelisk, small spit...," from Greek obeliskos "small spit, obelisk, leg of a compass," diminutive of obelos "a spit, pointed pillar, needle, broach...

 spout 

 "issue forcibly; spit out" as a liquid, early 14c., spouten, a common Germanic word, ultimately imitative, related to Middle...North Frisian spütji "spout, squirt," Swedish sputa "to spout," from Proto-Germanic *sput- (from PIE *sp(y)eu- "to spew, spit...

 retch 

 1540s, "to clear the throat, to cough up phlegm" (a sense now obsolete), from Old English hræcan "to cough up, spit" (related...

 rotisserie 

 1868, "restaurant where meat is roasted on a spit," from French rôtisserie "shop selling cooked food, restaurant," from present-participle...

 expectorate 

 c. 1600, "to clear out the chest or lungs," a literal use of Latin expectoratus, past participle of expectorare, which in classical use was figurative, "scorn, expel from the mind," literally "drive from the breast, make a clean breast," from ex "out" (see ex-) + pectus (genitive

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 Share spit 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/spit Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/spit">Etymology of spit by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of spit. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/spit Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of spit," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spit. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of spit." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spit. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of spit." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/spit (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near spit 
 spiro- 
 spirochete 
 Spirogyra 
 spirometer 
 spissitude 
 spit 
 Spitalfields 
 spitball 
 spite 
 spiteful 
 spitfire 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix