URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/orange
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:22:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Orange - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Orange - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of orange 

 orange (n.) 

 late 14c., in reference to the fruit of the orange tree (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French orange , orenge (12c., Modern French orange ), from Medieval Latin pomum de orenge , from Italian arancia , originally narancia (Venetian naranza ), an alteration of Arabic naranj , from Persian narang , from Sanskrit naranga-s "orange tree," a word of uncertain origin.

 Not used as a color word in English until 1510s ( orange color ), "a reddish-yellow color like that of a ripe orange." Colors similar to modern orange in Middle English might be called citrine or saffron . Loss of initial n- probably is due to confusion with the definite article (as in une narange, una narancia ), but also perhaps was by influence of French or "gold." The name of the town of Orange in France (see Orangemen ) perhaps was deformed by the name of the fruit. Orange juice is attested from 1723.

 The tree's original range probably was northern India. The Persian orange, grown widely in southern Europe after its introduction in Italy 11c., was bitter; sweet oranges were brought to Europe 15c. from India by Portuguese traders and quickly displaced the bitter variety, but only Modern Greek still seems to distinguish the bitter ( nerantzi ) from the sweet ( portokali "Portuguese") orange.

 Portuguese, Spanish, Arab, and Dutch sailors planted citrus trees along trade routes to prevent scurvy. On his second voyage in 1493, Christopher Columbus brought the seeds of oranges, lemons and citrons to Haiti and the Caribbean. Introduced in Florida (along with lemons) in 1513 by Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de Leon. It was introduced to Hawaii in 1792.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to orange 

 Orangemen (n.) 

 1796 in reference to members of a secret politico-religious society founded 1795 in Belfast to promote Protestant power in Northern Ireland, named for William of Orange (who became King William III of England and triumphed in Ireland at the head of a Protestant army at the Battle of the Boyne), of the German House of Nassau. His cousins and their descendants constitute the royal line of Holland.

 The name is from the town of Orange on the Rhone in France, which became part of the Nassau principality in 1530. Its Roman name was Arausio , which is said in 19c. sources to be from aura "a breeze" and a reference to the north winds which rush down the valley, but perhaps this is folk etymology of a Celtic word. The name subsequently was corrupted to Auranche , then Orange .

 The town has no obvious association with the fruit other than being on the road from Marseilles to Paris, along which masses of oranges were transported to northern France and beyond. In this roundabout way the political/religious movement of Northern Irish Protestantism acquired an association with the color orange, the Irish national flag acquired its orange band, and Syracuse University in New York state acquired its "Otto the Orange" mascot.

 adder (n.) 

 Middle English naddre , from Old English (West Saxon) næddre (Mercian nedre , Northumbrian nedra ), "a snake; the Serpent in the Garden of Eden," from Proto-Germanic *naethro "a snake" (source also of Old Norse naðra , Middle Dutch nadre , Old High German natra , German Natter , Gothic nadrs ), from PIE root *nētr- "snake" (source also of Latin natrix "water snake" (the sense is probably by folk-association with nare "to swim"); Old Irish nathir , Welsh neidr "snake, serpent").

 The modern form represents a faulty separation 14c.-16c. of a nadder into an adder , for which see also apron , auger , nickname , orange , humble pie , aitchbone , umpire . Nedder is still a northern English dialect form.

 Since Middle English the word has been restricted to use as the common name of the viper, the only venonous British reptile (though not generally fatal to humans), then by extension it was applied to venomous or similar snakes elsewhere ( puff-adder , etc.). Folklore connection with deafness is via Psalm lviii.1-5. The adder is said to stop up its ears to avoid hearing the snake charmer called in to drive it away.

 orangeade 
 orange-blossom 
 orange-peel 
 orangery 
 tariff 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tariff 

 1590s, "arithmetical table," also "official list or table of customs duties on goods for import or export;" also "a law regulating import duties," from Italian tariffa "tariff, price, assessment," Medieval Latin tarifa "list of prices, book of rates," ultimately from Arabic ta'ri

 saffron 

 The substance is noted for its sweet aroma and deep orange color....As a color word for deep yellow-orange, and an adjective, by late 14c....

 monarch 

 As a type of large orange and black North American butterfly by 1885; on one theory it was so called in honor of King William...III of England, who also was Prince of Orange, in reference to the butterfly's color....

 Boer 

 The Boer War (1899-1902), in which Great Britain defeated the South African Republic of Transvaal and Orange Free State,...

 nasturtium 

 Modern application to a South American trailing plant with orange flowers is recorded from 1704....

 love-apple 

 probably rather from d'or "of gold" (the earliest tomatoes brought to Italy in the mid-1500s apparently were of the yellow or orange...

 droog 

 ruffian," a transliteration of the Russian word for "friend," introduced by English novelist Anthony Burgess in "A Clockwork Orange...

 pigment 

 late 14c., "a red dye," from Latin pigmentum "coloring matter, pigment, paint," figuratively "ornament," from stem of pingere "to color, paint" (see paint (v.)). By 1610s in the broader sense "any substance that is or can be used by painters to impart color" (technically a dry su

 citrus 

 any tree of the genus Citrus, or its fruit, 1825, from the Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus "citron tree," the name of an African tree with aromatic wood and lemon-like fruit, the first citrus fruit to become available in the West. The name, like the tree, is probably o

 rustic 

 mid-15c., rustik, "associated with the country, rural," from Latin rusticus "of the country, rural; country-like, plain, simple, rough, coarse, awkward," from rus (genitive ruris) "open land, country" (see rural). From 1580s, of persons, "having the look and manner of country fol

 Share orange 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/orange Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/orange">Etymology of orange by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of orange. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/orange Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of orange," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orange. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of orange." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orange. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of orange." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/orange (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near orange 
 orach 
 oracle 
 oracular 
 orage 
 oral 
 orange 
 orangeade 
 orange-blossom 
 Orangemen 
 orange-peel 
 orangery 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close