URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustard
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mustard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mustard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mustard 

 mustard (n.) 

 late 13c. (late 12c. as a surname), "seed of the mustard plant crushed and used as a condiment paste or for medicinal purposes," from Old French mostarde "mustard; mustard plant" (Modern French moutarde ), from moust "must," from Latin mustum "new wine" (see must (n.1)); so called because it was originally prepared by adding must to the ground seeds of the plant to make a paste. As the name of the plant itself, by mid-14c. in English. As a color name, it is attested from 1848.

 Mustard-pot is attested from early 15c. Mustard gas , World War I poison (first used by the Germans at Ypres, 1917), so called for its color and smell and burning effect on eyes and lungs; chemical name is dichlordiethyl sulfide; it contains no mustard and is an atomized liquid, not a gas. To cut the mustard (1907, usually in negative) is probably from slang mustard "genuine article, best thing" (1903) on notion of "that which enhances flavor."

 I'm not headlined in the bills, but I'm the mustard in the salad dressing just the same. [O. Henry, "Cabbages and Kings," 1904]
 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to mustard 

 must (n.1) 

 "new wine," Old English must , from Latin mustum (also source of Old High German, German most , Old French moust , Modern French moût , Spanish, Italian mosto ), short for vinum mustum "fresh wine," neuter of mustus "fresh, new, newborn," perhaps literally "wet," and from PIE *mus-to- , from root *meus- "damp" (see moss ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 quern 

 "small mill for grinding" (grain, pepper, mustard, etc.),  Middle English querne, from Old English cweorn "hand-mill...

 aplenty 

 Two square feet, or four at most, in one corner of the frame, will give you mustard and cress a plenty for salads, if you...

 gallimaufry 

 from French galimafrée "hash, ragout, dish made of odds and ends," from Old French galimafree, calimafree "sauce made of mustard...

 nasturtium 

 name given to various plants of the mustard family, including watercress, late Old English nasturtium, nasturcium, from Latin...

 arugula 

 It also sometimes is called hedge mustard....

 condiment 

 mid-15c., "a pickling fluid, seasoning, sauce, something used to give relish to food," from Old French condiment (13c.), from Latin condimentum "spice, seasoning, sauce," from condire "to preserve, pickle, season, put fruit in vinegar, wine, spices, etc.," a variant of condere "p

 pare 

 c. 1300, paren, "peel (fruit), cut off the crust (of bread)," from Old French parer "arrange, prepare; trim, adorn," and directly from Latin parare "make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend, resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with m

 reap 

 "to cut grain with a hook or sickle, cut and gather a harvest," Middle English repen, from Old English reopan, a Mercian and Northumbrian (Anglian) form of repan, geripan "to reap," related to Old English ripe "ripe" (see ripe). The transferred and figurative use, "to gather in b

 pear 

 Middle English pere, from Old English pere, peru "fruit of the pear tree," common West Germanic (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German pere, Old High German pira, bira, Dutch peer), from Vulgar Latin *pera, variant of Latin pira, plural (taken for fem. singular) of pirum "pear," a loan

 the 

 definite article, late Old English þe, nominative masculine form of the demonstrative pronoun and adjective. After c.950, it replaced earlier se (masc.), seo (fem.), þæt (neuter), and probably represents se altered by the th- form which was used in all the masculine oblique cases

 Share mustard 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustard Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustard">Etymology of mustard by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mustard. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustard Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mustard," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustard. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mustard." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustard. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mustard." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustard (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mustard 
 mussy 
 must 
 mustache 
 mustachioed 
 mustang 
 mustard 
 mustee 
 mustelid 
 musteline 
 muster 
 mustn't 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix