URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cricket
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:24:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cricket - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cricket - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cricket 

 cricket (n.1) 

 saltatorial orthopterous insect, early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French criquet "a cricket" (12c.), from criquer "to creak, rattle, crackle," of echoic origin, with a diminutive suffix; The Middle English Compendium says the French word is from Germanic (compare Dutch krekel , German Kreckel ). The earliest uses in English are in reference to the fabulous fire-dwelling salamander (perhaps from the notion of hearth crickets); in reference to the insect, by c. 1500.
 also from early 14c. 

 cricket (n.2) 

 open-air game played by two sides of 11 with bats, balls, and wickets, 1590s, apparently from Old French criquet "goal post, stick," perhaps from Middle Dutch/Middle Flemish cricke "stick, staff," which is perhaps from the same root as crutch . The sense of "fair play" is recorded by 1851, on the notion of "cricket as it should be played."
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to cricket 

 crutch (n.) 

 Middle English crucche , "a support for the lame in walking consisting of a staff of proper length with a crosspiece at one end shaped to fit conveniently under the armpit," from Old English crycce "crutch, staff," from Proto-Germanic *krukjo (source also of Old Saxon krukka , Middle Dutch crucke , Old High German krucka , German Kröcke "crutch," related to Old Norse krokr "hook;" see crook (n.)).

 Figurative sense of "a prop, a support" is first recorded c. 1600. As a verb, from 1640s.

 Century Dictionary writes, "Akin to crook , with which in the Romance languages its derivatives are mingled" (Italian gruccia "crutch," crocco "hook" are Germanic loan-words).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Jiminy 

 Extended form jiminy cricket is attested from 1848, according to OED, and suggests Jesus Christ (compare also Jiminy Christmas...from c. 1901 and taken into the Pinocchio fairy tale by Disney (1940) to answer to Italian Il Grillo Parlante "the talking cricket...

 crease 

 In sports, first in cricket (1779), where originally it was cut into the ground....

 sticky 

 Sticky wicket is 1952, from British slang, in reference to cricket, in reference to the yielding surface when wet....

 bat 

 As a kind of wooden paddle used to play cricket (later baseball), it is attested from 1706....  The phrase right off the bat (1866), also hot from the bat (1870), probably represent a baseball metaphor, but cricket...

 notch 

 Meaning "to mark or score" (1837) is sporting slang, originally in cricket, from the old method of keeping score; notch (...

 wicket 

 Cricket sense of "set of three sticks defended by the batsman" is recorded from 1733; hence many figurative phrases in British...

 grandstand 

 Kelly, "Play Ball," 1888] Compare British gallery hit (1882) "showy play by a batsman in cricket, 'intended to gain applause...

 play 

 Middle English pleien, from Old English plegan, plegian "move lightly and quickly, occupy or busy oneself, amuse oneself; engage in active exercise; frolic; engage in children's play; make sport of, mock; perform music." It is from Proto-West Germanic *plegōjanan "occupy oneself 

 draconian 

 1759, "of or pertaining to Draco," the ancient Greek statesman; 1777, in reference to laws, "rigorous, extremely severe or harsh" (earlier Draconic, which is implied from 1640s). Draco is the Latinized form of Greek Drakon, name of the archon of Athens who laid down a code of law

 schedule 

 late 14c., sedule, cedule "ticket, label, slip of paper with writing on it" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French cedule (Modern French cédule), from Late Latin schedula "strip of paper" (in Medieval Latin also "a note, schedule"), diminutive of Latin scheda, scida "one of the 

 Share cricket 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cricket Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cricket">Etymology of cricket by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cricket. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cricket Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cricket," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cricket. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cricket." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cricket. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cricket." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cricket (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cricket 
 crewel 
 crib 
 cribbage 
 cribriform 
 crick 
 cricket 
 cried 
 crier 
 crikey 
 crime 
 Crimea 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix