URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/calamity
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:11:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Calamity - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Calamity - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of calamity 

 calamity (n.) 

 early 15c., "damage, state of adversity;" 1550s, "a great misfortune or cause of misery," from Old French calamite (14c.), from Latin calamitatem (nominative calamitas ) "damage, loss, failure; disaster, misfortune, adversity," a word of obscure origin.

 Early etymologists associated it with calamus "straw" (see shawm ) on the notion of damage to crops, but this seems folk-etymology. Perhaps it is from a lost root also preserved in incolumis "uninjured," from PIE *kle-mo- , from *kel- "to strike, cut" (see holt ). Calamity Jane was the nickname (attested by 1876) of U.S. frontierswoman, scout, and folk-hero Martha Jane Cannary (c. 1852-1903).
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to calamity 

 holt (n.) 

 Old English holt "woods, forest, grove, thicket," common in place names, from Proto-Germanic *hultam- (source also of Old Frisian, Old Norse, Middle Dutch holt , Dutch hout , German Holz "a wood, wood as timber"), from PIE *kldo- (source also of Old Church Slavonic klada "beam, timber;" Russian koloda , Lithuanian kalada "block of wood, log;" Greek klados "twig;" Old Irish caill "wood"), from root *kel- "to strike, cut."

 shawm (n.) 

 medieval oboe-like instrument, late 14c., shalemyes (plural), also schallemele , from Old French chalemie , chalemel , from Late Latin calamellus , literally "a small reed," diminutive of Latin calamus "reed," from Greek kalamos "reed, grass-stalk," often metaphoric of objects made of reed ("flute of reed, fishing rod, reed pen," etc.).

 The Greek word is from PIE *kole-mo- "grass, reed," source also of Old English healm , Old High German halm "straw;" Latin culmus "stalk;" Old Prussian salme "straw," Latvian salms ; Russian soloma . Sanskrit kalama- "writing reed," Arabic qalam are said by Beekes to have been borrowed from the Greek word.

 Mistaken as a plural and trimmed of its "-s" ending from mid-15c. Perhaps also influenced along the way by Old French muse as the name of a wind instrument (as in the Middle English variant shalmuse ). Related: Shawmist . Shawm also was used as a verb c. 1500, of ducks, "to honk" (make a noise like a shawm).

 calamitous (adj.) 

 "marked by great misfortune," 1540s, from French calamiteux (16c.), from Latin calamitosus "causing loss, destructive; liable to damage or disaster," from calamitas (see calamity ). Related: Calamitously ; calamitousness .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 catastrophe 

 1530s, "reversal of what is expected" (especially a fatal turning point in a drama, the winding up of the plot), from Latin catastropha, from Greek katastrophē "an overturning; a sudden end," from katastrephein "to overturn, turn down, trample on; to come to an end," from kata "d

 disaster 

 "anything that befalls of ruinous or distressing nature; any unfortunate event," especially a sudden or great misfortune, 1590s, from French désastre (1560s), from Italian disastro, literally "ill-starred," from dis-, here merely pejorative, equivalent to English mis- "ill" (see 

 tragedy 

 late 14c., "play or other serious literary work with an unhappy ending," from Old French tragedie (14c.), from Latin tragedia "a tragedy," from Greek tragodia "a dramatic poem or play in formal language and having an unhappy resolution," apparently literally "goat song," from tra

 grief 

 early 13c., "hardship, suffering, pain, bodily affliction," from Old French grief "wrong, grievance, injustice, misfortune, calamity...

 inconvenience 

 c. 1400, "harm, damage; danger; misfortune, affliction," from Old French inconvenience "misfortune, calamity; impropriety...

 perdition 

 .; from Old French perdicion "loss, calamity, perdition" of souls (11c.) and directly from Late Latin perditionem (nominative...

 misfortune 

 A very serious misfortune affecting large numbers is a calamity, the central idea of which is wide-spread and general mischief...

 apocalypse 

 late 14c., "revelation, disclosure," from Church Latin apocalypsis "revelation," from Greek apokalyptein "uncover, disclose, reveal," from apo "off, away from" (see apo-) + kalyptein "to cover, conceal" (from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover, conceal, save"). The Christian end-of-the

 plague 

 late 14c., plage, "affliction, calamity, evil, scourge, severe trouble or vexation;" early 15c., "malignant disease," from Old French plage (14c., Modern French plaie), from Late Latin plaga "affliction; slaughter, destruction," used in Vulgate for "pestilence," from Latin plaga 

 visitation 

 c. 1300, "a visit by an ecclesiastical representative to examine the condition of a parish, abbey, etc.," from Anglo-French visitacioun, Old French visitacion and directly from Latin visitationem (nominative visitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of visitare (see vi

 Share calamity 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/calamity Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/calamity">Etymology of calamity by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of calamity. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/calamity Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of calamity," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/calamity. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of calamity." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/calamity. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of calamity." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/calamity (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near calamity 
 Calais 
 calamari 
 calamine 
 calamint 
 calamitous 
 calamity 
 calash 
 calcaneus 
 calcareous 
 calcify 
 calcite 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close