URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hibernate
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:04:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hibernate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hibernate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hibernate 

 hibernate (v.) 

 "pass the winter in torpidity and seclusion," 1802, probably a back-formation from hibernation . Related: Hibernated ; hibernating .
 also from 1802 

 Entries linking to hibernate 

 hibernation (n.) 

 1660s, "action of passing the winter" (of plants, insect eggs, etc.), from Latin hibernationem (nominative hibernatio ) "the action of passing the winter," noun of action from past participle stem of hibernare "to winter, pass the winter, occupy winter quarters;" related to hiems "winter," from PIE root *gheim- "winter." Meaning "dormant condition of animals" is from 1789.

 *gheim- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "winter." 

 It might form all or part of: chimera ; chiono- ; hiemal ; hibernacle ; hibernal ; hibernate ; hibernation ; Himalaya .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit heman "in winter;" Hittite gimmant- , Armenian jmern , Greek kheima , Latin hiems , Old Church Slavonic zima , Lithuanian žiema "winter;" Greek khion "snow."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 shack 

 Yet another derives it from the verb shack meaning "to hibernate," as a bear or other animal, which is also a variant of...The perhaps-related verb in the "hibernate" sense by 1891 in the U.S....

 sleep 

 Middle English slepen, from Old English slæpan "to be or fall asleep; lie or remain dormant or inactive" (class VII strong verb; past tense slep, past participle slæpen), from Proto-Germanic *slēpanan (source also of Old Saxon slapan, Old Frisian slepa, Middle Dutch slapen, Dutch

 rest 

 [sleep, repose, slumber] Old English ræste, reste "rest; a bed or couch; intermission of labor; mental peace, state of quiet or repose," from Proto-Germanic *rasto- (source also of Old Saxon resta "resting place, burial-place," Dutch rust, Old High German rasta, German Rast "rest

 slumber 

 mid-14c., slomberen, "doze, drowse, sleep lightly," an alteration of slumeren (mid-13c.), frequentative form of slumen "to doze," which is probably from Old English sluma "light sleep" (compare Middle Dutch slumen, Dutch sluimeren, Middle Low German slummern "become drowsy," Germ

 kismet 

 "fate, destiny," 1834, from Turkish qismet, from Arabic qismah, qismat "portion, lot, fate," from root of qasama "he divided." From a nation of enthusiasts and conquerors, the Osmanlis became a nation of sleepers and smokers. They came into Europe with the sword in one hand and 

 spare 

 Middle English sparren, from Old English sparian, Mercian spearian, "refrain from harming or injury, leave undamaged; be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly," from the source of Old English spær "sparing, frugal," from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (source also of Old Saxon sp

 battery 

 1530s, "action of battering," in law, "the unlawful beating of another," from French batterie, from Old French baterie "beating, thrashing, assault" (12c.), from batre "to beat," from Latin battuere (see batter (v.)). The meaning shifted in French from "bombardment" ("heavy blows

 latitude 

 late 14c., "breadth," from Old French latitude (13c.) and directly from Latin latitudo "breadth, width, extent, size," from lātus (adj.) "wide, broad, extensive" Old Latin stlatus, from PIE *stleto-, suffixed form of root *stele- "to spread, to extend" (source also of Old Church 

 poindexter 

 "nerdy intellectual," by 1986, U.S. teenager slang, from the character Poindexter, introduced 1959 in the made-for-TV cartoon version of "Felix the Cat." The name originally was a surname, said to be Norman. There is a rare name Poindexter, appearing in French as Poingdestre, "r

 intelligence 

 late 14c., "the highest faculty of the mind, capacity for comprehending general truths;" c. 1400, "faculty of understanding, comprehension," from Old French intelligence (12c.) and directly from Latin intelligentia, intellegentia "understanding, knowledge, power of discerning; ar

 Share hibernate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hibernate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hibernate">Etymology of hibernate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hibernate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hibernate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hibernate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hibernate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hibernate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hibernate. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hibernate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hibernate (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hibernate 
 hiatal 
 hiatus 
 hibachi 
 hibernacle 
 hibernal 
 hibernate 
 hibernation 
 Hibernia 
 Hibernian 
 Hibernicism 
 hibiscus 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix