URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/turban
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:41:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Turban - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Turban - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of turban 

 turban (n.) 

 1560s, "distinctive headdress of men in Muslim nations, consisting of a scarf or shawl wound around a cap," from French turbant (15c.), from Italian turbante (Old Italian tolipante ), from Turkish tülbent "gauze, muslin, tulle," from Persian dulband "turban."

 Tulip is the same word. According to OED (1989) the change of -l- to -r- may have taken place in Portuguese India and subsequently spread to other European languages. Resemblance to Latin turbo "spinning top, that which whirls" appears coincidental but might have encouraged the form in the European words.

 A men's headdress in Muslim lands, a modification of this was popular in Europe and America c. 1776-1800 as a ladies' fashion and revived from time to time and sometimes used in reference to head coverings of Black women in the U.S. South and West Indies. Related: Turbaned .
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to turban 

 tulip (n.) 

 well-known garden plant blooming in spring with highly colored inverted-bell-shaped flowers, 1570s, via Dutch or German tulpe , French tulipe "a tulip" (16c.), all ultimately from Turkish tülbent "turban," also "gauze, muslin," from Persian dulband "turban;" so called from the fancied resemblance of the flower to a turban.

 Introduced from Turkey to Europe, where the earliest known instance of a tulip flowering in cultivation is 1559 in the garden of Johann Heinrich Herwart in Augsburg; popularized in Holland after 1587 by Clusius. The full form of the Turkish word is represented in Italian tulipano , Spanish tulipan , but the -an tended to drop in Germanic languages, where it was mistaken for a suffix.

 The tulip tree (1705), a towering North American magnolia, is so called from its tulip-shaped flowers. The wood, tulip-wood (1843), was used by cabinet-makers.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tulip 

 1570s, via Dutch or German tulpe, French tulipe "a tulip" (16c.), all ultimately from Turkish tülbent "turban," also "gauze..., muslin," from Persian dulband "turban;" so called from the fancied resemblance of the flower to a turban....

 mitre 

 mid-14c., "bishop's tall hat," from Old French mitre and directly from Latin mitra "headband, turban," from Greek mitra "...headband, turban," earlier a belt or cloth worn under armor about the waist, perhaps from PIE root *mei- "to bind, attach...

 quote 

 late 14c., coten, "to mark or annotate (a book) with chapter numbers or marginal references" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French coter and directly from Medieval Latin quotare "distinguish by numbers, mark off into chapters and verses," from Latin quotus "which in order? what

 desultory 

 1580s, "skipping about, jumping, flitting" in a figurative sense, from Latin desultorius "hasty, casual, superficial," adjective form of desultor (n.) "a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop," from desul-, stem of desilire "jump down," 

 peremptory 

 mid-15c., peremptorie, "absolute, allowing no refusal," a legal term, from Anglo-French peremptorie, from Late Latin peremptorius "destructive, decisive, final," from peremptor "destroyer," agent noun from past-participle stem of Latin perimpere "destroy, cut off," from per "away

 snow 

 Middle English snou, from Old English snaw "snow, that which falls as snow; a fall of snow; a snowstorm," from Proto-Germanic *snaiwaz (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German sneo, Old Frisian and Middle Low German sne, Middle Dutch snee, Dutch sneeuw, German Schnee, Old No

 intimate 

 1630s, "closely acquainted, very familiar," also "inmost, intrinsic," from Late Latin intimatus, past participle of intimare "make known, announce, impress," from Latin intimus "inmost, innermost, deepest" (adj.), also used figuratively, of affections, feelings, and as a noun, "c

 spring 

 Middle English springen, from Old English springan "to leap, leap up, jump;" of a fountain, spring, etc., "burst forth;" also "fly up; spread, grow" (class III strong verb; past tense sprang, past participle sprungen). This is from Proto-Germanic *sprenganan (source also of Old N

 radical 

 late 14c., "originating in the root or ground;" of body parts or fluids, "vital to life," from Latin radicalis "of or having roots," from Latin radix (genitive radicis) "root" (from PIE root *wrād- "branch, root"). The basic sense of the word in all meanings is "pertaining or rel

 perfunctory 

 "done mechanically or without interest or zeal and merely for the sake of being rid of the duty of doing it; done so as to conform to the letter but not the spirit," 1580s, from Late Latin perfunctorius "careless, negligent," literally "like one who wishes to get through a thing,

 Share turban 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/turban Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/turban">Etymology of turban by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of turban. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/turban Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of turban," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/turban. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of turban." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/turban. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of turban." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/turban (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near turban 
 Tupi 
 -tuple 
 tuppence 
 Tupperware 
 tuque 
 turban 
 turbid 
 turbidity 
 turbine 
 turbo- 
 turbocharger 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix