URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cart
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:56:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cart - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cart - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cart 

 cart (n.) 

 c. 1200, "two-wheeled vehicle," usually for one horse and often without springs, from Old Norse kartr or a similar Scandinavian source, akin to and replacing Old English cræt "cart, wagon, chariot," perhaps originally "body of a cart made of wickerwork, hamper" and related to Middle Dutch cratte "woven mat, hamper," Dutch krat "basket," Old English cradol (see cradle (n.)).

 Many old allusions are from the cart being used to convey offenders to the gallows (and sometimes serving as a drop for hangings) or for public exposure, especially of lewd women, either in the cart or tied to its tail. Compare tumbrel . To put the cart before the horse in a figurative sense "reverse the natural or proper order of things" is from 1510s in those words; the image in other words dates to mid-14c.: put the plow (sull) before the oxen .
 also from c. 1200 

 cart (v.) 

 "to carry in a cart," late 14c., from cart (n.). Related: Carted ; carting .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to cart 

 cradle (n.) 

 "baby's bed," usually mounted on rockers or suspended for rocking or swinging, c. 1200, cradel , from Old English cradol "little bed, cot," from Proto-Germanic *kradulaz "basket" (source also of Old High German kratto , krezzo "basket," German Krätze "basket carried on the back").

 Figurative sense of "the place where any person or thing is nurtured in the early stages of existence" is from 1580s. The word also was used from late 14c. in reference to various mechanical devices for holding or hoisting. As "frame of wood with long, curved teeth and a scythe blade for cutting grain and laying it in a straight swath," 1570s. As "rest on a telephone for the receiver when not in use" is from 1903.

 The children's game of cat's-cradle is so called by 1768. Cradle-snatching "amorous pursuit of younger person" is from 1906.

 "It's like cradle-snatching to want to marry a girl of sixteen, and you ought to be ashamed of yourself, for you can't be much more than twenty one yourself." ["Edith Van Dyne" (L. Frank Baum), "Aunt Jane's Nieces Abroad," 1906]

 tumbrel (n.) 

 late 14c., "low, two-wheeled cart used by farmers for hauling dung, stones, etc.," earlier an instrument of punishment of uncertain type (mid-14c.), from Old French tomberel "dump cart, wheeled cart designed to tip backward to empty its load" (Modern French tombereau ), from tomber "(let) fall or tumble."

 This is possibly from a Germanic source (compare Old Norse tumba "to tumble," Old High German tumon "to turn, reel;" see tumble (v.)). Notoriously the carts conveying victims to the guillotine during the Reign of Terror (illustrations often show large four-wheeled carts, not true tumbrels).

 cartage 
 carter 
 cart-horse 
 cart-way 
 cartwheel 
 cartwright 
 go-cart 
 push-cart 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 haul 

 "pull or draw forcibly," 1580s, hall, variant of Middle English halen "to drag, pull" (see hale (v.)). Spelling with -au- or -aw- is from early 17c. Related: Hauled; hauling. To haul off "pull back a little" before striking or otherwise acting is American English, 1802....1660s, 

 hale 

 "in good health, robust," Old English hal "healthy, sound, safe; entire; uninjured; genuine, straightforward," from Proto-Germanic *hailaz (source also of Old Frisian hel "complete, full; firm" (of ground), Old High German heil, Old Norse heill "hale, sound," Gothic hails "hale")

 drag 

 late 14c., draggen, "to draw a grapnel along the bottom of a river, lake, etc., in search of something;" late 15c., "to draw away by force, pull haul," from Old Norse draga, or a dialectal variant of Old English dragan "to draw," both from Proto-Germanic *draganan "to draw, pull,

 dray 

 late-14c., draie, "strong wheeled or wheel-less cart," from Old English dræge or some other noun derivative from dragan "...to draw" and originally meaning a cart without wheels that has to be "dragged" (compare Old Norse draga "timber dragged behind...Modern sense of "low, strong cart with stout wheels and without sides, used for carrying heavy loads" is from 1580s....

 bin 

 Probably from Gaulish, from Old Celtic *benna, and akin to Welsh benn "a cart," especially one with a woven wicker body....The same Celtic word seems to be preserved in Italian benna "dung cart," French benne "grape-gatherer's creel," Dutch benne..."large basket," all of which are from Late Latin benna "cart," Medieval Latin benna "basket."...

 Surrey 

 Meaning "two-seated, four-wheeled pleasure carriage" is from 1895, short for Surrey cart, an English pleasure cart (introduced...

 charette 

 also charrette, c. 1400, "a chariot, a cart," from Old French charrete "wagon, small cart" (12c.), diminutive of charre,...

 grip 

 Old English grippan "to grip, seize, obtain" (class I strong verb; past tense grap, past participle gripen), from West Germanic *greipanan (source also of Old High German gripfen "to rob," Old English gripan "to seize;" see gripe (v.)). Related: Gripped; gripping. French gripper 

 prig 

 "a conceited, narrow-minded pragmatical person; a dull, precise person; one who cultivates or affects propriety and offends or bores others," 1753, originally in reference to theological scruples (1704), a word of unknown origin. It could be related to earlier appearances of the 

 truck 

 "vehicle," 1610s, originally "small wheel" (especially one on which the carriages of a ship's guns were mounted), probably from Latin trochus "iron hoop," from Greek trokhos "wheel," from trekhein "to run" (see truckle (n.)). Sense extended to "cart for carrying heavy loads" (177

 Share cart 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cart Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cart">Etymology of cart by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cart. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cart Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cart," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cart. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cart." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cart. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cart." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cart (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cart 
 carry 
 carry on 
 carry-all 
 carry-out 
 car-sick 
 cart 
 cartage 
 carte blanche 
 carte de visite 
 cartel 
 carter 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close