URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/methylene
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T15:58:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Methylene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Methylene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of methylene 

 methylene (n.) 

 hydrocarbon radical occurring in many compounds, 1835, from French méthylène (1834), coined by Jean-Baptiste-André Dumas (1800-1884) and Eugène-Melchior Péligot (1811-1890) from Greek methy "wine" (see mead (n.1)) + hylē "wood" (which is of uncertain etymology) + Greek name-forming element -ene . So called because it was detected in wood alcohol.

 "The breakdown of methylene into methyl and -ene , and the identification of the last syllable of methyl with the general suffix -yl , led to the use of meth- as a separate combining-element, as, for example, in methane , methacrylic " [Flood]. The color methylene-blue (1880) was derived from dimethylanaline.
 also from 1835 

 Entries linking to methylene 

 mead (n.1) 

 "a strong liquor made from fermented honey and water," a favorite beverage of England in the Middle Ages, Middle English mede , from Old English medu , from Proto-Germanic *meduz , from PIE root *medhu- "honey, sweet drink."

 This root is reconstructed also as the source of Sanskrit madhu "sweet, sweet drink, wine, honey," Greek methy "wine," Old Church Slavonic medu , Lithuanian medus "honey," Old Irish mid , Welsh medd , Breton mez "mead." Germanic cognates include Old Norse mjöðr , Danish mjød , Old Frisian and Middle Dutch mede , Old High German metu , German Met "mead."

 The synonymous early Middle English meþeglin yielded Chaucer's hornes ful of meeth .

 ethylene (n.) 

 poisonous, flammable gas, 1852, from ethyl + -ene , probably suggested by methylene .

 methyl 
 -yl 
 -ene 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 group 

 1690s, originally an art criticism term, "assemblage of figures or objects forming a harmonious whole in a painting or design," from French groupe "cluster, group" (17c.), from Italian gruppo "group, knot," which probably is, with Spanish grupo, from a Germanic source, from Proto

 radical 

 late 14c., "originating in the root or ground;" of body parts or fluids, "vital to life," from Latin radicalis "of or having roots," from Latin radix (genitive radicis) "root" (from PIE root *wrād- "branch, root"). The basic sense of the word in all meanings is "pertaining or rel

 moment 

 late 14c., "very brief portion of time, instant," in moment of time, from Old French moment (12c.) "moment, minute; importance, weight, value" and directly from Latin momentum "movement, motion; moving power; alteration, change;" also "short time, instant" (also source of Spanish

 symptom 

 "a departure from normal function or form as an expression or evidence of a disease," late 14c., sinthoma, from Medieval Latin sinthoma "symptom of a disease," altered from Late Latin symptoma, from Greek symptoma "a happening, accident, disease," from stem of sympiptein "to befa

 tutor 

 late 14c., "guardian, custodian," from Old French tuteor "guardian, private teacher" (13c., Modern French tuteur), from Latin tutorem (nominative tutor) "guardian, watcher," from tutus, variant past participle of tueri "watch over, look at," a word of uncertain origin. De Vaan su

 ease 

 c. 1200, "physical comfort, undisturbed state of the body; tranquility, peace of mind," from Old French aise "comfort, pleasure, well-being; opportunity," which is of uncertain origin. According to Watkins is ultimately from Latin adiacens "lying at," present participle of adiace

 obvious 

 1580s, "frequently met with" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin obvius "that is in the way, presenting itself readily, open, exposed, commonplace," from obviam (adv.) "in the way," from ob "in front of, against" (see ob-) + viam, accusative of via "way" (from PIE root *wegh- "to 

 museum 

 1610s, "the university building in Alexandria," from Latin museum "library, study," from Greek mouseion "place of study, library or museum, school of art or poetry," originally "a temple or shrine of the Muses," from Mousa "Muse" (see muse (n.)). The earliest use in reference to 

 appreciate 

 1650s, "to esteem or value highly," from Late Latin appretiatus, past participle of appretiare "to set a price to," from ad "to" (see ad-) + pretium "price" (see price (n.)). The meaning "to rise in value" (intransitive) is by 1787; the sense of "be fully conscious of" is by 1833

 shebang 

 1862 (Whitman), "hut, shed, shelter," American English slang, popularized among soldiers in the U.S. Civil War, but like much of the soldier's slang (e.g. skedaddle, shoddy), it is of uncertain origin. Perhaps it is an alteration of shebeen (q.v.), but shebang meaning "tavern," a

 Share methylene 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/methylene Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/methylene">Etymology of methylene by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of methylene. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/methylene Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of methylene," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/methylene. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of methylene." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/methylene. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of methylene." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/methylene (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near methylene 
 methodize 
 methodological 
 methodology 
 Methusela 
 methyl 
 methylene 
 metic 
 meticulous 
 meticulously 
 meticulousness 
 metier 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix