URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/jackal
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:36:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Jackal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Jackal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of jackal 

 jackal (n.) 

 c. 1600, from French chacal , earlier jackal , from Turkish çakal , from Persian shaghal , from or cognate with Sanskrit srgala-s , literally "the howler." Figurative sense of "skulking henchman" is from the old belief that jackals stirred up game for lions.
 also from c. 1600 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dragon 

 size and fierceness; it translates Hebrew tannin "a great sea-monster," and tan, a desert mammal now believed to be the jackal...

 log 

 unshaped large piece of tree, early 14c., of unknown origin. Old Norse had lag "felled tree" (from stem of liggja "to lie," hence "a tree that lies prostrate"), but many etymologists deny on phonological grounds that this can be the root of English log. Instead, they suggest an i

 harlequin 

 1580s, Harlicken, one of the stock characters of Italian commedia dell'arte, from Italian Arlecchino or one of its variants (Arlechin, Arlechì, etc.) A 19th century theory proposes it to be from Old French Herlequin, Hellequin, etc., leader of la maisnie Hellequin (the household 

 hybrid 

 c. 1600, "offspring of plants or animals of different variety or species," from Latin hybrida, variant of ibrida "mongrel," specifically "offspring of a tame sow and a wild boar," of unknown origin but probably from Greek and somehow related to hubris. A rare word before the gene

 fail 

 c. 1200, "be unsuccessful in accomplishing a purpose;" also "cease to exist or to function, come to an end;" early 13c. as "fail in expectation or performance," from Old French falir "be lacking, miss, not succeed; run out, come to an end; err, make a mistake; be dying; let down,

 iron 

 Middle English iron, iren, yron, from Old English iren, variant (with rhotacism of -s-) of isen, later form of isern, isærn "the metal iron; an iron weapon or instrument," from Proto-Germanic *isarn (source also of Old Saxon isarn, Old Frisian isern, Old Norse isarn, Middle Dutch

 figure 

 c. 1200, "numeral;" mid-13c., "visible appearance of a person;" late 14c., "visible and tangible form of anything," from Old French figure "shape, body; form of a word; figure of speech; symbol, allegory" (10c), from Latin figura "a shape, form, figure; quality, kind, style; figu

 consent 

 c. 1300, "agree, give assent; yield when one has the right, power, or will to oppose," from Old French consentir "agree; comply" (12c.) and directly from Latin consentire "agree, accord," literally "feel together," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + sentir

 gibbous 

 c. 1400, "bulging, convex," from Late Latin gibbus "hunchbacked," from Latin gibbus "a hump, a hunch," as an adjective, "bulging," from Proto-Italic *gifri- "hump," *gifro- "hump-backed," of uncertain origin. De Vaan suggests a PIE *geibh-, with possible cognates in Lithuanian ge

 Knickerbocker 

 "descendant of Dutch settlers of New York," 1831, from Diedrich Knickerbocker, the name under which Washington Irving published his popular "History of New York" (1809). The pen-name was borrowed from Irving's friend Herman Knickerbocker, and literally means "toy marble-baker," f

 Share jackal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/jackal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/jackal">Etymology of jackal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of jackal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/jackal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of jackal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jackal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of jackal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jackal. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of jackal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/jackal (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near jackal 
 Jack 
 Jack Frost 
 Jack Ketch 
 Jack Russell 
 Jack Sprat 
 jackal 
 jackanapes 
 jackaroo 
 jackass 
 jackboot 
 jackdaw 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix