URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/obey
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:26:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Obey - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Obey - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of obey 

 obey (v.) 

 c. 1300, obeien , "carry out the commands of (someone); submit to (a command, rule, etc.); be ruled by," from Old French obeir "obey, be obedient, do one's duty" (12c.), from Latin obedire , oboedire "obey, be subject, serve; pay attention to, give ear," literally "listen to," from ob "to" (see ob- ) + audire "listen, hear" (from PIE root *au- "to perceive"). Same sense development is in  hiersumnian , the Old English word for the same thing. Related: Obeyed ; obeying .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to obey 

 disobedience (n.) 

 "neglect or refusal to obey," c. 1400, from Old French desobedience , from Vulgar Latin *disobedientia (replacing Latin inobedientia ) from Latin dis- (see dis- ) + oboedientia "obedience," abstract noun from oboedientem (nominative oboediens ), present participle of oboedire "to obey" (see obey ). The English word replaced earlier desobeissance in this sense, and inobedience (c. 1200).

 disobedient (adj.) 

 "neglecting or refusing to obey, refractory, not submitting to the rules or regulations prescribed by authority," early 15c., dysobedyent , from Old French desobedient , from Vulgar Latin *disobedientem (replacing Latin inobedientem ) from Latin dis- (see dis- ) + oboedientem (nominative oboediens ), present participle of oboedire "to obey" (see obey ). Related: Disobediently . Earlier in the same sense was disobeissant (late 14c.), from Old French desobeissant , and inobedient (early 14c.).

 disobey 
 obedience 
 obedient 
 obeisance 
 *au- 
 ob- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 disobey 

 late 14c., disobeien, "neglect or refuse to obey," from Old French desobeir (13c.) "disobey; refuse service or homage," from Vulgar Latin *disoboedire, reformed with dis- (see dis-) from Late Latin inobedire, a back-formation from inobediens "not obeying," from Latin in- "not" + 

 obedience 

 c. 1200, "the practice or virtue of submission to a higher power or authority;" late 14c., "dutiful compliance with a command or law," from Old French obedience "obedience, submission" (12c.), from Latin oboedientia "obedience," abstract noun from oboedientem (nominative oboedien

 obeisance 

 late 14c., obeisaunce, "act or fact of obeying, submissiveness, quality of being compliant or dutiful; respectful submission, homage," from Old French obeissance "obedience, service, feudal duty" (13c.), from obeissant, present participle of obeir "to obey," from Latin oboedire "

 transparent 

 "show light through," from Latin trans "across, beyond; through" (see trans-) + parere "come in sight, appear; submit, obey...

 recusant 

 "obstinate in refusal," 1610s, from Latin recusantem (nominative recusans) "refusing to obey," present participle of recusare...

 appear 

 apparere "to appear, come in sight, make an appearance," from ad "to" (see ad-) + parere "to come forth, be visible; submit, obey...

 follow 

 especially as a disciple), move in the same direction as; follow after, pursue, move behind in the same direction," also "obey...Sense of "accept as leader or guide, obey or be subservient to" was in late Old English....

 mind 

 "that which feels, wills, and thinks; the intellect," late 12c., mynd, from Old English gemynd "memory, remembrance; state of being remembered; thought, purpose; conscious mind, intellect, intention," Proto-Germanic *ga-mundiz (source also of Gothic muns "thought," munan "to thin

 listen 

 Old English hlysnan (Northumbrian lysna) "to listen, hear; attend to, obey" (transitive), from Proto-Germanic *hlusinon (source also of Dutch luisteren, Old High German hlosen "to listen," German lauschen "to listen"), from PIE root *kleu- "to hear." This root is the source also 

 tinsel 

 mid-15c., "a kind of cloth made with interwoven gold or silver thread," from Anglo-French tencele, Old French estencele, estincelle "spark, spangle" (see stencil (n.)). "In 14-15th c. Fr., the s of es- had long been mute" [OED]. Meaning "very thin sheets or strips of shiny metal"

 Share obey 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/obey Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/obey">Etymology of obey by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of obey. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/obey Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of obey," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/obey. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of obey." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/obey. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of obey." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/obey (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near obey 
 obeisance 
 obelisk 
 Oberon 
 obese 
 obesity 
 obey 
 obfuscate 
 obfuscation 
 Obie 
 obit 
 obiter dictum 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix