URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nun
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:22:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nun - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nun - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nun 

 nun (n.) 

 Old English nunne "woman devoted to religious life under vows of celibacy, poverty, and obedience to a superior," also "vestal, pagan priestess," from Late Latin nonna "nun, tutor," originally (along with masc. nonnus ) a term of address to elderly persons, perhaps from children's speech, reminiscent of nana (compare Sanskrit nona , Persian nana "mother," Greek nanna "aunt," Serbo-Croatian nena "mother," Italian nonna , Welsh nain "grandmother;" see nanny ).

 Entries linking to nun 

 nanny (n.) 

 "children's nurse," 1795, from the widespread child's word for "female adult other than mother" (compare Greek nanna "aunt," and see nana ). The word also is a nickname form of the fem. proper name Ann , which probably is the sense in nanny-goat "female goat" (1706, compare billy-goat ). Nanny-house "brothel" is slang from c. 1700. Nanny state , in reference to overintrusive government policies is attested by 1987, the term is associated with British political leader Margaret Thatcher, who criticized the tendency. Nannyism in reference to actions or policies considered unduly protective is by 1959; also compare the verb.

 nunnery (n.) 

 late 13c., nonnerie , "nunhood, the life of nuns," from nun + -ery or from Old French nonnerie . Meaning "convent or cloister for the exclusive use of nuns" is from c. 1300. Transferred meaning "house of ill fame" is attested by 1590s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 now 

 interjection and as an introductory word; from Proto-Germanic *nu (source also of Old Norse nu, Dutch nu, Old Frisian nu, German nun...Gothic nu "now"), from PIE *nu "now" (source also of Sanskrit and Avestan nu, Old Persian nuram, Hittite nuwa, Greek nu, nun...

 vixen 

 Solitary English survival of the Germanic feminine suffix -en, -in (also in Old English gyden "goddess;" mynecen "nun," from...

 ringer 

 An early 13c. text has belle ringestre "nun who rings the convent bell."...

 bun 

 hare" (1530s) in Scottish and northern England dialect and was transferred to human beings (and conveniently rhymed with nun...

 cell 

 early 12c., "small monastery, subordinate monastery" (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later "small room for a monk or a nun...

 past 

 [Faulkner, "Requiem for a Nun," 1950]...

 resist 

 late 14c., resisten, of persons, "withstand (someone), oppose;" of things, "stop or hinder (a moving body);" from Old French resister "hold out against" (14c.) and directly from Latin resistere "to make a stand against, oppose; to stand back; withstand," from re- "against" (see r

 sister 

 mid-13c., suster, "female sibling, a female person in her relation to other children of the same parents," from Old English sweostor, swuster, Northumbrian soester "sister," or a Scandinavian cognate (Old Norse systir, Swedish syster, Danish søster), in any case from Proto-German

 religious 

 c. 1200, "devout, pious, imbued with or expressive of religious devotion," used of Christians, Jews, pagans; also "belonging to a religious order," from Anglo-French religius, Old French religious (12c., Modern French religieux) and directly from Latin religiosus, "pious, devout,

 letter 

 c. 1200, "graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character conveying information about sound in speech," from Old French letre "character, letter; missive, note," in plural, "literature, writing, learning" (10c., Modern French lettre), from Latin littera (also litera) "letter o

 Share nun 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nun Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nun">Etymology of nun by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nun. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nun Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nun," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nun. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nun." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nun. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nun." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nun (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nun 
 Numidia 
 numinous 
 numismatic 
 numismatics 
 numismatist 
 nun 
 nuncheon 
 nuncio 
 nunnery 
 nuptial 
 nuptials 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix