URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/episode
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:38:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Episode - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Episode - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of episode 

 episode (n.) 

 1670s, "commentary between two choric songs in a Greek tragedy," also "an incidental narrative or digression within a story, poem, etc.," from French épisode or directly from Greek epeisodion "an episode," literally "an addition," noun use of neuter of epeisodios "coming in besides," from epi "in addition" (see epi- ) + eisodos "a coming in, entrance" (from PIE root *en "in").

 The second element is a compound of eis "into" + hodos "a way, path; a journey; a method, system," a word of uncertain origin (see Exodus ). Transferred sense of "outstanding incident, experience" first recorded in English 1773. Transferred by 1930s to individual broadcasts of serial radio programs.
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to episode 

 Exodus 

 late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus , from Greek exodos "a military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death," literally "a going out," from ex "out" (see ex- ) + hodos "a way, path, road; a ride, journey, march," figuratively "way out, means," a word of uncertain origin.

 The book is so called because it tells of the departure of the Israelites from Egypt under the leadership of Moses. General sense (with lower-case -e- ) "departure from a place," especially "the migration of large bodies of people or animals from one country or region to another," is from 1620s.

 Beekes derives the Greek word from PIE *sod- "course" and says it is traditionally connected with Slavic words for "course" (such as Russian xod "course, progress," "which might have been borrowed from Iranian") and adds that it is perhaps also related to Sanskrit a-sad- "to tread on, go on," Avestan apa-had- "to go away; become weak," "but the relation between them is unclear, as is the connection to the PIE root *sed- "sit" (proposed in Watkins, etc.)."

 episodic (adj.) 

 1711, from episode + -ic . Episodical is from 1660s.

 *en 
 epi- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sequence 

 late 14c., in church music, a composition said or sung after the Alleluia and before the Gospel, from Old French sequence "answering verses" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin sequentia "a following, a succession," from Latin sequentem (nominative sequens), present participl

 installment 

 also instalment, 1580s, "induction into office, act of installing," from install + -ment...."a partial payment on account of debt due," 1776, earlier "the arrangement of payment" (1732), an alteration of Anglo-French estaler "to fix payments," from Old French estal "fixed positio

 cliff-hanger 

 In some U.S. continued-next-week silent cinema serials in the "Perils of Pauline" days, the episode often ended with the...

 monsoon 

 It also brings heavy rain, hence the meaning "heavy episode of rainfall during the rainy season" (1747)....

 pilot 

 an adjective, 1788 as "pertaining to a pilot;" from 1928 as "serving as a prototype," thus the noun pilot meaning "pilot episode...

 affair 

 The meaning "an affair of the heart; a passionate episode" is from French affaire de coeur (itself attested as a French phrase...

 period 

 Sense of "episode of menstruation" is by 1829, probably short for period of menstruation (1808), etc....

 chapter 

 c. 1200, "main division of a book," from Old French chapitre (12c.) "chapter (of a book), article (of a treaty), chapter (of a cathedral)," alteration of chapitle, from Late Latin capitulum "main part, chapter of a book," in Medieval Latin also "a synod or council," literally "li

 incident 

 early 15c., "something which occurs casually in connection with something else," from Old French incident (13c.), and directly from Latin incidentem (nominative incidens), present participle of incidere "to fall in, fall, find the way; light upon, fall in with; fall upon, occur; 

 section 

 late 14c., seccioun, in astronomy, "the intersection of two straight lines; a division of a scale;" from Old French section and directly from Latin sectionem (nominative sectio) "a cutting, cutting off, division," noun of action from past-participle stem of secare "to cut" (from 

 Share episode 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/episode Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/episode">Etymology of episode by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of episode. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/episode Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of episode," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/episode. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of episode." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/episode. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of episode." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/episode (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near episode 
 epiphyte 
 episcopacy 
 episcopal 
 Episcopalian 
 episiotomy 
 episode 
 episodic 
 epistasis 
 epistaxis 
 epistemic 
 epistemology 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix