URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/caramel
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:03:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caramel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Caramel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of caramel 

 caramel (n.) 

 1725, "burnt sugar," from French caramel "burnt sugar" (17c.), from Old Spanish caramel (modern caramelo ), which is of uncertain origin, probably ultimately from Medieval Latin cannamellis , which is traditionally from Latin canna (see cane (n.)) + mellis , genitive of mel "honey" (from PIE root *melit- "honey"). But some give the Medieval Latin word an Arabic origin, or trace it to Latin calamus "reed, cane."

 The word was being used by 1884 of a dark-colored creamy candy and by 1909 as a color-name.
 also from 1725 

 Entries linking to caramel 

 cane (n.) 

 late 14c., "long slender woody stem," from Old French cane "reed, cane, spear" (13c., Modern French canne ), from Latin canna "reed, cane," from Greek kanna , perhaps from Babylonian-Assyrian qanu "tube, reed" (compare Hebrew qaneh , Arabic qanah "reed"), which may come from Sumerian-Akkadian gin "reed." The sense of "length of cane used as a walking stick" is from 1580s.

 caramelize (v.) 

 "convert into caramel," 1837, from caramel + -ize . Earlier was past-participle adjective carameled (1727). Related: Caramelized ; caramelizing .

 *melit- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "honey."

 It might form all or part of: caramel ; marmalade ; Melissa ; mellifluous ; mildew ; molasses ; mousse .

 It might also be the source of: Greek meli , Latin mel "honey; sweetness;" Albanian mjal' "honey;" Old Irish mil "honey," Irish milis "sweet;" Old English mildeaw "nectar," milisc "honeyed, sweet;" Old High German milsken "to sweeten;" Gothic miliþ "honey."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 buff 

 kind of thick, soft leather, 1570s, buffe leather "leather made of buffalo hide," from  French buffle "buffalo" (15c., via Italian, from Latin bufalus; see buffalo (n.)). The color term "light brownish-yellow" (by 1788) comes via the hue of buff leather. The old association 

 cracker-jack 

 The caramel-coated popcorn-and-peanuts confection was said to have been introduced at the World's Columbian Exposition (1893...

 Argus 

 hundred-eyed giant of Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Argos, literally "the bright one," from argos "shining, bright" (from PIE root *arg- "to shine; white"). His epithet was Panoptes "all-eyes." After his death, Hera transferred his eyes to the peacock's tail.

 brown 

 Old English brun "dark, dusky," developing a definite color sense from 13c., from Proto-Germanic *brunaz (source also of Old Norse brunn, Danish brun, Old Frisian and Old High German brun, Dutch bruin, German braun), from PIE root *bher- (2) "bright; brown." The Old English word 

 candy 

 late 13c., "crystallized sugar," from Old French çucre candi "sugar candy," ultimately from Arabic qandi, from Persian qand "cane sugar," probably from Sanskrit khanda "piece (of sugar)," perhaps from Dravidian (compare Tamil kantu "candy," kattu "to harden, condense"). The sense

 raw 

 Middle English raue, from Old English hreaw, hreow "uncooked," from Proto-Germanic *khrawaz (source also of Old Norse hrar, Danish raa, Old Saxon hra, Middle Dutch rau, Dutch rauw, Old High German hrawer, German roh), from PIE root *kreue- "raw flesh." Of skin, "tender, sore, abr

 sienna 

 brownish-ochre color, by 1760 (terra-sienna), from Italian terra di Sienna "earth of Siena," region in Italy where the coloring material first was produced from a type of earth mined there. It is used as a pigment in both oil and watercolor painting. See Siena. Burnt sienna is t

 refugee 

 1680s, "one who flees to a refuge or shelter or place of safety; one who in times of persecution or political disorder flees to a foreign country for safety," from French refugié, a noun use of the past participle of refugier "to take shelter, protect," from Old French refuge "hi

 clock 

 "machine to measure and indicate time mechanically" (since late 1940s also electronically), late 14c., clokke, originally "clock with bells," probably from Middle Dutch clocke (Dutch klok) "a clock," from Old North French cloque (Old French cloke, Modern French cloche "a bell"), 

 appeal 

 early 14c., appelen, originally in the legal sense, to "call" to a higher judge or court, from Anglo-French apeler "to call upon, accuse," Old French apeler "make an appeal" (11c., Modern French appeler), from Latin appellare "to accost, address, appeal to, summon, name," iterati

 Share caramel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/caramel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/caramel">Etymology of caramel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of caramel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/caramel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of caramel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caramel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of caramel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caramel. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of caramel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/caramel (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near caramel 
 carabineer 
 carabinieri 
 Caracas 
 carafe 
 caramba 
 caramel 
 caramelize 
 carapace 
 carat 
 caravan 
 caravansary 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close