URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hunch
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:52:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hunch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hunch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hunch 

 hunch (v.) 

 "raise or bend into a hump," 1650s; earlier "to push, thrust" (c. 1500), of unknown origin. Perhaps a variant of bunch (v.). Related: Hunched ; hunching .
 also from 1650s 

 hunch (n.) 

 1620s, "a push, a thrust," from hunch (v.) in its older sense. The figurative meaning "a hint, a tip" (a "push" toward a solution or answer), is recorded by 1849 and led to that of "premonition, presentiment" (by 1904).
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to hunch 

 bunch (v.) 

 late 14c., "to bulge out," from bunch (n.). The meaning "to gather up in a bunch" (transitive) is from 1828; sense of "to crowd together" (intransitive) is from 1850. Related: Bunched ; bunching .

 hunchback (n.) 

 "person with a hunched back," 1712, back-formation from hunchbacked (1590s; see hunch ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hump 

 1680s (in hump-backed), of uncertain origin; perhaps from Dutch homp "lump," from Middle Low German hump "bump," from Proto-Germanic *hump-, from PIE *kemb- "to bend, turn, change, exchange" (see change (v.)). Replaced, or perhaps influenced by, crump, from Old English crump. A m

 intuition 

 mid-15c., intuicioun, "insight, direct or immediate cognition, spiritual perception," originally theological, from Late Latin intuitionem (nominative intuitio) "a looking at, consideration," noun of action from past participle stem of Latin intueri "look at, consider," from in- "

 suspicion 

 c. 1300, suspecioun, "act of suspecting; unverified conjecture of wrongdoing; mistrust, distrust with but slight proof; feeling or passion excited by signs of danger," from Anglo-French suspecioun, corresponding to Old French suspicion, sospeçon "mistrust, suspicion" (Modern Fren

 gibbous 

 c. 1400, "bulging, convex," from Late Latin gibbus "hunchbacked," from Latin gibbus "a hump, a hunch," as an adjective, "...

 science 

 It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition....

 earth 

 Old English eorþe "ground, soil, dirt, dry land; country, district," also used (along with middangeard) for "the (material) world, the abode of man" (as opposed to the heavens or the underworld), from Proto-Germanic *ertho (source also of Old Frisian erthe "earth," Old Saxon erth

 heart 

 Old English heorte "heart (hollow muscular organ that circulates blood); breast, soul, spirit, will, desire; courage; mind, intellect," from Proto-Germanic *hertan- (source also of Old Saxon herta, Old Frisian herte, Old Norse hjarta, Dutch hart, Old High German herza, German Her

 impression 

 late 14c., "mark produced by pressure," also "image produced in the mind or emotions by something external," from Old French impression "print, stamp; a pressing on the mind" (13c.), from Latin impressionem (nominative impressio) "a pressing into, onset, attack," figuratively "a 

 belief 

 late 12c., bileave, "confidence reposed in a person or thing; faith in a religion," replacing Old English geleafa "belief, faith," from West Germanic *ga-laubon "to hold dear, esteem, trust" (source also of Old Saxon gilobo, Middle Dutch gelove, Old High German giloubo, German Gl

 opinion 

 early 14c., opinioun, "a judgment formed or a conclusion reached, especially one based on evidence that does not produce knowledge or certainty," from Old French opinion "opinion, view, judgements founded upon probabilities" (12c.), from Latin opinionem (nominative opinio) "opini

 Share hunch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hunch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hunch">Etymology of hunch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hunch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hunch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hunch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hunch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hunch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hunch. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hunch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hunch (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hunch 
 Humpty-dumpty 
 humus 
 humvee 
 Hun 
 Hunan 
 hunch 
 hunchback 
 hundred 
 hundredfold 
 hundredth 
 hundredweight 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close