URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/acoustic
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:42:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Acoustic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Acoustic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of acoustic 

 acoustic (adj.) 

 c. 1600, "pertaining to hearing or sound," from French acoustique , from Latinized form of Greek akoustikos "pertaining to hearing," from akoustos "heard, audible," verbal adjective from akouein "to hear," which probably is from copulative prefix a- (see a- (3)) + koein "to mark, perceive, hear" (from PIE root *kous- "to hear," which is also the presumed source of English hear ).

 In reference to material meant to deaden sound, 1924. Of sound reproduced mechanically (rather than electrically) from 1932 in reference to gramophone players; acoustic guitar (as distinguished from electric ) is attested by 1958. Related: Acoustical ; acoustically .
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to acoustic 

 hear (v.) 

 Old English heran (Anglian), (ge)hieran, hyran (West Saxon) "to hear, perceive by the ear, listen (to), obey, follow; accede to, grant; judge," from Proto-Germanic *hausejanan (source also of Old Norse heyra , Old Frisian hera, hora , Dutch horen , German hören , Gothic hausjan "to hear"), from PIE root *kous- "to hear" (source also of Greek koein "to mark, perceive, hear;" see acoustic ). The shift from *-s- to -r- is a regular feature in some Germanic languages. For the vowels, see head (n.).

 Spelling distinction between hear and here developed 1200-1550. Meaning "be told, learn by report" is from early 14c. Old English also had the excellent adjective hiersum "ready to hear, obedient," literally "hear-some" with suffix from handsome , etc. Hear, hear! (1680s) originally was imperative, an exclamation to call attention to a speaker's words ( "hear him!" ); now a general cheer of approval. To not hear of "have nothing to do with" is from 1754.

 acoustics (n.) 

 1680s, "the science of sound," from acoustic ; also see -ics . The meaning "acoustic properties" of a building, etc., is attested from 1885.

 presbycousis 
 a- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cure 

 c. 1300, "care, heed," from Latin cura "care, concern, trouble," with many figurative extensions over time such as "study; administration; office of a parish priest; a mistress," and also "means of healing, successful remedial treatment of a disease" (late 14c.), from Old Latin c

 therapeutic 

 pertaining to the healing of disease, 1640s, from Modern Latin therapeuticus "curing, healing," from Greek therapeutikos, from therapeutein "to cure, treat medically," primarily "do service, take care of, provide for," of unknown origin, related to therapon "attendant." Therapeut

 remedy 

 c. 1200, remedie, "means of counteracting sin or evil of any kind; cure for a vice or temptation;" late 14c., "a cure for a disease or disorder, medicine or process which restores health;" from Anglo-French remedie, Old French remede "remedy, cure" (12c., Modern French remède) an

 electric 

 1640s, first used in English by physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), apparently coined as Modern Latin electricus (literally "resembling amber") by English physicist William Gilbert (1540-1603) in treatise "De Magnete" (1600), from Latin electrum "amber," from Greek ēlektron 

 method 

 early 15c., "regular, systematic treatment of disease," from Latin methodus "way of teaching or going," from Greek methodos "scientific inquiry, method of inquiry, investigation," originally "pursuit, a following after," from meta "in pursuit or quest of" (see meta-) + hodos "a m

 ecstasy 

 late 14c., extasie "elation," from Old French estaise "ecstasy, rapture," from Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis "entrancement, astonishment, insanity; any displacement or removal from the proper place," in New Testament "a trance," from existanai "displace, put out of plac

 bruise 

 Old English brysan "to crush, pound, injure by a blow which discolors the skin," from Proto-Germanic *brusjan, from PIE root *bhreu- "to smash, cut, break up" (source also of Old Irish bronnaim "I wrong, I hurt;" Breton brezel "war," Vulgar Latin *brisare "to break"). It merged b

 act 

 late 14c., "a thing done," from Latin actus "a doing; a driving, impulse, a setting in motion; a part in a play," and actum "a thing done" (originally a legal term), both from agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform," figuratively "incite to action; 

 succor 

 c. 1200, socour, earlier socours "aid, help," from Anglo-French succors "help, aid," Old French socors, sucurres "aid, help, assistance" (Modern French secours), from Medieval Latin succursus "help, assistance," from past participle of Latin succurrere "run to help, hasten to the

 Sabbath 

 Middle English sabat, from Old English sabat "seventh day of the week in the Jewish calendar; Saturday" as observed by the Jews as a day of rest from secular employment and of religious observance, from Old French sabat and directly from Latin sabbatum, from Greek sabbaton, from 

 Share acoustic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/acoustic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/acoustic">Etymology of acoustic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of acoustic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/acoustic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of acoustic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/acoustic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of acoustic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/acoustic. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of acoustic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/acoustic (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near acoustic 
 acold 
 acolyte 
 acomia 
 aconite 
 acorn 
 acoustic 
 acoustics 
 acquaint 
 acquaintance 
 acquainted 
 acquiesce 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix