URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/spider
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Spider - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Spider - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of spider 

 spider (n.) 

 late 14c., spydyr , spither , earlier spiþre , spiþur , spiþer (mid-14c.), from Old English spiðra , from Proto-Germanic *spin-thron- (cognate with Danish spinder ), etymologically "spinner," from PIE root *(s)pen- "to draw, stretch, spin" + formative or agential *-thro . The connection with the root is more transparent in other Germanic cognates, such as Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Middle High German, German spinne , Dutch spin "spider."

 The loss of -n- before spirants is regular in Old English (compare goose (n.), tooth ). For shift of -th- to -d- compare murder (n.), burden (n.), rudder ; also see D .

 The male is commonly much smaller than the female, and in impregnating the female runs great risk of being devoured. The difference in sizes is as if the human female should be some 60 or 70 feet tall. [Century Dictionary entry for "spider"] 

 Not the common word in Old or Middle English, which identified the creatures as loppe  (Chaucer's usual word), lobbe . Old English also had atorcoppe (Middle English attercop , literally "poison-head"), and (from Latin aranea ), renge ; Middle English had araine , "spider," via Old French from the same Latin word (see arachnid ). Another Old English word was gangewifre "a weaver as he goes."

 In literature, often a figure of cunning, skill, and industry as well as venomous predation; in 17c. English used figuratively for venomousness and thread-spinning but also sensitivity (to vibrations), lurking, and independence. As the name for a type of two-pack solitaire, it is attested from 1890, probably based on resemblance of the layout of the decks in the original form of the game (see "Tarbart," "Games of Patience," 1901, p. 49).

 Spider crab is from 1710, used of various species with long, slender legs and comparatively small bodies; the spider monkey (1764) is so called for its long limbs. Spider-catcher (1570s) was an old vague term of abuse.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to spider 

 arachnid (n.) 

 1854, "a spider," from French arachnide (1806) or Modern Latin Arachnida (plural), the zoological name for the class of arthropods including spiders, scorpions, and mites, introduced as a class-name 1815 by French biologist Jean Baptiste Pierre Antoine de Monet de Lamarck, from Latinized form of Greek arakhnē (fem.) "spider; spider's web," which probably is cognate with Latin aranea "spider, spider's web," from aracsna , which is of unknown origin.

 The Latin word could be a borrowing of the Greek one, or both could be from a common root. Beekes writes, "As the word looks non-IE and since it is limited to these two languages, it is probably a borrowing." Latin aranea is the source of common words for "spider" in French ( araignée , Old French araigne ), Spanish ( araña ), Italian ( aragna ), etc. It also was borrowed in Old English as renge "spider;" Middle English had araine "spider" (late 14c., from Old French), which survived in dialect as arain , noted in John Ray's "Collection of English Words" (1768) as a Nottinghamshire word for "the larger kind of spiders." Also compare araneology .

 Earlier noun forms were arachnidian (1828), arachnidan (1843). As adjectives, arachnidean (1853), arachnidian (1854), arachnidial (1877), arachnidal (1850), arachnidous (1833) have been used.

 burden (n.1) 

 "a load, that which is borne or carried," Old English byrðen "a load, weight, charge, duty;" also "a child;" from Proto-Germanic *burthinjo- "that which is borne" (source also of Old Norse byrðr , Old Saxon burthinnia , German bürde , Gothic baurþei ), from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear children."

 The shift from -th- to -d- began early 12c. (compare murder (n.), rudder , afford ). Archaic burthen is occasionally retained for the specific sense of "capacity of a ship." Beast of burden is from 1740. Burden of proof (Latin onus probandi ) "obligation on one party in an action to establish an alleged fact by proof" is recorded from 1590s.

 D 
 goose 
 murder 
 rudder 
 tooth 
 spiderling 
 spiderman 
 spider-plant 
 spider-web 
 spidery 
 *(s)pen- 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 goose 

 "a large waterfowl proverbially noted, I know not why, for foolishness" [Johnson], Old English gos "a goose," from Proto-Germanic *gans- "goose" (source also of Old Frisian gos, Old Norse gas, Old High German gans, German Gans "goose"), from PIE *ghans- (source also of Sanskrit h

 rudder 

 mid-15c. (late 12c. as a surname), a variation or alteration of Middle English rother, from Old English roðor "paddle, oar," from Proto-Germanic *rothru- (source also of Old Frisian roðer, Middle Low German roder, Middle Dutch roeder, Dutch roer, Old High German ruodar, German Ru

 tooth 

 Old English toð (plural teð), from Proto-Germanic *tanthu- (source also of Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish, Dutch tand, Old Norse tönn, Old Frisian toth, Old High German zand, German Zahn, Gothic tunþus), from PIE root *dent- "tooth." Plural teeth is an instance of i-mutation. The los

 attercop 

 "spider," Middle English atter-coppe, from Old English atorcoppe "spider," literally "poison-head," from ator "poison, venom...German eiz "abscess, boil;" Old English atorcræft "art of poisoning") + copp "top, summit, round head," probably also "spider..." (compare cobweb and Dutch spinne-cop "spider")....

 cobweb 

 "a spider's web," early 14c., coppewebbe; the first element is Old English -coppe, in atorcoppe "spider," literally "poison-head...Cob as a stand-alone for "a spider" was an old word nearly dead even in dialects when J.R.R....

 chelicerae 

 piercing appendages in the proboscis of a scorpion or spider, 1831, plural of Modern Latin chelicera, from Greek khēlē "crab...

 tuffet 

 LITTLE Miss Muffet Sat on a tuffet And made of her knees such display That the old fashioned spider, Embarrassed...

 skillet 

 c. 1400, skellet, "pan used for boiling or frying," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French escuelette "a little dish" (Modern French écuelle), diminutive of escuele "plate," from Latin scutella "serving platter" (see scuttle (n.)); or formed in English from skele "wo

 tarantula 

 1560s, "wolf spider," (Lycos tarantula), from Medieval Latin tarantula, from Italian tarantola, from Taranto "Taranto," seaport city in southern Italy in the region where the spiders are frequently found, from Latin Tarentum, from Greek Taras (genitive Tarantos; perhaps from Illy

 program 

 1630s, "public notice," from Late Latin programma "proclamation, edict," from Greek programma "a written public notice," from stem of prographein "to write publicly," from pro "forth" (see pro-) + graphein "to write" (see -graphy).  The meaning "written or printed list of pi

 Share spider 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/spider Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/spider">Etymology of spider by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of spider. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/spider Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of spider," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spider. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of spider." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/spider. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of spider." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/spider (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near spider 
 spice-cake 
 spicer 
 spick-and-span 
 spicule 
 spicy 
 spider 
 spiderling 
 spiderman 
 spider-plant 
 spider-web 
 spidery 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix