URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/vinegar
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:16:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Vinegar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Vinegar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of vinegar 

 vinegar (n.) 

 diluted impure acetic acid, early 14c., vinegre , usually "wine vinegar," from Anglo-French vinegre , Old French vinaigre "vinegar," from vin "wine" (from Latin vinum ; see wine (n.)) + aigre "sour" (see eager ). In Latin, it was vinum acetum "wine turned sour," acetum for short (see acetic ), also used figuratively for "wit, shrewdness;" and compare Greek oxos "wine vinegar," which is related to oxys "sharp" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce"). Related: Vinegary ; vinegarish .
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to vinegar 

 acetic (adj.) 

 1808 (in acetic acid ), from French acétique "pertaining to vinegar, sour, having the properties of vinegar," from Latin acetum "vinegar" (properly vinum acetum "wine turned sour;" see vinegar ), originally the past participle of acere "be sharp; be sour" (related to acer "sharp," from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce").

 eager (adj.) 

 late 13c., "strenuous, ardent, fierce, angry," from Old French aigre "sour, acid; harsh, bitter, rough; eager greedy; lively, active, forceful," from Vulgar Latin *acrus (source also of Italian agro , Spanish agrio ), from Latin acer "keen, sharp, pointed, piercing; acute, ardent, zealous" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce").

 The meaning "full of keen desire" (early 14c.) seems peculiar to English. Into 19c. the word kept a secondary meaning of "pungent, sharp-edged" (as in Shakespeare's "The bitter clamour of two eager tongues," in "Richard II"). Related: Eagerly ; eagerness . Eager beaver "glutton for work" [OED, 1989] is from 1943, U.S. armed forces slang.

 wine 
 ester 
 vinaigrette 
 vinaigrous 
 *ak- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wine 

 Old English win "wine," from Proto-Germanic *winam (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German win, Old Norse vin, Dutch wijn, German Wein), an early borrowing from Latin vinum "wine," from PIE *uoin-a-, related to words for "wine" in other southern European languages

 ester 

 compound formed by an acid joined to an alcohol, 1852, coined in German in 1848 by German chemist Leopold Gmelin (1788-1853), professor at Heidelberg. The name is "apparently a pure invention" [Flood], perhaps a contraction of or abstraction from Essigäther, the German name for e

 marinade 

 "a pickle for fish or meat, generally of wine and vinegar with herbs and spices," 1704, from French marinade "spiced vinegar...

 prairie-oyster 

 "salted and peppered raw egg, drunk in booze or vinegar," by 1878, American English, from prairie + oyster (in reference...Into a wine glass pat a new-laid egg ; add half a tea-spoonful of vinegar, dropping it gently down on the inside of the glass...the size of a threepenny-piece; pepper according to taste, The way to take this should be by placing the glass with the vinegar...The vinegar being the last gives it more of an oyster-like flavour....

 tarragon 

 Its aromatic leaves long have been used for flavoring (especially vinegar)....

 gallimaufry 

 "hash, ragout, dish made of odds and ends," from Old French galimafree, calimafree "sauce made of mustard, ginger, and vinegar...

 condiment 

 condiment (13c.), from Latin condimentum "spice, seasoning, sauce," from condire "to preserve, pickle, season, put fruit in vinegar...

 gorgeous 

 c. 1500, "splendid, showy, sumptuously adorned" (of clothing), from French gorgias "elegant, fashionable," a word of unknown origin; perhaps a special use of gorgias "necklace" (and thus "fond of or resembling jewelry"), from Old French gorge "throat," also "something adorning th

 certain 

 c. 1300, "determined, fixed," from Old French certain "reliable, sure, assured" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *certanus, extended form of Latin certus "determined, resolved, fixed, settled," of things whose qualities are invariable, "established," also "placed beyond doubt, sure, tru

 beer 

 alcoholic drink made from grain (generally barley), infused with hops and boiled and fermented, Middle English ber, from Old English beor "strong drink, beer, mead," cognate with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier; a West Germanic wor

 Share vinegar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/vinegar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/vinegar">Etymology of vinegar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of vinegar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/vinegar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of vinegar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vinegar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of vinegar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/vinegar. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of vinegar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/vinegar (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near vinegar 
 vindicator 
 vindicatory 
 vindictive 
 vindictiveness 
 vine 
 vinegar 
 Vineland 
 vineyard 
 viniculture 
 Vinland 
 vino 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix