URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/attitude
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T22:54:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Attitude - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Attitude - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of attitude 

 attitude (n.) 

 1660s, "posture or position of a figure in a statue or painting," via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine "disposition, posture," also "aptness, promptitude," from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo ; see aptitude , which is its doublet).

 Originally 17c. a technical term in art; later generalized to "a posture of the body supposed to imply some mental state" (1725). The sense of "a settled behavior reflecting feeling or opinion" is by 1837. The meaning "habitual mode of regarding" is short for attitude of mind (1757). Connotations of "antagonistic and uncooperative" developed by 1962 in slang.

 Attitude is generally studied for the sake of looking graceful ; hence it is sometimes affected, the practice of it being then called 
 attitudinizing . An 
 attitude is often taken intentionally for the purpose of imitation or exemplification ; generally 
 attitude is more artistic than 
 posture . [Century Dictionary]
 also from 1660s 

 Entries linking to attitude 

 aptitude (n.) 

 early 15c., "tendency, likelihood," from Late Latin aptitudo (genitive aptitudinis ) "fitness," noun of quality from Latin aptus "joined, fitted" (see apt ). The meaning "natural capacity to learn" is by 1540s; that of "state or quality of being fit (for a purpose or position)" is from 1640s. Related: Aptitudinal . A doublet of attitude .

 attitudinal (adj.) 

 "pertaining to attitude," 1831; see attitude + -al (1), and compare -tude .

 attitudinize 
 tude 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 position 

 late 14c., posicioun, as a term in logic and philosophy, "statement of belief, the laying down of a proposition or thesis," from Old French posicion "position, supposition" (Modern French position) and directly from Latin positionem (nominative positio) "act or fact of placing, s

 posture 

 c. 1600, "position, situation; disposition of the several parts of anything with respect to one another or a particular purpose," especially of the body, "pose," from French posture (16c.), from Italian postura "position, posture," from Latin positura "position, station," from po

 repentance 

 turning from sin to righteousness; the Bible word most often translated repentance means a change of mental and spiritual attitude...

 defensive 

 Meaning "posture or attitude of defense" is from c. 1600....

 slouch 

 1754, "walk, sit, or pose with a loose gait or attitude;" 1755 as "have a downcast or stooped aspect;" from slouch (n.)....

 Maginot Line 

 After the fall of France in 1940, for the next 40 years or so the phrase was associated with a mental attitude of obsessive...

 spite 

 c. 1300, "feeling or attitude of contempt, insolent disdain;" also "a humiliation, act of insult or ridicule; a shortened...

 respect 

 late 14c., "relationship, relation; regard, consideration" (as in in respect to), from Old French respect and directly from Latin respectus "regard, a looking at," literally "act of looking back (or often) at one," noun use of past participle of respicere "look back at, regard, c

 scepter 

 "staff of office peculiar to royalty or independent sovereignty," c. 1300, ceptre, from Old French ceptre, sceptre (12c.) and directly from Latin sceptrum "royal staff," from Greek skēptron "staff to lean on," in a Persian and Asian context, "royal scepter," in transferred use, "

 petrous 

 c. 1400, in anatomy, "very hard, dense," from Old French petros (Modern French petreux) and directly from Latin petrosus "stony," from petra "rock," from Greek petra "rock, cliff, ledge, shelf of rock, rocky ridge," a word of unknown etymology (Beekes says it is "probably Pre-Gre

 Share attitude 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/attitude Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/attitude">Etymology of attitude by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of attitude. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/attitude Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of attitude," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/attitude. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of attitude." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/attitude. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of attitude." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/attitude (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near attitude 
 attestation 
 attested 
 Attic 
 Attica 
 attire 
 attitude 
 attitudinal 
 attitudinise 
 attitudinize 
 atto- 
 attorn 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix