URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fugitive
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:14:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fugitive - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fugitive - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fugitive 

 fugitive (n.) 

 late 14c., "one who flees, a runaway, a fugitive from justice, an outlaw," from fugitive (adj.). Old French fugitif also was used as a noun meaning "fugitive person," and Latin fugitivus (adj.) commonly also was used as a noun meaning "a runaway, fugitive slave, deserter."
 also from late 14c. 

 fugitive (adj.) 

 late 14c., "fleeing, having fled, having taken flight," from Old French fugitif , fuitif "absent, missing," from Latin fugitivus "fleeing," past-participle adjective from stem of fugere "to flee, fly, take flight, run away; become a fugitive, leave the country, go into exile; pass quickly; vanish, disappear, perish; avoid, shun; escape the notice of, be unknown to," from PIE root *bheug- "to flee" (source also of Greek pheugein "to flee, escape, go into exile, be on the run," phyza "(wild) flight, panic," phyge "flight, exile;" Lithuanian būgstu, būgti "be frightened," bauginti "frighten someone," baugus "timid, nervous;" perhaps also Avestan būj(i)- "penance, atonement," būjat "frees"). Old English had flyma .

 Meaning "lasting but a short time, fleeting" is from c. 1500. Hence its use in literature for short compositions written for passing occasions or purposes (1766).
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to fugitive 

 centrifugal (adj.) 

 "flying off or proceeding out from a center," 1690s, with adjectival suffix -al (1) + Modern Latin centrifugus , 1687, coined by Sir Isaac Newton in "Principia" (which is written in Latin), from Latin centri- , alternative combining form of centrum "center" (see center (n.)) + fugere "to flee" (see fugitive (adj.)). Centrifugal force is Newton's vis centrifuga .

 febrifuge (n.) 

 "medicine that reduces fever," 1680s, from French fébrifuge , literally "driving fever away," from Latin febris (see fever ) + fugare "cause to flee, put to flight, drive off, chase away, rout," also used in reference to banishment and exile, derived verb from fuga "flight," which is reconstructed to be from a suffixed form of PIE root *bheug- (1) "to flee" (see fugitive (adj.)).

 fugacious 
 fugue 
 lucifugous 
 refuge 
 refugee 
 subterfuge 
 vermifuge 
 -fuge 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fugue 

 type of musical composition, 1590s, fuge, from Italian fuga, literally "flight," also "ardor," from Latin fuga "a running away, act of fleeing," from fugere "to flee" (see fugitive (adj.)). Current English spelling (1660s) is from the French version of the Italian word. A Fugue 

 refuge 

 "shelter or protection from danger, assistance in distress," late 14c., from Old French refuge "hiding place" (12c.), from Latin refugium "a taking refuge; a place of refuge, place to flee back to," from re- "back" (see re-) + fugere "to flee" (see fugitive (adj.)) + -ium neuter 

 refugee 

 1680s, "one who flees to a refuge or shelter or place of safety; one who in times of persecution or political disorder flees to a foreign country for safety," from French refugié, a noun use of the past participle of refugier "to take shelter, protect," from Old French refuge "hi

 maroon 

 "fugitive black slave living in the wilder parts of Dutch Guyana or Jamaica and other West Indies islands" (1660s), earlier...symeron (1620s), from French marron, simarron, said to be a corruption of Spanish cimmaron "wild, untamed, unruly, fugitive..." (as in Cuban negro cimarron "a fugitive black slave")....

 overtake 

 According to OED, originally "the running down and catching of a fugitive or beast of chase"; the editors find the sense...

 runaway 

 1540s (late 13c. as a surname), "one who flees or departs; a fugitive, deserter," from the verbal phrase run away "flee in...

 capoeira 

 Said to be from Tupi ka'a "forest" + pau "round," referring to the scrubby areas in the Brazilian interior where fugitive...

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 outlaw 

 Old English utlaga "one put outside the law" (and thereby deprived of its benefits and protections), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse utlagi (n.) "outlaw," from utlagr (adj.) "outlawed, banished," from ut "out" (see out (adv.)) + *lagu, plural of lag "law" (see law). 

 Share fugitive 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fugitive Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fugitive">Etymology of fugitive by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fugitive. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fugitive Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fugitive," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fugitive. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fugitive." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fugitive. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fugitive." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fugitive (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fugitive 
 fuel 
 fug 
 fugacious 
 fugal 
 -fuge 
 fugitive 
 fugleman 
 fugly 
 fugue 
 Fuhrer 
 Fuji 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix