URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/poet
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:07:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Poet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Poet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of poet 

 poet (n.) 

 "one endowed with the gift and power of imaginative invention and creation, attended by corresponding eloquence of expression, commonly but not necessarily in a metrical form" [Century Dictionary, 1895], early 14c., "a poet, an author of metrical compositions; one skilled in the art of making poetry; a singer" (c. 1200 as a surname), from Old French poete (12c., Modern French poète ) and directly from Latin poeta "a poet," from Greek poētēs "maker, author, poet," variant of poiētēs , from poein , poiein "to make, create, compose."

 This is reconstructed [Watkins] to be from PIE *kwoiwo- "making," from root *kwei- "to pile up, build, make" (source also of Sanskrit cinoti "heaping up, piling up," Old Church Slavonic činu "act, deed, order").

 A POET is as much to say as a maker. And our English name well comformes with the Greeke word : for of [poiein] to make, they call a maker Poeta. [Puttenham, "Arte of English Poesie," 1589] 

 It isn't what [a poet] 
 says that counts as a work of art, it's what he makes, with such intensity of perception that it lives with an intrinsic movement of its own to verify its authenticity. [William Carlos Williams, 1944] 

 It replaced Old English scop (which survives in scoff ). It was used in 14c., as in classical languages, in reference to all writers or composers of works of literature. In 16c.-17c. often Englished as maker .

 Poète maudit , "a poet insufficiently appreciated by his contemporaries," literally "cursed poet," is attested by 1930, from French (1884, Verlaine). For poet laureate see laureate .

 also from 1895 

 Entries linking to poet 

 laureate (adj.) 

 "crowned with laurels" (as a mark of distinction), late 14c., earliest reference is to poetic distinction, from Latin laureatus "crowned with laurels," from laurea "laurel crown" (emblematic of victory or distinction in poetry), from fem. of laureus "of laurel," from laurus "laurel" (see laurel (n.)).

 A poet laureate is one who has been publicly crowned with laurels by a sovereign or other eminent person in recognition of merits. Laureat poete is first found in Chaucer's "Canterbury Tales" (in reference to Petrarch — Fraunceys Petrak ); it also was used in Middle English of Aesop and, by early 15c., of Chaucer himself. The first official one probably was Ben Jonson (1638), though the first recorded one was Dryden (1668). The inverted form poet laureate , in imitation of Latin word order, is attested in English from c. 1400.

 As a noun, laureate is by 1520s, from the adjective or from a mistaken reading of poet laureate . Extended 1947 to Nobel prize winners. Related: Laureateship (1732), laureation .

 scoff (v.) 

 mid-14c., "jest, make light of something;" mid-15c., "ridicule, mock," from a noun meaning "contemptuous ridicule" (c. 1300), which is from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skaup , skop "mockery, ridicule," Middle Danish skof "jest, mockery;" perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub- , *skuf- (source also of Old English scop "poet," Old High German scoph "fiction, sport, jest, derision"), from PIE *skeubh- "to shove" (see shove (v.)). Related: Scoffed; scoffing .

 cheetah 
 logopoeia 
 mythopoeic 
 onomatopoeia 
 phanopoeia 
 pharmacopeia 
 poem 
 poesy 
 poetaster 
 poetess 
 poetic 
 poetry 
 prosopopeia 
 -poietic 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cheetah 

 "large, spotted cat of India," 1704, from Hindi chita "leopard," from Sanskrit chitraka "hunting leopard, tiger," literally "speckled," from chitra-s "distinctively marked, variegated, many-colored, bright, clear" (from PIE *kit-ro-, from root *skai- "to shine, gleam, be bright;"

 logopoeia 

 a quality in poetic writing that charges words with meaning based on context and prior usage, a term introduced, along with phanopoeia (visual image) and melopoeia (sound), by Ezra Pound from Greek logopoeia, from logos "word" (see Logos) + poiein "to make, create" (see poet). [

 onomatopoeia 

 "formation of words or names by imitation of natural sounds; the naming of something by a reproduction of the sound made by it or a sound associated with it," 1570s, from Late Latin onomatopoeia, from Greek onomatopoiia "the making of a name or word" (in imitation of a sound asso

 wood 

 madness," German wut "rage, fury"), from PIE *wet- (1) "to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse;" source of Latin vates "seer, poet...," Old Irish faith "poet;" "with a common element of mental excitement" [Buck]....

 skald 

 "Scandinavian poet and singer of medieval times," 1763, from Old Norse skald "skald, poet" (9c.), a word of unknown origin...

 bard 

 "ancient Celtic minstrel-poet," mid-15c., from Scottish, from Old Celtic bardos "poet, singer," from Celtic *bardo-, possibly...Subsequently idealized by Scott in the more ancient sense of "lyric poet, singer."...

 typewriter 

 It is the advantage of the typewriter that, due to its rigidity and its space precisions, it can, for a poet, indicate exactly...For the first time the poet has the stave and the bar a musician has had....

 author 

 mid-14c., auctor, autour, autor "father, creator, one who brings about, one who makes or creates" someone or something, from Old French auctor, acteor "author, originator, creator, instigator" (12c., Modern French auteur) and directly from Latin auctor "promoter, producer, father

 brad 

 "small flat nail having instead of a head a slight projection on one side," late 13c., brod, from Old Norse broddr "spike, point, arrow," from Proto-Germanic *brozda- (source also of Old English brord "point, prick, blade of grass," Old High German brort "point, edge, crown"), fr

 drab 

 1715, "yellowish-gray; of the color of natural, undyed cloth," from the trade name for the color itself (1680s), which is from an earlier noun drab, drap meaning "thick, woolen cloth of a yellowish-gray color" (1540s), from French drap "cloth, piece of cloth" (see drape (v.)). Th

 Share poet 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/poet Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/poet">Etymology of poet by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of poet. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/poet Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of poet," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poet. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of poet." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poet. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of poet." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/poet (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near poet 
 podiatry 
 podium 
 Podunk 
 poem 
 poesy 
 poet 
 poetaster 
 poetess 
 poetic 
 poetry 
 po-face 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix