URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dungeon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:58:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dungeon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dungeon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dungeon 

 dungeon (n.) 

 c. 1300, "great tower of a castle," from Old French donjon "great tower of a castle" (12c.), from Gallo-Roman *dominionem , from Late Latin dominium , from Latin dominus "master" (of the castle), from domus "house" (from PIE root *dem- "house, household"), so called probably for its commanding position or strength. Sense of "castle keep" led to that of "strong (underground) cell" in English early 14c. The original sense went with the variant donjon .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to dungeon 

 donjon (n.) 

 early 14c., dongoun , "inner tower, keep, or stronghold of a castle," also "underground prison cell in a donjon of a castle;" see dungeon .

 danger (n.) 

 mid-13c., daunger , "arrogance, insolence;" c. 1300, "power of a lord or master, jurisdiction," from Anglo-French daunger , Old French dangier "power, power to harm, mastery, authority, control" (12c., Modern French danger ), alteration (due to association with damnum ) of dongier , from Vulgar Latin *dominarium "power of a lord," from Latin dominus "lord, master," from domus "house" (from PIE root *dem- "house, household").

 Modern sense of "risk, peril, exposure to injury, loss, pain, etc." (from being in the control of someone or something else) evolved first in French and was in English by late 14c. For this, Old English had pleoh ; in early Middle English this sense is found in peril . For sound changes, compare dungeon , which is from the same source.

 *dem- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "house, household." It represents the usual Indo-European word for "house" (Italian, Spanish casa are from Latin casa "cottage, hut;" Germanic *hus is of obscure origin).

 It might form all or part of: Anno Domini ; belladonna ; condominium ; dame ; damsel ; dan "title of address to members of religious orders;" danger ; dangerous ; demesne ; despot ; Dom Perignon ; domain ; dome ; domestic ; domesticate ; domicile ; dominate ; domination ; dominion ; domino ; don (n.) "Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese title of respect;" Donna ; dungeon ; ma'am ; madam ; madame ; mademoiselle ; madonna ; major-domo ; predominant ; predominate ; timber ; toft .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit damah "house;" Avestan demana- "house;" Greek domos "house," despotēs "master, lord;" Latin domus "house," dominus "master of a household;" Armenian tanu-ter "house-lord;" Old Church Slavonic domu , Russian dom "house;" Lithuanian dimstis "enclosed court, property;" Old Norse topt "homestead."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 keep 

 Middle English kēpen, from late Old English cepan (past tense cepte) "to seize, hold; seek after, desire," also "to observe or carry out in practice; look out for, regard, pay attention to," from Proto-Germanic *kopjan, which is of uncertain origin. Old English cepan was used c. 

 oubliette 

 "secret dungeon reached only via trapdoor and with an opening only at the top for admission of air," 1780, originally in...

 cage 

 cage "cage, prison; retreat, hideout" (12c.), from Latin cavea "hollow place, enclosure for animals, coop, hive, stall, dungeon...

 prison 

 late Old English, prisoun, "place of confinement or involuntary restraint, dungeon, jail," from Old French prisoun "captivity...

 lock 

 lok "enclosure, prison, concealed place," Old Norse lok "fastening, lock," Gothic usluks "opening," Old High German loh "dungeon...

 cell 

 early 12c., "small monastery, subordinate monastery" (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later "small room for a monk or a nun in a monastic establishment; a hermit's dwelling" (c. 1300), from Latin cella "small room, store room, hut," related to Latin celare "to hide, conceal" 

 castle 

 late Old English castel "village" (this sense from a biblical usage in Vulgar Latin); later "large building or series of connected buildings fortified for defense, fortress, stronghold" (late Old English), in this sense from Old North French castel (Old French chastel, 12c.; Mode

 sibling 

 "brother or sister," 1903, a modern revival (originally in anthropology) of Middle English and Old English sibling "relative, kinsman or kinswoman," from sibb "kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness," from Proto-Germanic *sibja- "blood relation, relative," prop

 curmudgeon 

 "churlish, miserly fellow, mean man," 1570s, of unknown origin. Drant (1568) translating Gregory of Nazianus, calls someone "a bolde curmogine chuffe." Liberman says the word "must have been borrowed from Gaelic" (and references muigean "disagreeable person"), with variant spelli

 fox 

 Old English fox "a fox," from Proto-Germanic *fuhsaz "fox" (cognates Old Saxon vohs, Middle Dutch and Dutch vos, Old High German fuhs, German Fuchs, Old Norse foa, Gothic fauho), from Proto-Germanic *fuh-, from PIE *puk- "tail" (source also of Sanskrit puccha- "tail"). The bushy 

 Share dungeon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dungeon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dungeon">Etymology of dungeon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dungeon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dungeon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dungeon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dungeon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dungeon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dungeon. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dungeon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dungeon (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dungeon 
 dunderhead 
 dundrearies 
 dune 
 dung 
 dungaree 
 dungeon 
 dunghill 
 dunk 
 Dunker 
 Dunkirk 
 dunno 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix