URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sign
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:04:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sign - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sign - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sign 

 sign (n.) 

 early 13c., signe , "gesture or motion of the hand," especially one meant to express thought or convey an idea, from Old French signe "sign, mark," from Latin signum "identifying mark, token, indication, symbol; proof; military standard, ensign; a signal, an omen; sign in the heavens, constellation."

 According to Watkins, literally "standard that one follows," from PIE *sekw-no- , from root *sekw- (1) "to follow." De Vaan has it from PIE *sekh-no- "cut," from PIE root *sek- "to cut" He writes: "The etymological appurtenance to seco 'to cut' implies a semantic shift of *sek-no- 'what is cut out', 'carved out' > 'sign'." But he also also compares Hebrew sakkin , Aramaic sakkin "slaughtering-knife," and mentions a theory that "both words are probably borrowed from an unknown third source."

 It has ousted native token . By c. 1300 as "an indication of some coming event." The meaning "a visible mark or device having some special meaning" is recorded from late 13c.; that of "miraculous manifestation, a miracle demonstrating divine power" is from c. 1300. In reference to one of the 12 divisions of the zodiac, from mid-14c.

 The sense of "inscribed board with a characteristic device attached to the front of an inn, shop, etc.," to distinguish it from others is recorded from mid-15c. The meaning "indicator, token or signal of some condition" (late 13c.) is behind sign of the times (1520s). The meaning "conventional mark or symbol in place of words" (in music, mathematics, etc., as in plus sign) is by 1550s. In some uses, the word probably is a shortening of ensign . 
 also from early 13c. 

 sign (v.) 

 early 13c., signen , "to make the sign of the cross," from Old English segnian and Old French signier "to make a sign (to someone); to mark," both of them from Latin signare "to set a mark upon, mark out, designate; mark with a stamp; distinguish, adorn;" figuratively "to point out, signify, indicate," from signum "identifying mark, sign" (see sign (n.)).

 The sense of "to mark, stamp" is attested from mid-14c.; that of "affix one's name or signature to" is from late 15c. The meaning "communicate by hand signs, make known by significant motion" is recorded from 1700.

 Transitive sense in baseball, "engage (a player) by the signing of an agreement" is by 1889. To sign out (transitive) "secure the release of (someone or something) by signing" is attested by 1963, of library books. The intransitive sense of "record one's departure" is recorded by 1951. Related: Signed; signing.
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to sign 

 ensign (n.) 

 early 15c., "a token, sign, symbol; badge of office, mark or insignia of authority or rank;" also "battle flag, flag or banner of a ship or troop of soldiers," via Scottish, from Old French enseigne (12c.) "mark, symbol, signal; flag, standard, pennant," from Latin insignia (plural); see insignia , which is a doublet of this word. As the word for the soldier who carries the flag, 1510s. U.S. Navy sense of "commissioned officer of the lowest rank" is from 1862. French navy had rank of enseigne de vaisseau at least since early 18c. Until 1871 one of the lowest grades of commissioned officers in a British army infantry regiment, also a rank in the American Revolutionary army.

 token (n.) 

 Old English tacen "sign, symbol, evidence, portent" (related to verb tæcan "show, explain, teach"), from Proto-Germanic *taikna- (source also of Old Saxon tekan , Old Norse teikn "zodiac sign, omen, token," Old Frisian tekan , Middle Dutch teken , Dutch teken , Old High German zeihhan , German zeichen , Gothic taikn "sign, token"). According to Watkins, this is from PIE root *deik- "to show," also "pronounce solemnly." Compare, from the same root, German  zeigen  "to show," Old English  teon  "to accuse,"

 Also in late Old English as "observable characteristic or action indicating an inner state; means of identifying a person." By c. 1200 of physical objects representing an action, state, deity, etc.; "keepsake, that which serves as a reminder." From late 14c. as "act performed in recognition of a contract or agreement; public, symbolic display or act." The meaning "coin-like piece of stamped metal" is by 1590s.

 The Middle English sense of "evidence, support for a belief" is retained in by the same token (mid-15c.), a phrase used in introducing a corroborative circumstance, according to Century Dictionary "almost equivalent to 'this in testimony.' "

 assign 
 assignation 
 consign 
 cosign 
 countersign 
 design 
 designate 
 designation 
 insignia 
 resign 
 sain 
 seal 
 sigil 
 sign language 
 signage 
 signal 
 signatory 
 signature 
 See All Related Words (33) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 assign 

 c. 1300, "to transfer, convey, bequeath (property); appoint (to someone a task to be done); order, direct (someone to do something); fix, settle, determine; appoint or set (a time); indicate, point out," from Old French assigner "assign, set (a date, etc.); appoint legally; allot

 assignation 

 early 14c., assignacioun, "appointment by authority," from Old French assignacion (14c., Modern French assignation), from Latin assignationem (nominative assignatio) "an assigning, allotment," noun of action from past-participle stem of assignare/adsignare "to mark out, to allot 

 consign 

 mid-15c. (implied in consigned), "to ratify or certify by a sign or seal," from French consigner (15c.) and directly from Latin consignare "to seal, register," originally "to mark with a sign," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + signare "to sign, mark," fr

 semiotic 

 marking," also "observant of signs," adjective form of sēmeiosis "indication," from sēmeioun "to signal, to interpret a sign...," from sēmeion "a sign, mark, token," from sēma "sign" (see semantic)....

 semantic 

 applied by Michel Bréal (1883) to the psychology of language, from Greek sēmantikos "significant," from sēmainein "to show by sign..., signify, point out, indicate by a sign," from sēma "sign, mark, token; omen, portent; constellation; grave" (Doric sama...

 mark 

 "trace, impression," Old English mearc (West Saxon), merc (Mercian) "boundary, limit; sign, landmark," from Proto-Germanic...*markō (source also of Old Norse merki "boundary, sign," mörk "forest," which often marked a frontier; Old Frisian merke...The primary sense "boundary" had evolved by Old English through "pillar, post, etc. as a sign of a boundary," through "a...sign in general," then to "impression or trace forming a sign."...

 subscribe 

 early 15c., "to sign at the bottom of a document," from Latin subscribere "write, write underneath, sign one's name; register...

 opposition 

 late 14c., opposicioun, an astrological term for the situation of two heavenly bodies exactly across from one another in the heavens, from Old French oposicion (12c.) and directly from Latin oppositionem (nominative oppositio) "act of opposing, a placing against," noun of action 

 motion 

 late 14c., mocioun, "process of moving; change of place, continuous variation of position;" also "suggestion, proposal or proposition formally made," from Old French mocion "movement, motion; change, alteration" (13c., Modern French motion) and directly from Latin motionem (nomin

 write 

 Old English writan "to score, outline, draw the figure of," later "to set down in writing" (class I strong verb; past tense wrat, past participle writen), from Proto-Germanic *writan "tear, scratch" (source also of Old Frisian writa "to write," Old Saxon writan "to tear, scratch,

 Share sign 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sign Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sign">Etymology of sign by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sign. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sign Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sign," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sign. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sign." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sign. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sign." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sign (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sign 
 Sigismund 
 sigma 
 sigmatism 
 sigmoid 
 sigmoidoscope 
 sign 
 sign language 
 signage 
 signal 
 signalize 
 signatory 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix