URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chemistry
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chemistry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chemistry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chemistry 

 chemistry (n.) 

 c. 1600, "alchemy," from chemist + -ry ; also see chemical (adj.). The meaning "natural physical process" is from 1640s; the sense of "scientific study of the composition of material things and the changes they undergo" is by 1788. Chemistry in the European mind disengaged itself from alchemy in the mid-1600s; The Academy del Cimento was established in Italy in 1657, the Royal Society in London in 1660, and the Academy of Sciences in Paris in 1666.

 The figurative sense of "instinctual attraction or affinity" is also attested by c. 1600, from the alchemical sense.
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to chemistry 

 chemical (adj.) 

 1570s, "relating to chemistry, pertaining to the phenomena with which chemistry deals," from chemic "of alchemy" (a worn-down derivative of Medieval Latin alchimicus ; see alchemy ) + -al (1). In early use also of alchemy. Related: Chemically . Chemical warfare is attested from 1917.

 chemist (n.) 

 1560s, chymist , "alchemist," from French chimiste , from Medieval Latin chimista , reduced from alchimista (see alchemy ). The modern spelling is from c. 1790. The meaning "chemical scientist, person versed in chemistry" is from 1620s; the looser meaning "dealer in medicinal drugs" is from 1745, mostly in British English.

 alchemy 
 biochemistry 
 thermochemistry 
 -ry 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 alchemy 

 "medieval chemistry; the supposed science of transmutation of base metals into silver or gold" (involving also the quest for the universal solvent, quintessence, etc.), mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic al-kimiya,

 alcohol 

 In organic chemistry, the word was extended by 1808 to the class of compounds of the same type as this (a 1790 translation...of Lavoisier's "Elements of Chemistry" has alkoholic gas for "the combination of alkohol with caloric")....

 analyze 

 Of literature, "examine critically to get the essence of," from 1610s; the meaning in chemistry ("resolve a compound into...

 valence 

 Chemistry sense of "relative combining capacity of an element with other atoms when forming compounds or molecules" is recorded...

 mesomorph 

 Related: Mesomorphic (attested from 1923 in chemistry, a separate coinage in reference to a state of a liquid crystal)....

 isomeric 

 Isomerous is from 1845 in botany, 1840 in chemistry....

 vinyl 

 In chemistry, vinyl was used from 1851 as the name of a univalent radical derived from ethylene, from Latin vinum "wine"...

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 science 

 mid-14c., "state or fact of knowing; what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information;" also "assurance of knowledge, certitude, certainty," from Old French science "knowledge, learning, application; corpus of human knowledge" (12c.), from Latin scientia "kn

 sanctuary 

 early 14c., seintuarie, sentwary, etc., "consecrated place, building set apart for holy worship; holy or sacred object," from Anglo-French sentuarie, Old French saintuaire "sacred relic, holy thing; reliquary, sanctuary," from Late Latin sanctuarium "a sacred place, shrine" (espe

 Share chemistry 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chemistry Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chemistry">Etymology of chemistry by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chemistry. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chemistry Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chemistry," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chemistry. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chemistry." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chemistry. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chemistry." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chemistry (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chemistry 
 cheliped 
 Chelsea 
 chemical 
 chemise 
 chemist 
 chemistry 
 chemo- 
 chemosynthesis 
 chemotaxis 
 chemotherapy 
 chenille 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix