URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/marijuana
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Marijuana - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Marijuana - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of marijuana 

 marijuana (n.) 

 a preparation of Cannabis sativa for use as an intoxicant, generally by smoking, 1918, altered by influence of Spanish proper name Maria Juana "Mary Jane" from mariguan (1894), from Mexican Spanish marihuana , which is of uncertain origin. As the plant was not native to Mexico, a native source for the word seems unlikely.
 also from 1918 

 Entries linking to marijuana 

 juju (n.2) 

 "marijuana cigarette," 1940, supposedly a reduplication of the middle syllable of marijuana .

 Mary 

 fem. proper name, Old English Maria , Marie , name of the mother of Jesus, from Latin Maria , from Greek Mariam , Maria , from Aramaic Maryam , from Hebrew Miryam , name of the sister of Moses (Exodus xv), a word of unknown origin, said to mean literally "rebellion."

 The nursery rhyme "Mary had a Little Lamb" was written early 1830 by Sarah Josepha Hale of Boston and published September 1830 in "Juvenile Miscellany," a popular magazine for children. Mary Jane is 1921 as the proprietary name of a kind of low-heeled shoe worn chiefly by young girls, 1928 as slang for marijuana .

 Mary Sue as a type of ludicrously idealized fictional character, originally in fan fiction based on the Star Trek television series, is attested by 1992, from the name of a character in the 1973 parody story A Trekkie's Tale . Attested in reference to other types of fiction by 1999. The male counterpart is a Gary Stu (2002) a Marty Stu (2003) or a Murray Sue (2002).

 Mary Sue is often easy to spot because she's impossible to miss. Put simply, Mary Sue is more: more charming, more belligerent, more understanding, more beautiful, more graceful, more eccentric, more spiritual, more klutzy. She has better hair, better clothes, better weapons, better brains, better sex, and better karma than anyone else. [Pat Pflieger, "Too Good to Be True: 150 Years of Mary Sue." 2001.]

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cannabis 

 1798, "common hemp," from Cannabis, Modern Latin plant genus named (1728), from Greek kannabis "hemp," a Scythian or Thracian word. That word is also source of Armenian kanap', Albanian kanep, Russian konoplja, Persian kanab, Lithuanian kanapės "hemp," and English canvas and poss

 reefer 

 "marijuana cigarette," 1920s, perhaps an alteration of Mexican Spanish grifo "marijuana, drug addict" [OED]; or perhaps from...

 hemp 

 Slang sense of "marijuana" dates from 1940s; scientific applications for the narcotic derived from hemp date to 1870....

 herb 

 Slang meaning "marijuana" is attested from 1960s. The native word is wort....

 blasted 

 "smoke marijuana" is attested from 1959 and in early 17c. blast (n.) was the usual word for "a smoke of tobacco."...

 Panama 

 Panama red as a variety of Central American marijuana is attested from 1967....

 chronic 

 Dre; said to be because it described especially potent marijuana, on the notion of "extreme, severe."...

 stick 

 "piece of wood, generally rather long and slender," Middle English stikke, from Old English sticca "twig or slender branch from a tree or shrub," also "rod, peg, spoon," from Proto-Germanic *stikkon- "pierce, prick" (source also of Old Norse stik, Middle Dutch stecke, stec, Old H

 smoke 

 late Old English smoca, smocca (rare) "visible fumes and volatile material given off by burning or smoldering substances," related to smeocan "give off smoke," from Proto-Germanic *smuk- (source also of Middle Dutch smooc, Dutch smook, Middle High German smouch, German Schmauch),

 gage 

 "a pledge, a pawn, something valuable deposited to insure performance," especially "something thrown down as a token of challenge," c. 1300, from Old French gage "pledge (of battle), security, guarantee; pay, reward" (11c.), from Frankish *wadja-, from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see 

 Share marijuana 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/marijuana Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/marijuana">Etymology of marijuana by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of marijuana. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/marijuana Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of marijuana," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/marijuana. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of marijuana." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/marijuana. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of marijuana." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/marijuana (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near marijuana 
 mariachi 
 Marian 
 Marianne 
 Marie Antoinette 
 marigold 
 marijuana 
 Marilyn 
 marimba 
 marina 
 marinade 
 marinara 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix