URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chronic
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:11:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chronic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chronic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chronic 

 chronic (adj.) 

 early 15c., cronik , of diseases, "lasting a long time," from Old French chronique and directly from Latin chronicus , from Greek khronikos "of time, concerning time," from khronos "time" (see chrono- ). Vague disapproving sense (from 17c.) is from association with diseases and later addictions. Literal sense "pertaining to time" is rare in English. As a popular slang catch-all word for "cannabis," popularized from 1992 by "The Chronic," an album released by rapper Dr. Dre; said to be because it described especially potent marijuana, on the notion of "extreme, severe." Related: Chronical ; chronically .
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to chronic 

 chronicity (n.) 

 "state of being of long continuance," 1829; see chronic + -ity . 

 chrono- 

 before vowels chron- , word-forming element meaning "time," from Latinized form of Greek khronos "time, a defined time, a lifetime, a season, a while," which is of uncertain origin.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 acute 

 late 14c., originally of fevers and diseases, "coming quickly to a crisis" (opposed to chronic), from Latin acutus "sharp, pointed," figuratively "shrill, penetrating; intelligent, cunning," past participle of acuere "to sharpen" (literal and figurative), from PIE root *ak- "be s

 inveterate 

 late 14c., "old," from Latin inveteratus "of long standing, chronic, old," past participle of inveterare "become old in," from in- "in, into" (from PIE root *en "in") + verb from vetus (genitive veteris) "old" (see veteran). From early 15c. as "firmly established by long continua

 pellagra 

 chronic disease caused by dietary deficiency (formerly blamed on diseased grain) and characterized by dry, red skin, 1811...

 rounder 

 Sense of "chronic loafer, drunkard, or criminal" is by 1854, American English, on notion of one who "goes the round" of misdemeanor...

 gamer 

 Quite a few of the gamers we've encountered during our monthly strolls down "Arcade Alley" suffer the same chronic frustration...

 multiple 

 The chronic, progressive disease multiple sclerosis is so called by 1877, because it occurs in patches (see sclerosis)....

 leprosy 

 name given to various chronic skin diseases, later in more restricted use, 1530s, probably from leprous + -y (4)....

 ofay 

 African-American vernacular, "white person," 1925, of unknown origin. If, as is sometimes claimed, it derives from an African word, none corresponding to it has been found. Perhaps the most plausible speculation is Yoruba ófé "to disappear" (as from a powerful enemy), with the se

 plantation 

 mid-15c., plantacioun, "action of planting (seeds, etc.)," a sense now obsolete, from Latin plantationem (nominative plantatio) "a planting," noun of action from past-participle stem of *plantare "to plant" (see plant (n.)). From c. 1600 as "introduction, establishment." From 158

 Babel 

 capital of Babylon, now a ruin near Hillah in Iraq, late 14c., from Late Latin, from Hebrew Babhel (Genesis xi), from Akkadian bab-ilu "Gate of God" (from bab "gate" + ilu "god"). The name is a translation of Sumerian Ka-dingir. The meaning "a confused medley of sounds" (1520s) i

 Share chronic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chronic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chronic">Etymology of chronic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chronic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chronic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chronic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chronic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chronic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chronic. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chronic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chronic (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chronic 
 chrome 
 chromium 
 chromophotography 
 chromosome 
 chromosphere 
 chronic 
 chronicity 
 chronicle 
 chronicler 
 chrono- 
 chronograph 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix