URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/reek
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Reek - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Reek - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of reek 

 reek (n.) 

 Middle English reke "smoke, fumes; steam, vapor," from Old English rec (Anglian), riec (West Saxon), "smoke from burning material," probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse reykr , Danish rǿg , Swedish rök "smoke, steam."

 These are reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *raukiz (source also of Old Frisian rek , Middle Dutch rooc , Old High German rouh , German Rauch , Icelandic reykr "smoke, steam"), from PIE *reug- "to vomit, belch;" also "smoke, cloud."

 The sense of "stench" is attested 1650s via the notion of "that which rises" (compare reek (v.)). Century Dictionary (1891) marks the word "Obsolete, archaic, or Scotch." According to OED, "As the word has chiefly survived in northern use the palatalized form reech is comparatively rare." A c. 1250 document refers to the period March-April as Reke-fille "the misty month."

 reek (v.) 

 Middle English reken "to emit smoke," of smoke or stench, "to rise," from Old English recan (Anglian), reocan (West Saxon) "emit smoke," from Proto-Germanic *reukan (source also of Old Frisian reka "smoke," Middle Dutch roken , Dutch rieken "to smoke," Old High German riohhan "to smoke, steam," German rauchen "to smoke," riechen "to smell"); from the same source as the nouns (see reek (n.)).

 Originally a strong verb, with past tense reac , past participle gereocen , but occasionally showing weak conjugation in Old English. Meaning "to emit a bad smell" is recorded from 1710 via sense "be heated and perspiring" (early 15c.). Related: Reeked ; reeking .

 Entries linking to reek 

 Ragnarok (n.) 

 in Norse mythology, the last battle of the world, in which gods and men will be destroyed by monsters and darkness, 1770, from Old Norse Ragnarök , from ragna , genitive of rögn "gods" + rök "destined end" or rökr "twilight," which is related to reykr "smoke, steam" (see reek (v.)). Compare Gotterdammerung .

 reeky (adj.) 

 early 15c., reki , "smoky, steamy, vaporous; giving off rank, offensive vapors," from reek (n.) + -y (2). The sense of "soiled with smoke" is from 1580s. Related: Reekily ; reekiness .

 Reykjavik 
 smoke 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 smoke 

 late Old English smoca, smocca (rare) "visible fumes and volatile material given off by burning or smoldering substances," related to smeocan "give off smoke," from Proto-Germanic *smuk- (source also of Middle Dutch smooc, Dutch smook, Middle High German smouch, German Schmauch),

 smack 

 "a taste, flavor, savor" especially a slight flavor that suggests something, Middle English smakke, from Old English smæc "taste; scent, odor," from Proto-Germanic *smakka- (source also of Old Frisian smek, Middle Dutch smæck, Dutch smaak, Old High German smac, German Geschmack, 

 fume 

 late 14c., "vapor, odorous vapor; exhalation," from Old French fum "smoke, steam, vapor, breath, aroma, scent" (12c.), from Latin fumus "smoke, steam, fume, old flavor" (source also of Italian fumo, Spanish humo), from PIE root *dheu- (1) "dust, vapor, smoke." In old medicine, an

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 suggest 

 1520s, "place before another's mind; put forward a proposition," from Latin suggestus, past participle of suggerere "bring up, bring under, lay beneath; furnish, afford, supply; prompt" (see suggestion). The meaning "act so as to call up the idea of (something else); introduce to

 odor 

 c. 1300, "sweet smell, scent, fragrance," from Anglo-French odour, from Old French odor "smell, perfume, fragrance" (12c., Modern French odeur) and directly from Latin odor "a smell, a scent" (pleasant or disagreeable), from PIE root *hed- "to smell" (source also of Latin olere "

 door 

 "movable barrier, commonly on hinges, for closing a passage into a building, room, or other enclosure," c. 1200, a Middle English merger of two Old English words, both with the general sense of "door, gate": dor (neuter; plural doru) "large door, gate," and duru (fem., plural dur

 rood 

 Middle English rode, "a cross; a crucifix," especially a large one, from Old English rod "cross," especially that upon which Christ suffered, from Proto-Germanic *rod- (source also of Old Saxon ruoda "stake, pile, cross," Old Norse roða, Old Frisian rode, Middle Dutch roede, Old 

 Share reek 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/reek Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/reek">Etymology of reek by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of reek. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/reek Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of reek," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/reek. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of reek." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/reek. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of reek." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/reek (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near reek 
 reed 
 re-educate 
 reedy 
 reef 
 reefer 
 reek 
 reeky 
 reel 
 re-elect 
 reem 
 re-embark 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix