URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/franchise
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:38:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Franchise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Franchise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of franchise 

 franchise (n.) 

 c. 1300, fraunchise , "a special right or privilege (by grant of a sovereign or government);" also "national sovereignty; nobility of character, generosity; the king's authority; the collective rights claimed by a people or town or religious institution," also used of the state of Adam and Eve before the Fall, from Old French franchise "freedom, exemption; right, privilege" (12c.), from variant stem of franc "free" (see frank (adj.)).

 From late 14c. as "freedom; not being in servitude; social status of a freeman;" early 15c. as "citizenship, membership in a community or town; membership in a craft or guild." The "special right" sense narrowed 18c. to "particular legal privilege," then "right to vote" (1790). From mid-15c. as "right to buy or sell," also "right to exclude others from buying or selling, a monopoly;" meaning "authorization by a company to sell its products or services" is from 1959.
 also from c. 1300 

 franchise (v.) 

 late 14c., "to make free," from Old French franchiss- , past participle stem of franchir "to free" (12c.), from franc "free" (see frank (adj.)). Franchising is from 1570s; the commercial licensing sense is from 1966. Related: Franchisee ; franchiser ; franchisor .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to franchise 

 frank (adj.) 

 c. 1300, "free, liberal, generous;" 1540s, "outspoken," from Old French franc "free (not servile); without hindrance, exempt from; sincere, genuine, open, gracious, generous; worthy, noble, illustrious" (12c.), from Medieval Latin francus "free, at liberty, exempt from service," as a noun, "a freeman, a Frank" (see Frank ).

 Frank , literally, 
 free ; the freedom may be in regard to one's own opinions, which is the same as 
 openness , or in regard to things belonging to others, where the freedom may go so far as to be unpleasant, or it may disregard conventional ideas as to reticence. Hence, while 
 openness is consistent with timidity, 
 frankness implies some degree of boldness. [Century Dictionary] 

 A generalization of the tribal name; the connection is that Franks, as the conquering class, alone had the status of freemen in a world that knew only free, captive, or slave. For sense connection of "being one of the nation" and "free," compare Latin liber "free," from the same root as German Leute "nation, people" (see liberal (adj.)) and Slavic "free" words (Old Church Slavonic svobodi , Polish swobodny , Serbo-Croatian slobodan ) which are cognates of the first element in English sibling "brother, sister" (in Old English used more generally: "relative, kinsman"). For the later sense development, compare ingenuity .

 disfranchise (v.) 

 "deprive of the rights and privileges of a free citizen or member of a corporation," especially that of voting, late 15c., from dis- + franchise (v.). Related: Disfranchised; disfranchising; disfranchisement .

 enfranchise 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 enfranchise 

 early 15c., enfraunchīsen, "grant (someone) the status or privilege of citizenship, admit to membership in a town," from Old French enfranchiss-, present-participle stem of enfranchir "to set or make free; grant a franchise to;" from en- "make, put in" (see en- (1)) + franc "free

 denizen 

 native or a foreigner," from Anglo-French deinzein, denzein, (Old French deinzein) "one within" (the privileges of a city franchise...Formerly also an adjective, "within the city franchise, having certain rights and privileges of citizenship" (late 15c.)....

 Spock 

 half-alien character in the "Star Trek" U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by series creator Gene Roddenberry...

 business 

 Old English bisignes (Northumbrian) "care, anxiety, occupation," from bisig "careful, anxious, busy, occupied, diligent" (see busy (adj.)) + -ness. The original sense is obsolete, as is the Middle English sense of "state of being much occupied or engaged" (mid-14c.), the latter r

 rectify 

 c. 1400, rectifien, "to cure, heal, remedy" (a bad or faulty condition); early 15c. "set (someone) straight in conduct or behavior;" late 15c., "correct an error, set (something) straight or right;" from Old French rectifier, literally "to make straight" (14c.), from Late Latin r

 certify 

 mid-14c., "to declare the truth of," also "to vouch for or confirm" (an official record, etc.), from Old French certefiier "make certain, witness the truth of" (12c.), from Late Latin certificare "to certify, to make certain," from Latin certus "fixed, sure" (see certain) + root 

 concern 

 early 15c., of persons, "to perceive, distinguish;" also, of things, "to refer to, relate to, pertain to," from Old French concerner (15c.) and directly from Medieval Latin concernere "concern, touch, belong to," figurative use of Late Latin concernere "to sift, mix as in a sieve

 suffrage 

 late 14c., "prayer," especially "intercessory prayers or pleas on behalf of another," from Old French sofrage "plea, intercession" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin suffragium, from Latin suffragium "support, ballot, vote cast in an assembly; right of voting; a voting table

 licence 

 late 14c., "formal authorization, official permission, permit, privilege," from Old French licence "freedom, liberty, power, possibility; permission," (12c.), from Latin licentia "freedom, liberty; unrestrained liberty, wantonness, presumption," from licentem (nominative licens),

 concession 

 mid-15c., "act of granting or yielding" (especially in argumentation), from Old French concession (14c.) or directly from Latin concessionem (nominative concessio) "an allowing, conceding," noun of action from past-participle stem of concedere "to give way, yield," figuratively "

 Share franchise 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/franchise Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/franchise">Etymology of franchise by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of franchise. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/franchise Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of franchise," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/franchise. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of franchise." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/franchise. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of franchise." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/franchise (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near franchise 
 frame 
 framework 
 franc 
 France 
 Frances 
 franchise 
 Francis 
 Franciscan 
 francium 
 Franco- 
 Francophile 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix