URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nocturnal
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:28:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nocturnal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nocturnal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nocturnal 

 nocturnal (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to the night, used or done at night," late 15c. (Caxton), from Old French nocturnal "nightly, nocturnal," or directly from Late Latin nocturnalis , from Latin nocturnus "belonging to the night," from nox (genitive noctis ) "night," cognate with Old English neaht (see night ) + -urnus , suffix forming adjectives of time. Related: Nocturnally . Nocturnal emission "involuntary ejaculation during sleep" is recorded by 1813.
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to nocturnal 

 night (n.) 

 late Old English niht (West Saxon neaht , Anglian næht , neht ) "the dark part of a day; the night as a unit of time; darkness," also "absence of spiritual illumination, moral darkness, ignorance," from Proto-Germanic *nahts (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German naht , Old Frisian and Dutch nacht , German Nacht , Old Norse natt , Gothic nahts ).

 The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- "night" (source also of Greek nyx "a night," Latin nox , Old Irish nochd , Sanskrit naktam "at night," Lithuanian naktis "night," Old Church Slavonic nosti , Russian noch' , Welsh henoid "tonight"), according to Watkins, probably from a verbal root *neg- "to be dark, be night." For spelling with -gh- see fight . The vowel indicates that the modern English word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte , dative niht ).

 The fact that the Aryans have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by nights. [Weekley]

 Thus in Old English combinations night was "the night before (a certain day or feast day);" compare German Weihnachten "Christmas," literally "holy night." In early times, the day was held to begin at sunset, so Old English monanniht "Monday night" was the night before Monday, or what we would call Sunday night ; so saeterniht "Friday night." Thomas à Becket's Wednes-night (Old English Wodnes-niht ) would be our Tuesday night. The Greeks, by contrast, counted their days by mornings.

 To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night soil "excrement" (1770) is so called because it was removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train is attested from 1838; night-school from 1520s; night-life "habitual nocturnal carousing" is attested from 1852.

 nocturn (n.) 

 also nocturne , name of a division of the office of matins said just before daybreak (in the early Church a service recited after midnight), c. 1200, from Old French nocturne "evening service; curfew," from Medieval Latin nocturna , "group of Psalms used in the nocturns," from Latin nocturnus "pertaining or belonging to the night" (see nocturnal ).

 nocturne (n.) 

 1851, "musical composition of a dreamy character," properly instrumental, from French nocturne , literally "composition appropriate to the evening or night," noun use of Old French nocturne "nocturnal," from Latin nocturnus (see nocturnal ). The style and the name are said to have originated c. 1814 with Irish-born composer John Field, who wrote many of them, in a style that Chopin mastered in his own works, which popularized the term. But Field's work seems to have been appreciated in German and French publications before it came to attention in England in 1851.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 diurnal 

 late 14c., "daily, happening every day," from Late Latin diurnalis "daily," from Latin dies "day" + -urnus, an adjectival suffix denoting time (compare hibernus "wintery"). Dies "day" is from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine" (source also of Sanskrit diva "by day," Welsh diw, Breton dei

 moth 

 "nocturnal lepidopterous insect," Middle English motthe, from Old English moððe (Northumbrian mohðe), a common Germanic word...

 owl 

 "raptorial nocturnal bird of prey of the family Strigidæ," Middle English oule, from Old English ule "owl," from Proto-Germanic...The bird was used in proverbs and figures of speech in reference to its nocturnal habits, but also in Middle English for...

 badger 

 type of low, nocturnal, burrowing, carnivorous animal, 1520s, perhaps from bage "badge" (see badge) + reduced form of -ard...

 lemur 

 nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, given this sense by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural, singular lemurum) "evil spirits...

 bat 

 The shift from -k- to -t- may have come through confusion of bakke with Latin blatta "moth, nocturnal insect."...

 marten 

 agile, short-legged, bushy-tailed, medium-sized carnivorous mammal in the weasel family, largely nocturnal and found in forests...

 folk 

 Old English folc "common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army," from Proto-Germanic *fulka- (source also of Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk, Old High German folc, German Volk "people"). Perhaps originally "host of warri

 scale 

 [one of the skin plates on fish or snakes] c. 1300, from Old French escale "cup, scale, shell pod, husk" (12c., Modern French écale), from Frankish *skala or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *skæla "to split, divide" (source also of Dutch schaal "a scale, husk," Ol

 moor 

 "to fasten (a ship) in a particular location by or as by cables, anchors, etc.," late 15c., probably related to Old English mærels "mooring rope," via unrecorded *mærian "to moor," or possibly borrowed from Middle Low German moren or Middle Dutch maren "to moor," from West German

 Share nocturnal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nocturnal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nocturnal">Etymology of nocturnal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nocturnal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nocturnal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nocturnal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nocturnal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nocturnal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nocturnal. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nocturnal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nocturnal (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nocturnal 
 noctidial 
 noctilucent 
 noctivagant 
 noctuary 
 nocturn 
 nocturnal 
 nocturne 
 nocuous 
 nod 
 nodal 
 node 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix