URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/powder
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:59:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Powder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Powder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of powder 

 powder (n.) 

  "fine, minute, loose, uncompacted particles," c. 1300, poudre , "ash, cinders; dust of the earth;" early 14c. of any pulverized substance; from Old French poudre "dust, powder; ashes; powdered substance" (13c.), earlier pouldre (11c.), from Latin pulverem (nominative pulvis ) "dust, powder" (source also of Spanish polvo , Italian polve ; see pulverize ).

 The insertion of the unetymological -d- was common in French (compare meddle , tender (adj.), remainder ; see D ). German has it as a doublet; Puder via French and Pulver from Latin. From mid-14c. specifically as "medicinal powder;" specialized sense of "gunpowder" is from late 14c. In the sense "powdered cosmetic," it is recorded from 1570s.

 Powder keg "small barrel for holding gunpowder" is by 1820; the figurative sense ("something likely to explode easily") is by 1895. Powder room , euphemistic for "women's lavatory," is attested from 1936. Earlier it meant "place where gunpowder is stored on a warship" (1620s). Powder monkey "boy employed on ships to carry powder from the magazines to the guns" is from 1680s. Powder blue (1650s) was smalt (powdered glass containing cobalt) used in laundering; as a color name from 1894.

 The phrase take a powder "scram, vanish," is from 1920; it was a common phrase as a doctor's instruction, so perhaps the notion is of taking a laxative medicine or a sleeping powder, with the result that one has to leave in a hurry (or, on another guess, from a magician's magical powder, which makes things disappear).

 Avis dropped an exhausted little heap onto her aunt's bed. She put her hand over her heart and said piteously, "Oh, Aunt Joyce, I mustn't ever do that again. My heart's going awful fast. I shall have to take a powder. Wasn't it fun though-" Avis' dark eyes flashed. [from "The Evolution of Avis" in The Connecticut School Journal, Jan. 9, 1902] 

 When the wife of your breast has confessed she has drest 

   On just triple the sum you allowed her, 

 And has run up long bills for her frocks and her frills— 

   Take a powder, my friend, take a powder. 

 [from "The Panacaea," in Punch, Dec. 14, 1901] 

 Powder in the wind (c. 1300, meaning powdered spices) was a Middle English image of something highly valued but flawed in some way that renders it impermanent or doomed to loss (of virtues without humility, etc.).
 also from c. 1300 

 powder (v.) 

 c. 1300, poudren , "to put or sprinkle powder on;" late 14c., "to make into powder," from Old French poudrer "to pound, crush to powder; strew, scatter," from poudre (see powder (n.)). Specifically as "to whiten cosmetically by some application of white material in powder form" is from 1590s. Related: Powdered ; powdering .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to powder 

 D 

 fourth letter of the Roman alphabet, from Greek delta , from Phoenician and Hebrew daleth , pausal form of deleth "door," so called from its shape.

 The form of the modern letter is the Greek delta (Δ) with one angle rounded. As the sign for "500" in Roman numerals, it is said to be half of CIƆ, which was an early form of M, the sign for "1,000." 3-D for "three-dimensional" is attested from 1952.

 *

 Unetymological -d- is the result of a tendency in English and neighboring languages, perhaps for euphony, to add -d- to -n- , and especially to insert or swap a -d- sound when -l- or -r- follow too closely an -n- .

 Compare sound (n.1), thunder (n.), pound (v.), spindle , kindred , strand (n.2) "fiber of rope," dialectal rundel , rundle for runnel . Swound was a form of swoun ( swoon ) attested from mid-15c, and used by Malory, Spenser, Lyly, Middleton, Beaumont & Fletcher. Also obsolete round (n.) "whispering," variant of roun "secret, mystery, divine mystery" (from Old English run , source of rune ), with unetymological -d attested by 15c. in the verb. 

 Among the words from French are powder (n.), meddle , tender (adj.), remainder , gender (n.), also riband , jaundice . It is less evident in spider (an agent noun from the Germanic * spin- root), and perhaps explains lender in place of loaner .

 meddle (v.) 

 early 14c., "to mingle, blend, mix" (a sense now obsolete), from Old North French medler (Old French mesler , 12c., Modern French mêler ) "to mix, mingle, to meddle," from Vulgar Latin *misculare (source of Provençal mesclar , Spanish mezclar , Italian mescolare , meschiare ), from Latin miscere "to mix" (from PIE root *meik- "to mix").

 From late 14c. as "busy oneself, be concerned with, engage in," and in the disparaging sense of "interfere or take part in inappropriately or impertinently, be officious, make a nuisance of oneself" (the notion is of meddling too much), which is the surviving sense of the word. From mid-14c. to c. 1700 it also was a euphemism for "have sexual intercourse." Related: Meddled ; meddling .

 pulverize 
 remainder 
 tender 
 gunpowder 
 piepowder 
 powder-horn 
 powder-puff 
 powdery 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pulverize 

 early 15c., pulverisen, "reduce to powder or dust," from Late Latin pulverizare "reduce to powder or dust," from Latin pulvis (genitive pulveris) "dust, powder," which perhaps is related to Latin pollen "mill dust; fine flour" (and thus the other words under pollen), but de Vaan 

 remainder 

 late 14c., remaindre, in law, a right of ownership designed to devolve upon a second party, from Anglo-French remeinder, Old French remaindre, noun use of infinitive, a variant of Old French remanoir "to stay, dwell, remain; be left; hold out," from Latin remanere "to remain, to 

 tender 

 "soft, easily injured," early 13c., from Old French tendre "soft, delicate; young" (11c.), from Latin tenerem (nominative tener) "soft, delicate; of tender age, youthful," from a derivative of PIE root *ten- "to stretch," on the notion of "stretched," hence "thin," hence "weak" o

 putty 

 1630s, "type of plasterer's fine paste or cement," from French potée "polishing powder" (12c.), originally "pot-full, contents...From 1660s as "powder used for polishing glass or metals."...

 alcohol 

 1540s (early 15c. as alcofol), "fine powder produced by sublimation," from Medieval Latin alcohol "powdered ore of antimony...," from Arabic al-kuhul "kohl," the fine metallic powder used to darken the eyelids, from kahala "to stain, paint."...Paracelsus (1493-1541) used the word to refer to a fine powder but also a volatile liquid....

 mull 

 "grind to powder" (which survived into 19c. in dialect), from Middle English mullyn, mollen "grind to powder, soften by pulverizing...

 friable 

 "easily crumbled or pulverized; easily reduced to powder," 1560s, from French friable (16c.) and directly from Latin friabilis...

 make-up 

 also makeup, "manner in which something is put together," 1821, from the verbal phrase (see make (v.) + up (adv.)). To make up as "build, collect into one form by bringing together" is from late 14c., also "prepare." It is attested from late 15c. as "supply as an equivalent," fro

 solid 

 late 14c., "not empty or hollow, hardened;" of figures or bodies, "having three dimensions," from Old French solide "firm, dense, compact," from Latin solidus "firm, whole, undivided, entire," figuratively "sound, trustworthy, genuine," from suffixed form of PIE root *sol- "whole

 medicine 

 c. 1200, "medical treatment, cure, healing," also (early 14c.) "substance used in treatment of a disease, medicinal potion or plaster," also used figuratively of spiritual remedies, from Old French medecine (Modern French médicine) "medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, poti

 Share powder 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/powder Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/powder">Etymology of powder by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of powder. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/powder Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of powder," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/powder. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of powder." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/powder. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of powder." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/powder (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near powder 
 pousette 
 pout 
 pouty 
 poverty 
 pow 
 powder 
 powder-horn 
 powder-puff 
 powdery 
 power 
 power-broker 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix