URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyst
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:23:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cyst - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cyst - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cyst 

 cyst (n.) 

 "bladder-like bag or vesicle in an animal body," 1713, from Modern Latin cystis (in English as a Latin word from 1540s), from Greek kystis "bladder, pouch," which is of uncertain etymology.
 also from 1713 

 Entries linking to cyst 

 blastocyst (n.) 

 a fertilized egg after about 5 or 6 days, when it is a ball of rapidly dividing cells, 1876, from blasto- + cyst .

 cholecyst (n.) 

 "gall bladder," 1846, from medical Latin cholecystis , incorrectly formed from Greek khole "gall" (from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives denoting "green, yellow," and thus "bile, gall") + kystis "bladder, cyst" (see cyst ). Related: Cholecystectomy .

 cystectomy 
 cystitis 
 encyst 
 nematocyst 
 oocyst 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cost 

 "manner, way, course of action," from Old English cyst "choice, election, thing chosen."...

 new 

 Middle English neue, from Old English neowe, niowe, earlier niwe "made or established for the first time, fresh, recently made or grown; novel, unheard-of, different from the old; untried, inexperienced, unused," from Proto-Germanic *neuja- (source also of Old Saxon niuwi, Old Fr

 pathology 

 "science of diseases," 1610s, from French pathologie (16c.), from medical Latin pathologia "study of disease," from Greek pathos "suffering" (from PIE root *kwent(h)- "to suffer") + -logia "study" (see -logy). In reference to the study of abnormal mental conditions from 1842. Anc

 bristle 

 "stiff, coarse hair of certain animals," especially those set along the backs of hogs, Old English byrst "bristle," with metathesis of -r-, from Proto-Germanic *bursti- (source also of Middle Dutch borstel, German borste, Danish börste), from PIE *bhrsti- from root *bhars- "point

 beer 

 alcoholic drink made from grain (generally barley), infused with hops and boiled and fermented, Middle English ber, from Old English beor "strong drink, beer, mead," cognate with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier; a West Germanic wor

 chow 

 "food," originally especially "Chinese food," 1856, American English (originally in California), from Chinese pidgin English chow-chow (1795) "food; mixed pickle or preserve; mix or medley of any sort," perhaps a reduplication of Chinese cha or tsa "mixed," or Cantonese chaau "to

 pariah 

 1610s, "member of a low caste in southern India, shunned as unclean," from Portuguese paria or directly from Tamil (Dravidian) paraiyar, plural of paraiyan "drummer" (at festivals, the hereditary duty of members of the largest of the lower castes of southern India), from parai "l

 quintessence 

 early 15c., quint-essence, in ancient philosophy and medieval alchemy, "a pure essence latent in all things, and the substance of which the heavenly bodies are composed," literally "fifth essence," from Old French quinte essence (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin quinta esse

 rendezvous 

 1590s, "place appointed for assembling of troops," from French rendez-vous, noun use of rendez vous "present yourselves," from the wording of orders, from rendez, second person plural imperative of rendre "to present" (see render (v.)) + vous "you" (from Latin vos, from PIE *wos-

 chocolate 

 c. 1600, from Mexican Spanish chocolate, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) chocola-tl, "chocolate," and/or cacahua-tl "chocolate, chocolate bean." With a-tl "water." In the first form, the first element might be related to xocalia "to make something bitter or sour" [Karttunen]. Made with co

 Share cyst 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyst Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyst">Etymology of cyst by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cyst. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyst Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cyst," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyst. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cyst." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyst. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cyst." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyst (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cyst 
 Cypriot 
 Cyprus 
 Cyrene 
 Cyrillic 
 Cyrus 
 cyst 
 cystectomy 
 cystic 
 cystitis 
 cystocele 
 cystoscopy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix