URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Satan
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:28:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Satan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Satan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Satan 

 Satan (n.) 

 proper name of the supreme evil spirit and great adversary of humanity in Christianity, Old English Satan , from Late Latin Satan (in Vulgate in the Old Testament only), from Greek Satanas , from Hebrew satan "adversary, one who plots against another," from satan "to show enmity to, oppose, plot against," from root s-t-n "one who opposes, obstructs, or acts as an adversary."

 In the Septuagint usually translated into Greek as diabolos "slanderer," literally "one who throws (something) across" the path of another (see devil (n.)), though epiboulos "plotter" is once used.

 In biblical sources the Hebrew term the 
 satan describes an adversarial role. It is not the name of a particular character. Although Hebrew storytellers as early as the sixth century B.C.E. occasionally introduced a supernatural character whom they called the 
 satan , what they meant was any one of the angels sent by God for the specific purpose of blocking or obstructing human activity. [Elaine Pagels, "The Origin of Satan," 1995]

 In Middle English also Satanas , Sathanas .

 Entries linking to Satan 

 devil (n.) 

 Old English deofol "a devil, a subordinate evil spirit afflicting humans;" also, in Christian theology, "the Devil, a powerful spirit of evil otherwise known as Satan," from Late Latin diabolus (also the source of Italian diavolo , French diable , Spanish diablo ; German Teufel is Old High German tiufal , from Latin via Gothic diabaulus ).

 The Late Latin word is from Ecclesiastical Greek diabolos , which in Jewish and Christian use was "the Devil, Satan," and which in general use meant "accuser, slanderer" (thus it was a scriptural loan-translation of Hebrew satan; see Satan ). It is an agent noun from Greek diaballein "to slander, attack," literally "to throw across," from dia "across, through" (see dia- ) + ballein "to throw" (from PIE root *gwele- "to throw, reach").

 Jerome re-introduced Satan in Latin bibles, and English translators have used both words in different measures. In Vulgate, as in Greek, diabolus and dæmon (see demon ) were distinct, but they have merged in English and other Germanic languages.

 Meaning "false god, heathen god" is from c. 1200. Sense of "diabolical person, person resembling a devil or demon in character" is from late 12c. Playful use for "clever rogue" is from c. 1600, on the notion of mischievous energy and cleverness. The sense of "errand-boy in a printing office" (1680s) is from this, perhaps reinforced because they often were blackened by the ink (devils then being popularly supposed to be black).

 As an expletive and in expletive phrases from c. 1200.

 Meaning "sand spout, dust storm" is from 1835 ( dust devil is attested by 1867). In U.S. place names, the word often represents a native word such as Algonquian manito , more properly "spirit, god." Phrase a devil way (c. 1300) was originally "Hell-ward, to Hell," but by late 14c. it was a mere expression of irritation.

 Devil's books "playing cards" is from 1729, but the cited quote says they've been called that "time out of mind" (the four of clubs is the devil's bedposts ); devil's coach-horse is from 1840, the large rove-beetle, which is defiant when disturbed. Devil's food cake (1895; three different recipes in the cookbook "compiled by the Ladies' Aid Society of the Friends' Church, Wilmington, Ohio"), rich and chocolate, probably is in deliberate contrast to angel food cake . Conventional phrase talk (or speak ) of the Devil, and he's presently at your elbow is by 1660s.

 fiend (n.) 

 Old English feond "enemy, foe, adversary," originally present participle of feogan "to hate," from Proto-Germanic *fijand- "hating, hostile" (source also of Old Frisian fiand "enemy," Old Saxon fiond , Middle Dutch viant , Dutch vijand "enemy," Old Norse fjandi , Old High German fiant , Gothic fijands ), from suffixed form of PIE root *pe(i)- "to hurt" (source also of Sanskrit pijati "reviles, scorns;" Avestan paman- , name of a skin disease; Greek pema "disaster, sorrow, misery, woe;" Gothic faian "to blame").

 As spelling suggests, the word originally was the opposite of friend (n.). Both are from the active participles of the Germanic verbs for "to love" and "to hate." Boutkan says the "fiend" word was a Germanic analogical formation from the "friend" word. According to Bammesberger ["English Etymology"], "The long vowel in FIEND is regular. In FRIEND the vowel has been shortened; perhaps the shortening is due to compounds like FRIENDSHIP, in which the consonant group ( -nds- ) regularly caused shortening of the preceeding long vowel."

 Fiend at first described any hostile enemy (male and female, with abstract noun form feondscipe "fiendship"), but it began to be used in late Old English for "the Devil, Satan " (literally "adversary") as the "enemy of mankind," which shifted its sense to "diabolical person" (early 13c.). The old sense of the word devolved to foe , then to the imported word enemy . For spelling with -ie- see field . Meaning "devotee (of whatever is indicated)," as in dope fiend , is from 1865.

 satanic 
 Satanism 
 Satanist 
 Satanophobia 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share Satan 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Satan Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Satan">Etymology of Satan by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Satan. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Satan Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Satan," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Satan. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Satan." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Satan. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Satan." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Satan (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Satan 
 sassafras 
 Sassanid 
 Sassenach 
 sassy 
 SAT 
 Satan 
 satanic 
 Satanism 
 Satanist 
 Satanophobia 
 satay 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix