URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/barium
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T14:59:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Barium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Barium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of barium 

 barium (n.) 

 1808, coined in Modern Latin by its discoverer, English chemist Sir Humphry Davy, because it was present in the mineral barytes "heavy spar" (barium sulphate), so named by Lavoisier from Greek barys "heavy" (from PIE root *gwere- (1) "heavy"). The metal is actually relatively light. With chemical ending -ium . Related: Baric .
 also from 1808 

 Entries linking to barium 

 *gwere- (1) 

 gwerə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "heavy."

 It might form all or part of: aggravate ; aggravation ; aggrieve ; bar (n.4) "unit of pressure;" bariatric ; baritone ; barium ; barometer ; blitzkrieg ; brig ; brigade ; brigand ; brigantine ; brio ; brut ; brute ; charivari ; gravamen ; grave (adj.); gravid ; gravimeter ; gravitate ; gravity ; grief ; grieve ; kriegspiel ; guru ; hyperbaric ; isobar ; quern ; sitzkrieg .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit guruh "heavy, weighty, venerable;" Greek baros "weight," barys "heavy in weight," often with the notion of "strength, force;" Latin gravis , "heavy, ponderous, burdensome, loaded; pregnant;" Old English cweorn "quern;" Gothic kaurus "heavy;" Lettish gruts "heavy."

 -ium 

 word-forming element in chemistry, used to coin element names, from Latin adjectival suffix -ium (neuter of -ius ), which formed metal names in Latin ( ferrum "iron," aurum "gold," etc.). In late 18c chemists began to pay attention to the naming of their substances with words that indicate their chemical properties. Berzelius in 1811 proposed forming all element names in Modern Latin. As the names of some recently discovered metallic elements already were in Latin form ( uranium , chromium , borium , etc.), the pattern of naming metallic elements in -ium or -um was maintained (in cadmium , lithium , plutonium , etc.; helium is an anomaly).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 plutonium 

 The name plutonium earlier had been proposed for barium and was used sometimes in this sense early 19c....

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 plot 

 late Old English plot "small piece of ground of defined shape," a word of unknown origin. The sense of "ground plan," and thus "map, chart, survey of a field, farm, etc." is from 1550s. Plat is a Middle English collateral form. The meaning "a secret, plan, fully formulated scheme

 condescend 

 mid-14c., of God, a king., etc., "make gracious allowance" for human frailty, etc.; late 14c., "yield deferentially," from Old French condescendere (14c.) "to agree, consent, give in, yield, come down from one's rights or claims," and directly from Late Latin condescendere "to le

 cohort 

 early 15c., "company of soldiers, band of warriors," from French cohorte (14c.) and directly from Latin cohortem (nominative cohors) "enclosure," with meaning extended to "infantry company" in the Roman army through the notion of "enclosed group, retinue;" from assimilated form o

 mollycoddle 

 also molly-coddle, by 1839 (implied in mollycoddling), from a noun (by 1828) meaning "overly pampered, fastidious, effeminate male," from Molly (pet name formation from Mary), which had been used contemptuously at least since 1707 for "a milksop, an effeminate man" (see molly (n.

 Iowa 

 organized as a U.S. territory 1838; admitted as a state 1846, named for the river, ultimately from the name of the native people, of the Chiwere branch of the Siouan family; said to be from Dakota ayuxba "sleepy ones," or from an Algonquian language (Bright cites Miami/Illinois /

 idle 

 Old English idel "empty, void; vain; worthless, useless," from Proto-West Germanic *idla- (source also of Old Saxon idal, Old Frisian idel "empty, worthless," Old Dutch idil, Old High German ital, German eitel "vain, useless, mere, pure"), a word of unknown origin. Subsequent dev

 Share barium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/barium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/barium">Etymology of barium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of barium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/barium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of barium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/barium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of barium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/barium. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of barium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/barium (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near barium 
 barge 
 bargeman 
 bariatric 
 barista 
 baritone 
 barium 
 bark 
 barkeep 
 barker 
 barley 
 barleycorn 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix