URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/throne
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:07:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Throne - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Throne - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of throne 

 throne (n.) 

 c. 1200, trone , "the seat of God or a saint in heaven;" c. 1300, "seat occupied by a sovereign, potentate, or dignity on earth," from Old French trone (12c., Modern French trône ), from Latin thronus (Medieval Latin tronus ), from Greek thronos "elevated seat, chair, throne," according to Watkins from suffixed form of PIE root *dher- "to hold firmly, support" (source also of Latin firmus "firm, steadfast, strong, stable," Sanskrit dharma "statute, law").

 Attested from late 14c. figuratively as a symbol of royal power. The colloquial meaning "toilet" is by 1960; comparison of the toilet to a throne is by 1922. The classical -h- begins to appear in English from late 14c. Related: Thronal .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to throne 

 dethrone (v.) 

 c. 1600, "remove or drive from a throne, depose;" see de- (privative) + throne . Figurative sense "divest of power or authority" is from 1640s. Related: Dethroned ; dethroning .

 enthrone (v.) 

 "to place on a throne, exalt to the seat of royalty," c. 1600, from en- (1) + throne (n.). Replacing enthronize (late 14c.), from Old French introniser (13c.), from Late Latin inthronizare , from Greek enthronizein . Also simply throne (v.), late 14c., from the noun in English. Related: Enthroned ; enthroning .

 th 
 *dher- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 toilet 

 1530s, earliest in English in an obsolete sense "cover or bag for clothes," from French toilette "a cloth; a bag for clothes," diminutive of toile "cloth, net" (see toil (n.2)). Toilet acquired an association with upper class dressing by 18c., through the specific sense "a fine c

 can 

 Old English 1st and 3rd person singular present indicative of cunnan "to know," less commonly as an auxiliary, "have power to, to be able," (also "have carnal knowledge"), from Proto-Germanic *kunnjanan "be mentally able, have learned" (source also of Old Norse kenna "become acqu

 commode 

 1786, "decorative chest of drawers for holding clothes, handy articles, etc.," earlier (1680s) name of a type of fashionable ladies' large, high headdress mounted on a wire frame, from French commode, noun use of adjective meaning "convenient, suitable," from Latin commodus "prop

 see 

 c. 1300, "throne of a bishop, archbishop, or pope," also "throne of a monarch, a goddess, the Antichrist, etc.," from Old...French sie "seat, throne; town, capital; episcopal see," from Latin sedem (nominative sedes) "seat, throne, abode, temple...

 chair 

 "a seat with a back, intended for one person," early 13c., chaere, from Old French chaiere "chair, seat, throne" (12c.; Modern...French chaire "pulpit, throne;" the humbler sense having gone since 16c. with the variant form chaise), from Latin cathedra...

 stool 

 (source also of Old Frisian stol, Old Norse stoll, Old High German stuol, German Stuhl "seat," Gothic stols "high seat, throne...The English word was originally used of thrones (as in cynestol "royal seat, throne") and in early Middle English still of...

 accession 

 From 1640s as "act of coming to a position or into possession," especially in reference to a throne....

 billet 

 1590s, "to assign quarters to, to direct (a soldier) by note to a lodging place," from a noun meaning "a ticket given by a military officer directing a person to whom it is addressed to provide board and lodging for the soldier carrying it" (1640s). This was a specific use of the

 office 

 mid-13c., "a post in government or administration, an employment to which certain duties are attached, secular position of authority or responsibility," from Anglo-French and Old French ofice "place or function; divine service" (12c. in Old French) and directly from Latin officiu

 post 

 "a timber of considerable size set upright," from Old English post "pillar, doorpost," and from Old French post "post, upright beam," both from Latin postis "door, post, doorpost," in Medieval Latin "a beam, rod, pole," which is perhaps from Vulgar Latin *por- "forth," a variant 

 Share throne 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/throne Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/throne">Etymology of throne by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of throne. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/throne Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of throne," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/throne. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of throne." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/throne. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of throne." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/throne (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near throne 
 throe 
 thrombo- 
 thrombophlebitis 
 thrombosis 
 thrombus 
 throne 
 throng 
 throstle 
 throttle 
 through 
 throughly 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix