URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/card
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:59:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Card - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Card - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of card 

 card (n.1) 

 early 15c., "a playing card," from Old French carte (14c.), from Medieval Latin carta / charta "a card, paper; a writing, a charter," from Latin charta "leaf of paper, a writing, tablet," from Greek khartēs "layer of papyrus," which is probably from Egyptian. The form has been influenced by Italian cognate carta "paper, leaf of paper." Compare chart (n.). The shift in English from -t to -d is unexplained.

 The sense of "playing cards" also is the oldest of the French word. The sense in English was extended by 1590s to similar small, flat, stiff pieces of paper. As "small piece of cardboard upon which is written or printed the name, address, etc. of the person presenting it," from 1795: visiting-cards for social calls, business-cards announcing one's profession. The meaning "printed ornamental greetings for special occasions" is from 1862.

 Application to clever or original persons (1836, originally with an adjective, as in smart card ) is from the playing-card sense, via expressions such as sure card "an expedient certain to attain an object" (c. 1560).

 Card-sharper "professional cheat at cards" is from 1859 (see sharper ). House of cards in the figurative sense of "any insecure or flimsy scheme" is from 1640s (in Milton), from children's play. To (figuratively) have a card up (one's) sleeve is from 1898. To play the _______ card (for political advantage) is from 1886, originally the Orange card , meaning "appeal to Northern Irish Protestant sentiment."

 Cards are first mentioned in Spain in 1371, described in detail in Switzerland in 1377, and by 1380 reliably reported from places as far apart as Florence, Basle, Regensburg, Brabant, Paris, and Barcelona. References are also claimed for earlier dates, but these are relatively sparse and do not withstand scrutiny. [David Parlett, "A History of Card Games"]
 also from early 15c. 

 card (v.1) 

 1540s, "to play cards" (now obsolete), from card (n.1). From 1925 as "to write (something) on a card for filing." Meaning "require (someone) to show an identification card" is from 1970s. Related: Carded ; carding .
 also from 1540s 

 card (v.2) 

 "to comb wool," late 14c., from card (n.2) or else from Old French carder , from Old Provençal cardar "to card," from Vulgar Latin *caritare , from Latin carrere "to clean or comb with a card," perhaps from PIE root *kars- "to scrape" (see harsh ). Related: Carded ; carding .
 also from late 14c. 

 card (n.2) 

 "implement or machine for combing, brush with wire teeth used in disentangling fibers for spinning," late 14c. (mid-14c. in surname Cardmaker ), from Old French carde "card, teasel," from Old Provençal cardo or some other Romanic source (compare Spanish and Italian carda "thistle, tease, card," back-formation from cardar "to card" (see card (v.2)). The English word probably also comes via Anglo-Latin cardo , from Medieval Latin carda "a teasel," from Latin carduus .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to card 

 carding (n.) 

 "wool-dressing," late 15c., verbal noun from card (v.2).

 chart (n.) 

 1570s, "map for the use of navigators," from French charte "card, map," from Late Latin charta "paper, card, map" (see card (n.1)).

 Charte is the original form of the French word in all senses, but after 14c. (perhaps by influence of Italian cognate carta ), carte began to supplant it. English used both carte and card 15c.-17c. for "chart, map," and in 17c. chart could mean "playing card," but the words have gone their separate ways and chart has predominated since in the "map" sense.

 The meaning "sheet on which information is presented in a methodical or tabulated form" is from 1840; specifically in the music score sense from 1957.

 harsh 
 sharper 
 a la carte 
 cardboard 
 card-carrying 
 card-catalogue 
 carder 
 cards 
 card-table 
 carminative 
 carte blanche 
 carte de visite 
 cartel 
 cartography 
 cartomancy 
 carton 
 cartridge 
 credit-card 
 See All Related Words (28) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 harsh 

 originally of texture, "hairy," 1530s, probably from Middle English harske "rough, coarse, sour" (c. 1300), a northern word of Scandinavian origin (compare Danish and Norwegian harsk "rancid, rank"), related to Middle Low German harsch "rough, raw," German harst "a rake;" perhaps

 carminative 

 "expelling or having the quality of expelling flatulence," early 15c., from Latin carminativus, from past-participle stem of carminare "to card," from carmen, genitive carminis, "a card for wool or flax," which is related to carrere "to card" (see card (v.2)). A medical term fro

 cartel 

 1550s, "a written challenge, letter of defiance," from French cartel (16c.), from Italian cartello "placard," diminutive of carta "card" (see card (n.1)). It came to mean "written agreement between states at war" (1690s), for the exchange of prisoners or some other mutual advanta

 pinochle 

 once-popular American game played with a double 24-card pack, originally German, also pinocle, etc., 1864, Peaknuckle, of...obscure origin (as are the names of many card games), evidently from Swiss dialect Binokel (German), binocle (French), from...Binokel was the name of a card game played in Württemberg, related to the older card game bezique and the name is perhaps...from French bésigue "bezique," the card game, wrongly identified with besicles "spectacles," perhaps because the game is...

 slam 

 "a winning of all tricks in a card game," used especially in whist, 1650s, earlier the name of a card game (also called ruff...The grand slam in bridge is recorded by 1892; it was used earlier in related card games (by 1800); the figurative sense of...The baseball sense of "home run with the bases loaded" is by 1935, probably a natural extension from the card game sense,...

 joker 

 In generic slang use for "any man, fellow, chap" by 1811, which probably is the source of the meaning "odd face card in the...An 1857 edition of Hoyle's "Games" lists a card game called Black Joke in which all face cards were called jokers....American manufacturers of playing-cards are wont to include a blank card at the top of the pack; and it is, alas!...true that some thrifty person suggested that the card should not be wasted. This was the origin of the joker. ["St....

 Hoyle 

 cited as a typical authority on card or board games, by 1755, a reference to Edmond Hoyle (1672-1769), author of several...works on card-playing....["Dictionary of English and Welsh Surnames," London, 1901] To the making of rule-books there is no end, and books on card...[David Parlett, "A History of Card Games," 1991]...

 correspondence 

 early 15c., "congruence, resemblance, harmony, agreement," from Medieval Latin correspondentia, from correspondentem (nominative correspondens), present participle of correspondere "correspond, harmonize, reciprocate," from assimilated form of com "together, with (each other)" (s

 wit 

 "mental capacity," Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit "understanding, intellect, sense; knowledge, consciousness, conscience," from Proto-Germanic *wit- (source also of Old Saxon wit, Old Norse vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi "knowled

 insure 

 mid-15c., insuren, spelling variant of ensuren "to assure, give formal assurance" (late 14c.), also "make secure, make safe" (c. 1400), from Anglo-French enseurer, Old French ensurer, from en- "make" (see en- (1)) + seur, sur "safe, secure, undoubted" (see sure (adj.)). The parti

 Share card 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/card Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/card">Etymology of card by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of card. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/card Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of card," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/card. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of card." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/card. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of card." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/card (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near card 
 carcass 
 carceral 
 carcinogen 
 carcinogenic 
 carcinoma 
 card 
 cardamom 
 cardboard 
 card-carrying 
 card-catalogue 
 carder 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix