URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorophyll
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:09:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chlorophyll - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chlorophyll - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chlorophyll 

 chlorophyll (n.) 

 green-colored stuff in plants, 1819, from French chlorophyle (1818), coined by French chemists Pierre-Joseph Pelletier (1788-1842) and Joseph Bienaimé Caventou (1795-1877) from chloro- , from Latinized form of Greek khlōros "pale green, greenish-yellow" (from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives denoting "green" and "yellow") + phyllon "a leaf" (from suffixed form of PIE root *bhel- (3) "to thrive, bloom").
 also from 1819 

 Entries linking to chlorophyll 

 *bhel- (3) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to thrive, bloom," possibly a variant of PIE root *bhel- (2) "to blow, swell."

 It might form all or part of: blade ; bleed ; bless ; blood ; blow (v.2) "to bloom, blossom;" bloom (n.1) "blossom of a plant;" bloom (n.2) "rough mass of wrought iron;" blossom ; cauliflower ; chervil ; cinquefoil ; deflower ; defoliation ; effloresce ; exfoliate ; feuilleton ; flora ; floral ; floret ; florid ; florin ; florist ; flour ; flourish ; flower ; foil (n.) "very thin sheet of metal;" foliage ; folio ; folium ; gillyflower ; Phyllis ; phyllo- ; portfolio ; trefoil .

 It might also be the source of: Greek phyllon "leaf;" Latin flos "flower," folio , folium "leaf;" Middle Irish blath , Welsh blawd "blossom, flower;" Gaelic bile "leaflet, blossom;" Old English blowan "to flower, bloom."

 *ghel- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine;" it forms words for "gold" (the "bright" metal), words denoting colors, especially "yellow" and "green," also "bile, gall," for its color, and a large group of Germanic gl- words having to do with shining and glittering and, perhaps, sliding. Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is "perhaps because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to yellow."

 It might form all or part of: arsenic ; Chloe ; chloral ; chloride ; chlorinate ; chlorine ; chloro- ; chloroform ; chlorophyll ; chloroplast ; cholecyst ; choler ; cholera ; choleric ; cholesterol ; cholinergic ; Cloris ; gall (n.1) "bile, liver secretion;" gild ; glad ; glance ; glare ; glass ; glaze ; glazier ; gleam ; glee ; glib ; glide ; glimmer ; glimpse ; glint ; glissade ; glisten ; glister ; glitch ; glitter ; glitzy ; gloaming ; gloat ; gloss (n.1) "glistening smoothness, luster;" glow ; glower ; gold ; guilder ; jaundice ; melancholic ; melancholy ; yellow ; zloty .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit harih "yellow, tawny yellow," hiranyam "gold;" Avestan zari "yellow;" Old Persian daraniya- , Avestan zaranya- "gold;" Greek khlōros "greenish-yellow color," kholos "bile, gall, wrath;" Latin helvus "yellowish, bay," Gallo-Latin gilvus "light bay;" Lithuanian geltonas "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlutu , Polish żółty , Russian zeltyj "yellow;" Latin galbus "greenish-yellow," fellis "bile, gall;" Lithuanian žalias "green," želvas "greenish," tulžis "bile;" Old Church Slavonic zelenu , Polish zielony , Russian zelenyj "green;" Old Irish glass , Welsh and Breton glas "green," also "gray, blue;" Old English galla "gall, bile," geolu , geolwe , German gelb , Old Norse gulr "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlato , Russian zoloto , Old English gold , Gothic gulþ "gold;" Old English glæs "glass; a glass vessel."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 photosynthesis 

 out the need of a distinctive term for the synthetical process in plants, brought about by protoplasm in the presence of chlorophyll...

 pigment 

 late 14c., "a red dye," from Latin pigmentum "coloring matter, pigment, paint," figuratively "ornament," from stem of pingere "to color, paint" (see paint (v.)). By 1610s in the broader sense "any substance that is or can be used by painters to impart color" (technically a dry su

 proper 

 c. 1300, propre, "adapted to some purpose, fit, apt; commendable, excellent" (sometimes ironic), from Old French propre "own, particular; exact, neat, fitting, appropriate" (11c.) and directly from Latin proprius "one's own, particular to itself," from pro privo "for the individu

 preposterous 

 1540s, "contrary to nature, reason, or common sense," from Latin praeposterus "absurd, contrary to nature, inverted, perverted, in reverse order," literally "before-behind" (compare topsy-turvy, cart before the horse), from prae "before" (see pre-) + posterus "subsequent, coming 

 canon 

 "a rule or law," Old English canon "rule, law, or decree of the Church," from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon "Church law, a rule or doctrine enacted by ecclesiastical authority," in classical Latin, "measuring line, rule," from Greek kanon "any straight rod or

 confer 

 1530s, "examine by comparison;" 1540s (intransitive) "consult together on some special subject;" 1560s, "bestow as a gift or permanent possession," from Old French conférer (14c.) "to give; to converse; to compare," from Latin conferre "to bring together," figuratively "to compar

 revolution 

 late 14c., revolucioun, originally of celestial bodies, "one (apparent) rotation about the earth," also the time required for this, also "act or fact of moving in a circular course," from Old French revolucion "course, revolution" of celestial bodies (13c.) or directly from Late 

 succor 

 c. 1200, socour, earlier socours "aid, help," from Anglo-French succors "help, aid," Old French socors, sucurres "aid, help, assistance" (Modern French secours), from Medieval Latin succursus "help, assistance," from past participle of Latin succurrere "run to help, hasten to the

 corporation 

 mid-15c., corporacioun, "persons united in a body for some purpose," from such use in Anglo-Latin, from Late Latin corporationem (nominative corporatio) "assumption of a body" (used of the incarnation of Christ), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin corporare "embody

 politics 

 1520s, "science and art of government," from politic (n.) "the political state of a country or government (early 15c.), from Old French politique and Medieval Latin politica; see politic (adj.). The plural form probably was modeled on Aristotle's ta politika "affairs of state" (p

 Share chlorophyll 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorophyll Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorophyll">Etymology of chlorophyll by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chlorophyll. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorophyll Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chlorophyll," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorophyll. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chlorophyll." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorophyll. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chlorophyll." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chlorophyll (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chlorophyll 
 chlorination 
 chlorine 
 chloro- 
 chlorofluorocarbon 
 chloroform 
 chlorophyll 
 chloroplast 
 choad 
 choate 
 chock 
 chock-a-block 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix