URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/opium
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:17:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Opium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Opium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of opium 

 opium (n.) 

 "inspissated juice of the poppy plant," especially as used in medicine from 17c. for relief of pain and production of sleep, late 14c., from Latin opium , from Greek opion "poppy juice, poppy," diminutive of opos "vegetable juice, plant juice, fig curd," from PIE *sokwo- "juice, resin" (source also of Old Church Slavonic soki "juice," Lithuanian sakaī (plural) "resin").

 Die Religion ist der Seufzer der bedrängten Kreatur, das Gemüth einer herzlosen Welt, wie sie der Geist geistloser Zustände ist. Sie ist das Opium des Volks. [Karl Marx, 
 "Zur Kritik der Hegel'schen Rechts-Philosophie," in 
 "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher," February, 1844]

 The British Opium War against China lasted from 1839-42; the name is attested from 1841. Opium-eater , one who habitually uses opium in some form, is by 1821.
 also from 17c. 

 Entries linking to opium 

 opiate (n.) 

 "medicine containing opium," early 15c., from Medieval Latin opiatus , from Latin opium (see opium ). Figurative sense of "anything that dulls the feelings and induces rest or inaction" is from 1640s. From 1540s in English as an adjective, "made with or containing opium," hence "inducing sleep, narcotic."

 opioid (n.) 

 1957, from opium + -oid . Originally not clearly distinguished from opiate , but now generally "chemical product that works the same as an opiate but does not occur naturally."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 laudanum 

 contain gold and crushed pearls and many expensive ingredients, but probably owing its effectiveness to only one of them, opium...The word soon came to be used for "any alcoholic tincture of opium."...

 addiction 

 The sense of "compulsion and need to take a drug as a result of prior use of it" is by 1906, in reference to opium (there...

 meconium 

 ," 1706, from Latin meconium "excrement of a newborn child," literally "poppy juice," from Greek mēkōnion "poppy-juice, opium...

 disguise 

 [Thomas De Quincey, "Confessions of an English Opium-Eater," 1856] Related: Disguised; disguising....

 delirium 

 1813 by British physician Thomas Sutton for "that form of delirium which is rendered worse by bleeding, but improved by opium...

 hit 

 To hit the bottle "drink alcohol" is from 1933 (hit the booze in the same sense is from 1889, and hit the pipe "smoke opium...

 joint 

 U.S. use especially "an opium-smoking den" (1883)....

 frog-march 

 also frog's march, 1871, a term that originated among London police and referred to their method of moving "a drunken or refractory prisoner" by carrying him face-down between four people, each holding a limb; the connection with frog (n.1) perhaps being the notion of going along

 daughter 

 Middle English doughter, from Old English dohtor "female child considered with reference to her parents," from Proto-Germanic *dokhter, earlier *dhutēr (source also of Old Saxon dohtar, Old Norse dóttir, Old Frisian and Dutch dochter, German Tochter, Gothic dauhtar), from PIE *dh

 seal 

 "design stamped on wax," especially an impressed figure attached to a document as evidence of authenticity, c. 1200, sel, sele, from Old French seel, seal "seal on a letter" (Modern French sceau), from Vulgar Latin *sigellum (source of Italian suggello, Spanish sello; also Old Fr

 Share opium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/opium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/opium">Etymology of opium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of opium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/opium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of opium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/opium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of opium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/opium. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of opium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/opium (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near opium 
 opinion 
 opinionate 
 opinionated 
 opioid 
 opisthography 
 opium 
 opossum 
 opponent 
 opportune 
 opportunism 
 opportunist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix