URL: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/peach
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:43:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: peach - Wiktionary, the free dictionary

peach - Wiktionary, the free dictionary 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Community portal 
 Requested entries 
 Recent changes 
 Random entry 
 Help 
 Glossary 
 Contact us 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Beginning

 1 
 English 

 Toggle English subsection 

 1.1 
 Pronunciation 

 1.2 
 Etymology 1 

 1.2.1 
 Noun 

 1.2.1.1 
 Hypernyms 

 1.2.1.2 
 Derived terms 

 1.2.1.3 
 Descendants 

 1.2.1.4 
 Translations 

 1.2.2 
 Adjective 

 1.2.2.1 
 Translations 

 1.2.3 
 See also 

 1.2.4 
 Further reading 

 1.3 
 Etymology 2 

 1.3.1 
 Verb 

 1.3.1.1 
 Derived terms 

 1.3.1.2 
 Translations 

 1.4 
 Etymology 3 

 1.4.1 
 Noun 

 1.4.1.1 
 Derived terms 

 1.5 
 Anagrams 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 peach 

 64 languages 

 Afrikaans 
 Aragonés 
 العربية 
 Asturianu 
 Azərbaycanca 
 Беларуская 
 বাংলা 
 Català 
 Čeština 
 Cymraeg 
 Dansk 
 Deutsch 
 Ελληνικά 
 Esperanto 
 Español 
 Eesti 
 Euskara 
 فارسی 
 Suomi 
 Français 
 Galego 
 Hrvatski 
 Magyar 
 Հայերեն 
 Interlingua 
 Ido 
 Íslenska 
 Italiano 
 日本語 
 ಕನ್ನಡ 
 한국어 
 Kurdî 
 Кыргызча 
 ລາວ 
 Lietuvių 
 Latviešu 
 Malagasy 
 Māori 
 മലയാളം 
 မြန်မာဘာသာ 
 Nāhuatl 
 Nederlands 
 Occitan 
 Oromoo 
 Polski 
 Português 
 Română 
 Русский 
 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 
 Simple English 
 Slovenčina 
 Svenska 
 Kiswahili 
 தமிழ் 
 తెలుగు 
 ไทย 
 Türkçe 
 اردو 
 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 
 Vèneto 
 Tiếng Việt 
 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí 
 中文 
 IsiZulu 

 Entry 

 Discussion 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 

 Print/export

 Create a book 
 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wiktionary, the free dictionary

 See also: Peach 

 English
 [ edit ] 

 Autumn Red peaches (noun sense 2). 
 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 IPA ( key ) : /ˈpiːt͡ʃ/ , [ˈpɪi̯t͡ʃ] 
 Audio ( US ) : ( file ) 

 Rhymes: -iːtʃ 

 Hyphenation: peach 

 Etymology 1
 [ edit ] 

 Etymology tree

 Latin persicus 
 Latin persicum 
 Late Latin persica 
 Vulgar Latin *pessica 
 Old French pesche bor. 
 Middle English peche 
 English peach 

 From Middle English peche , borrowed from Old French pesche ( French pêche ), Vulgar Latin *pessica (cf. Medieval Latin pesca ) from Late Latin persica , from Classical Latin mālum persicum , from Ancient Greek μᾶλον περσικόν ( mâlon persikón , “ Persian apple ” ) . Displaced Middle English persogȝe , from Old English persoc , ultimately from the same Latin root above.

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 peach ( countable and uncountable , plural peaches ) 

 ( countable ) Any tree of species Prunus persica , native to China and now widely cultivated throughout temperate regions, having pink flowers and edible fruit.
 Synonym: peach tree 
 1768 , M. Combles, A Treatise Upon the Culture of Peach Trees , page 8 : I think it the best way to plant the fifteen sorts, and the hard Peaches I have mentioned, in the same order as they stand in the list. 

 1840 , Thomas Bridgeman, The Young Gardener’s Assistant , page 136 : Several attempts have been made to class the varieties of Peaches and Nectarines by the leaf and flower, as well as the fruit. 

 1942 , Raymond Earl Storie, Soil Survey, the Pixley Area, California , volume 1, page 11 : Scattered plantings of peaches are maintained on the light-textured deep alluvial soils of the Foster, Cajon, Hanford, Hesperia, and Greenfield series west of Porterville, near Woodville, Poplar, Sausalito School, and farther south along the Kern County boundary line north of Delano. 

 2014 , Melissa Walker, The New Encyclopedia of Southern Culture , volume 11 , page 183 : State universities and U.S. Department of Agriculture facilities have largely replaced the private state and national pomological and horticultural organizations as the primary researchers for peach cultivation. 

 ( countable , uncountable ) Soft juicy stone fruit of the peach tree, having yellow flesh, downy, red-tinted yellow skin, and a deeply sculptured pit or stone containing a single seed.
 1789 , Hester Lynch Piozzi, Observations and Reflections Made in the Course of a Journey Through France, Italy, and Germany , volume II, page 191 : [A]nd that the English should eat peaches in May, and green pease in October, sounds to Italian ears as a miracle; they comfort themselves, however, by saying that they must be very insipid, while we know that fruits forced by strong fire are at least many of them higher in flavour than those produced by sun [ … ] 

 1869 , The American Housewife and Kitchen Directory , page 104 : When dissolved, stir it up well, and put in the peaches , without crowding them, and boil them slowly about twenty minutes. 

 1915 June , T[homas] S[tearns] Eliot , “ The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock ”, in Prufrock and Other Observations , London: The Egoist   [ … ] , published 1917 , →OCLC , page 15 : Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare eat a peach ? / I shall wear white flannel trousers, and walk upon the beach. 

 2012 , Jasper Woodroof, Commercial Fruit Processing , page 103 : Boiling water or steam loosens the peel of very ripe peaches , especially freestone or melting-flesh types, in 10–30 sec. 

 ( uncountable ) A light yellow-red colour.
 1854 , Thomas Love, The Art of Cleaning, Dyeing, Scouring and Finishing, etc , page 242 : To dye one chip bonnet peach colour, put four ounces of cudbear in one gallon of water, make it boil, and put one ounce of soda in the liquor. 

 1990 , Lila Fretz, Hooking Rugs: Storey’s Country Wisdom Bulletin , page 27 : If the dye is for a light color such as peach , more dry dye could be used. 

 2013 , Kim Eichler-Messmer, Modern Color—An Illustrated Guide to Dyeing Fabric for Modern Quilts , page 61 : Circle Quilt throw in peach and green 

 peach:   

 ( countable , informal ) A particularly admirable or pleasing person or thing.
 1922 September, Lucile Brewer, “Fourteen Peach Delicacies”, in The Delineator , volume 101 , page 58 : How did the common expressions "She's a peach !" and "He has a peach of a job!" arise if not because the peach of all fruits is a symbol of perfection? 

 1977 , “Peaches”, in Rattus Norvegicus , performed by The Stranglers : Walking on the beaches / looking at the peaches 

 1996 , Paul L. Mariani, Dream Song: The Life of John Berryman , page 30 : Except for the loss of Uncle Jack's income, his mother's growing disenchantment with her domestic arrangements, and the deepening Depression, it was a peach of a time for Berryman. 

 2012 September 15, Amy Lawrence, “Arsenal's Gervinho enjoys the joy of six against lowly Southampton”, in Alan Rusbridger , editor, The Guardian ‎ [1] , London: Guardian News & Media , →ISSN , →OCLC : Arsenal's dominance was reflected in a flurry of goals before half-time – three in six minutes: first, Podolski turned the screw with a peach of a free-kick; then Gervinho accelerated on to Mikel Arteta's beautifully crafted pass and beat Davis at his near post with conviction; and finally Southampton's defence unspooled completely when Gervinho broke to release Gibbs, whose return ball cannoned off Nathaniel Clyne for Southampton's second own goal of a sobering afternoon. (Can we archive this URL ?) 

 ( euphemestic , often in plural ) Buttock or bottom .
 1977 , “ Peaches ”, performed by the Stranglers : Down on the beaches, just look at all the peaches 

 2011 , Nicole “Snooki” Polizzi , A Shore Thing : Gia danced around a little, shaking her peaches for show. She shook it hard. Too hard. In the middle of a shimmy, her stomach cramped. A fart slipped out. A loud one. And stinky. 

 Hypernyms
 [ edit ] 

 fruit 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 African peach ( Sarcocephalus latifolius )
 Anderson's peachbrush ( Prunus andersonii )
 belly-up peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 bloom is off the peach , blush is off the peach 
 Chinese peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 cling peach 
 clingstone peach 
 custard peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 desert peach ( Prunus andersonii )
 donut peach , doughnut peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 flat peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 freestone peach 
 freeze peach 
 fuzzless peach ( Prunus persica var. nucipersica , Prunus persica var. nectarina )
 green peach aphid ( Myzus persicae )
 Guinea peach ( Sarcocephalus latifolius )
 hat peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 Indian peach 
 Jupiter peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 lesser peach tree borer ( Synanthedon pictipes )
 little peach 
 longevity peach 
 pan tao peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 paraguayo peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 peacharita 
 peach bark beetle ( Phloeotribus liminaris )
 peach basket hat 
 peach blossom 
 peachblow 
 peach borer 
 peachbush 
 Peach County 
 peachen 
 peacherine 
 peacherino 
 peachery 
 peaches and cream 
 peach-fronted parakeet , peach-fronted conure ( Eupsittula aurea )
 peach fruit borer ( Carpasina niponesis )
 peach fruit moth 
 peach fuzz , peachfuzz 
 peaching 
 peachish 
 peachleaf 
 peachleaf bellflower ( Campanula persicifolia )
 peach leaf curl 
 peach-leaf willow , peachleaf willow ( Salix amygdaloides )
 peachless 
 peachlet 
 peachlike 
 peach melba 
 peach oak ( Quercus phellos )
 peach of immortality 
 peach palm ( Bactris gasipaes )
 peach phony disease 
 peach pit , peach-pit 
 peach-potato aphid ( Myzus persicae )
 peachskin snailfish ( Careproctus scottae )
 peach snailfish ( Allocareproctus tanix )
 Peach Springs 
 peach thorn ( Lycium cooperi )
 peachtini 
 peach tree , peachtree 
 peach twig borer ( Anarsia lineatella )
 peach water 
 peachwood 
 peachy 
 peachy keen 
 phony peach disease 
 pickle peach 
 pita peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 plum peach 
 press peach 
 Saturn peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 saucer peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 sea peach ( Halocynthia spp.)
 Sierra Leone peach ( Sarcocephalus latifolius )
 smallflower peachbrush ( Prunus minutiflora )
 sweetcap peach 
 Texas peachbrush ( Prunus texana )
 UFO peach ( Prunus persica subsp. platycarpa )
 wild peach 
 wolf's peach ( Solanum lycopersicum )

 Descendants
 [ edit ] 

 → Abenaki: biches ( from the plural peaches ) 

 → ? Arapaho: biisíb 

 → Bengali: পীচ ( pic ) ( probably ) 

 → Haida: píichas 

 → Malay: pic ( probably ) 

 → ? Māori: pītiti 

 → Swahili: pichi ( probably ) 

 → Thai: พีช ( píit ) 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 tree

 Abkhaz: атамаҵла ( atʼamacʼla ) 

 Afrikaans: perskeboom 

 Aramaic:
 Assyrian Neo-Aramaic: ܐܝܼܠܵܢܵܐ ܕܚܵܘܚܵܐ   m ( īlana d-ḳawḳa ) 

 Armenian: դեղձենի   (hy) ( deġjeni ) 

 Aromanian: chearsic   m , hearhic   m 

 Asturian: pescal   (ast)   f 

 Basque: mertxikondo 

 Bulgarian: пра́скова   (bg)   f ( práskova ) 

 Catalan: presseguer   (ca)   m 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 桃樹  / 桃树   (zh) ( táoshù ) 

 Cornish: aval gwlanek 

 Czech: broskvoň   (cs)   f , broskev   (cs)   f ( informal ) 

 Danish: ferskentræ   n 

 Dutch: perzikboom   (nl)   m , perzikenboom   (nl)   m 

 Finnish: persikka   (fi) 

 French: pêcher   (fr)   m 

 Friulian: piersolâr   m 

 Galician: pexegueiro   (gl)   m , pavieira   f 

 Georgian: ატამი   (ka) ( aṭami ) , ატმის ხე ( aṭmis xe ) 

 German: Pfirsichbaum   (de)   m 

 Greek: ροδακινιά   (el)   f ( rodakiniá ) 
 Pontic Greek: ροδάκινον ( rodákinon ) 

 Hebrew: אֲפַרְסֵק   (he)   m ( afarsék ) 

 Hungarian: őszibarackfa   (hu) 

 Hunsrik: Perschebaam   m 

 Indonesian: persik   (id) , kesemek   (id) 

 Irish: crann péitseog   m 

 Italian: pesco   (it)   m , persico   (it) 

 Japanese: 桃   (ja) ( もも, momo ) 

 Kaitag: кьвя́рче ( q̇və́rče ) 

 Kashmiri: ژٕنٕنؠ کُل ( ċụnụn' kul ) 

 Kazakh: шабдалы ( šabdalı ) 

 Korean: 복사나무 ( boksanamu ) 

 Kurdish:
 Central Kurdish: قۆخ   (ckb) ( qox ) 
 Northern Kurdish: xox   (ku)   f , şeftalî   (ku)   f 

 Kyrgyz: шабдалы   (ky) ( şabdalı ) 

 Lao: ໝາກພິດຄ ( māk phit kha ) , ໄຄ້ ( khai ) 

 Latin: persicus   (la)   f 

 Laz: ანტამა ( ant͏̌ama ) 

 Luxembourgish: Pijebam   m 

 Macanese: árve di péscu 

 Macedonian: пра́ска   (mk)   f ( práska ) 

 Malay: toh ( rare, Singapore ) , pic ( Malaysia ) , persik ( Malay areas of Indonesia ) 

 Mongolian: тоор   (mn) ( toor ) , тоор мод ( toor mod ) 

 Neapolitan: piérzeco   m 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: fersken   m , ferskentre   n 

 Occitan: persec   (oc) 

 Okinawan: 桃 ( むむ, mumu ) 

 Old English: persoctrēow   n 

 Oromo: kookii 

 Pannonian Rusyn: брескиня   f ( breskinja ) 

 Persian: هلو   (fa) ( holu ) , شفتالو   (fa) ( šaftâlu ) 

 Piedmontese: persi   m 

 Polish: brzoskwinia   (pl)   f 

 Portuguese: pessegueiro   (pt)   m 

 Romanian: piersic   (ro)   m 

 Romansh: persic 

 Russian: пе́рсик   (ru)   m ( pérsik ) , пе́рсиковое де́рево   n ( pérsikovoje dérevo ) 

 Sardinian: pessiche   m 

 Serbo-Croatian:
 Cyrillic: бресква   f 
 Latin: breskva   (sh)   f 

 Sicilian: pèrsica   f 

 Spanish: duraznero   (es)   m , durazno   (es)   m , melocotonero   m , melocotón   (es)   m 

 Swedish: persika   (sv)   c , persikoträd   (sv)   n 

 Tagalog: melokoton 

 Thai: ท้อ   (th) ( tɔ́ɔ ) 

 Turkish: şeftali   (tr) , alıç   (tr) 

 Ukrainian: пе́рсик   (uk)   m ( pérsyk ) , пе́рсикове де́рево   n ( pérsykove dérevo ) 

 Unami: pilkëshakw 

 Vietnamese: đào   (vi) 

 Volapük: pärsigabim , pärsigep 

 Welsh: coeden eirin gwlanog   f 

 Zazaki: xewxêr   f 

 Zulu: umpetshisi ( nc 3 ) 

 fruit

 Abkhaz: атама ( atʼama ) 

 Afrikaans: perske   (af) 

 Alabama: takkola 

 Albanian: pjeshkë   (sq) 

 Amharic: ኮክ ( kok ) 

 Arabic: خَوْخ   f   pl ( ḵawḵ ) ( collective ) , خَوْخَة   f ( ḵawḵa ) ( singular ) , دُرَّاق   m ( durrāq ) , فِرْسِك   m ( firsik ) 
 Egyptian Arabic: خوخ   m ( ḵōḵ ) ( collective ) , خوحة   f ( ḵōḵa ) ( singulative ) 
 Hijazi Arabic: خوخ   m   pl ( ḵōḵ ) 
 Moroccan Arabic: خوخ ( ḵūḵ ) 
 South Levantine Arabic: دراق   m ( dirrāʕ ) 

 Aragonese: malacatón   m , presiego   (an)   m 

 Aramaic:
 Assyrian Neo-Aramaic: ܚܵܘܚܵܐ   m ( ḳawḳa ) 
 Mandaic: ࡊࡀࡅࡊࡀ   m ( ḵawḵā ) 

 Armenian: դեղձ   (hy) ( deġj ) 

 Aromanian: chearsicã   f , hearhicã   f 

 Asturian: piescu   (ast)   m 

 Azerbaijani: şaftalı   (az) , hulu   (az) 

 Basque: mertxika   (eu) 

 Belarusian: пе́рсік   m ( pjérsik ) 

 Bengali: পীচ ( pic ) 

 Breton: pechez   (br) collective noun pechezenn   (br)   f sg 

 Bulgarian: пра́скова   (bg)   f ( práskova ) 

 Burmese: မက်မွန်   (my) ( makmwan ) 

 Carpathian Rusyn: броскы́ня   f ( broskŷ́nja ) 

 Catalan: préssec   (ca)   m , melicotó   (ca)   m ( Mallorca ) , bresquilla   (ca)   f ( Valencia ) 

 Cherokee: ᏆᏅ ( quanv ) 

 Chickasaw: takolo 

 Chinese:
 Cantonese: 桃   (yue) ( tou 4-2 ) , 桃子 ( tou 4 zi 2 ) , 蜜桃 ( mat 6 tou 4 ) 
 Eastern Min: 桃 ( to ) 
 Mandarin: 桃   (zh) ( táo ) , 桃子   (zh) ( táozi ) 

 Choctaw: takkon 

 Cornish: aval gwlanek   f 

 Czech: broskev   (cs)   f 

 Danish: fersken   (da)   c 

 Dutch: perzik   (nl)   m 

 Egyptian: (please verify ) 

 ( dpḥ n prs   m ) 

 Esperanto: persiko   (eo) 

 Estonian: virsik   (et) 

 Faroese: ferska   f 

 Finnish: persikka   (fi) 

 French: pêche   (fr)   f 

 Frisian:
 North Frisian: Fersk   m ( Sylt ) 
 West Frisian: perzik   c 

 Friulian: piersul 

 Galician: pexego   (gl)   m , pavía   (gl)   f 

 Ge'ez: ኮክ ( kok ) 

 Georgian: ატამი   (ka) ( aṭami ) 

 German: Pfirsich   (de)   m 
 Alemannic German: Fërsich   m 

 Greek: ροδάκινο   (el)   n ( rodákino ) 
 Ancient Greek: περσικόν   n ( persikón ) , δωράκιον   n ( dōrákion ) 
 Pontic Greek: ροδάκινον ( rodákinon ) 

 Greenlandic: ferskeni 

 Haitian Creole: pèch 

 Hawaiian: koukī 

 Hebrew: אֲפַרְסֵק   (he)   m ( afarsék ) 

 Hindi: आड़ू   (hi) ( āṛū ) , शफतालु   (hi) ( śaphtālu ) , शफ़तालु ( śaftālu ) 

 Hungarian: őszibarack   (hu) , barack   (hu) 

 Hunsrik: Persch   f or m , fërsich   m , phërx   m 

 Icelandic: ferskja   (is)   f 

 Indonesian: persik   (id) , kesemek   (id) 

 Irish: péitseog   f 

 Italian: pesca   (it)   f 

 Japanese: 桃   (ja) ( もも, momo ) 

 Kabyle: taxuxet   f , lxux 

 Kaitag: кьвя́рче ( q̇və́rče ) 

 Kashmiri: ژٕنُن ( ċụnun ) 

 Kazakh: шабдалы ( šabdalı ) 

 Korean: 복숭아   (ko) ( boksung'a ) 

 Kumyk: шаптал ( şaptal ) 

 Kurdish:
 Northern Kurdish: xox   (ku)   f , şeftalî   (ku)   f 

 Kyrgyz: шабдалы   (ky) ( şabdalı ) 

 Ladino: shefteli , brisko 

 Lao: ໝາກພິດຄ ( māk phit kha ) 

 Latin: persicum   n , duracinum   n 

 Latvian: persiks   (lv)   m , firziķis   m 

 Laz: ანტამა ( ant͏̌ama ) 

 Ligurian: pèrsego 

 Lithuanian: persikas   (lt)   m 

 Lombard: persich , persegh , pérsigh 

 Low German: Peersch   m 
 East Frisian Low German: peerske   n , paarske   n ( Emden ) 

 Lü: ᦖᦱᧅᦃᦸᧂᧈ ( ṁaakẋoang¹ ) 

 Luxembourgish: Piisch   f , Pijen   pl 

 Macanese: péscu 

 Macedonian: пра́ска   (mk)   f ( práska ) 

 Malagasy: paiso   (mg) 

 Malay: toh ( rare, Singapore ) , pic ( Malaysia ) , persik ( Malay areas of Indonesia ) 

 Maltese: ħawħ   m , ħawħa   f 

 Manchu: ᡨᠣᡵᠣ ( toro ) 

 Manx: peitshag , pershagh 

 Māori: pītiti   (mi) 

 Mauritian Creole: pes 

 Mirandese: pierxigo   (mwl)   m , piérxigo   (mwl)   m 

 Mongolian: тоор   (mn) ( toor ) , тоор жимс ( toor žims ) , персик ( persik ) 

 Navajo: didzétsoh , bitseeʼ hólóní 

 Neapolitan: pèrzeca , percòca , piérzeco 

 Nogai: шабдал ( şabdal ) 

 Norman: pêche   f 

 Norwegian: fersken   m 

 Nuosu: ꌧꃰ ( syp vo ) 

 Occitan: persèga   (oc)   f , persec   (oc)   m 

 Ojibwe: miishijiimin 

 Okinawan: 桃 ( むむ, mumu ) 

 Old English: persoc   m 

 Oromo: kookii 

 Pannonian Rusyn: брескиня   f ( breskinja ) 

 Pashto: شلتالو   m ( shaltâlu ) , شوتالو   (ps)   m ( šawtâlu ) 

 Persian: هلو   (fa) ( holu ) , شفتالو   (fa) ( šaftâlu ) 

 Polish: brzoskwinia   (pl)   f 

 Portuguese: pêssego   (pt)   m 

 Quechua: turasnu 

 Romanian: piersică   (ro)   f 

 Romansh: persic   m 

 Russian: пе́рсик   (ru)   m ( pérsik ) 

 Saaroa: mimiliki’ukuhlucu 

 Sami:
 Northern Sami: persihkka 

 Sardinian:
 Campidanese: prèssiu   m 
 Logudorese: pèssighe   m 

 Scottish Gaelic: peitseag   f 

 Serbo-Croatian:
 Cyrillic: бре̏сква   f 
 Latin: brȅskva   (sh)   f 

 Sicilian: pèrsicu   (scn)   m 

 Sindhi: آڙو ( āṛo ) 

 Slovak: broskyňa   (sk)   f 

 Slovene: breskev   (sl)   f 

 Sorbian:
 Lower Sorbian: rjaschen   m 
 Upper Sorbian: brěšk   m , brěška   f 

 Spanish: durazno   (es)   m ( Mexico , Argentina ) , melocotón   (es)   m ( Antilles , Colombia , Dominican Republic , Spain ) 

 Swahili: pichi 

 Swedish: persika   (sv)   c 

 Tagalog: melokoton 

 Tajik: шафтолу   (tg) ( šaftolu ) 

 Taos: phòʼína 

 Thai: ท้อ   (th) ( tɔ́ɔ ) , พีช ( píit ) 

 Tigrinya: ኩኽ ( kux ) 

 Turkish: şeftali   (tr) , alıç   (tr) 

 Turkmen: şetdaly 

 Ubykh: тым'а ( tʼəṃa ) 

 Ukrainian: пе́рсик   (uk)   m ( pérsyk ) 

 Unami: pilkësh 

 Urdu: آڑو   (ur) ( āṛū ) 

 Uyghur: شاپتۇل ( shaptul ) 

 Uzbek: shaftoli   (uz) 

 Venetan: pèrsego   (vec) 

 Vietnamese: đào   (vi) 

 Volapük: pärsig   (vo) 

 Welsh: eirinen wlanog   (cy)   f 

 Winnebago: kšeehįšek , kąąc hįšek ( literally “ fuzzy plum ” ) 

 Yiddish: פֿערשקע   f ( fershke ) 

 Zazaki: xewx 

 Zulu: ipentshisi   (zu) 

 colour

 Afrikaans: perkse 

 Catalan: préssec   (ca)   m 

 Finnish: persikka   (fi) 

 French: pêche   (fr)   f 

 Frisian:
 West Frisian: pjisk   n , perzik   c 

 Georgian: ატმისფერი ( aṭmisperi ) 

 Greek: ροδακινί   (el)   n ( rodakiní ) 

 Indonesian: krem   (id) 

 Italian: color pesca 

 Japanese: 桃色   (ja) ( ももいろ, momoiro ) 

 Macedonian: пра́ска   (mk)   f ( práska ) 

 Norwegian: fersken   m 

 Polish: brzoskwiniowy   (pl)   m 

 Portuguese: cor pêssego   f 

 Romanian: piersiciu   (ro) ( rare ) 

 Russian: пе́рсик   (ru)   m ( pérsik ) , пе́рсиковый   (ru)   m ( pérsikovyj ) ( цвет ) 

 Sicilian: pèrsicu   (scn)   m 

 Volapük: pärsigaköl 

 Welsh: melynbinc 

 pleasing person/thing

 Bulgarian: красавица   (bg)   f ( krasavica ) 

 Japanese: すてき な 人 ( sutekina hito ) , すてき もの ( sutekina mono ) 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: perle   (no)   m or f 

 Persian: هلو   (fa) ( holu ) 

 Spanish: perita en dulce   f ( colloquial ) 

 Adjective
 [ edit ] 

 peach ( comparative more peach , superlative most peach ) 

 Of or pertaining to the color peach.
 2006 , Anne Bold-Pryor, The Naked Wall ‎ [2] : Looking around her very large and very peach open kitchen and family room, I couldn't believe my eyes, but I knew the color must be there for a reason. 

 2012 , Mac Barnett, It Happened on a Train ‎ [3] : The dining compartment was very peach . 

 2014 , Kristin G. Congdon, Happy Clouds, Happy Trees: The Bob Ross Phenomenon : Perhaps this is best illustrated in the particularly bizarre Kinkade painting entitled The Good Shepherd's Cottage, where an openarmed (and very peach ) Jesus welcomes a herd of sheep—literal sheep—to the threshold of a glowing cottage. 

 Particularly pleasing or agreeable .
 Synonyms: agreeable , fair , orange , paragon , peachy , rosy 
 Antonyms: disagreeable , foul , ugly , unpleasant 
 2000 , Marc Behm, Afraid to Death , →ISBN , page 174 : 'That'll be just peach with me.' 

 2011 May 19, Gilbert Sullivan, “SWF (Adobe Flash) support”, in linux.debian.user ‎ [4] ( Usenet ): If I explain that I won't help them maintain systems running proprietary software (I'll make an exception for firmware, sometimes.) they usually shrug their shoulders and ask someone else -- which is just peach with me. 

 2011 , R. J. Anderson, Ultraviolet , →ISBN , page 9: Her words were peach with sincerity, and I could tell she really believed it was a good idea. 

 2015 November 2, “Resetting, goalsetting, and dreamsetting”, in From Athlete to triathlete : I am sure I was just peach to deal with. 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 colour

 Afrikaans: perskekleurig 

 Czech: broskvový   (cs) 

 Indonesian: krem   (id) 

 Scottish Gaelic: peitseagach 

 Ukrainian: пе́рсиковий   (uk) ( pérsykovyj ) 

 See also
 [ edit ] 

 🍑 

 laetrile 

 nectarine 

 Appendix:Colors 

 Further reading
 [ edit ] 

 Peach on Wikipedia. Wikipedia 

 Etymology 2
 [ edit ] 

 From Middle English pechen , from apechen ( “ to accuse ” ) and empechen ( “ to accuse ” ) , possibly from Anglo-Norman anpecher , from Late Latin impedicō ( “ entangle ” ) . See impeach .

 Verb
 [ edit ] 

 peach ( third-person singular simple present peaches , present participle peaching , simple past and past participle peached ) 

 ( intransitive , obsolete ) To inform on someone; turn informer.
 Synonyms: sing , squeal , tattle ; see also Thesaurus: rat out 
 1623 , Shakespeare, Henry IV : If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. 

 1859 , George Meredith, chapter 9, in The Ordeal of Richard Feverel. A History of Father and Son.   [ … ] , volume (please specify |volume=I to III) , London: Chapman and Hall , →OCLC : "But will your cousin tell?" was Ripton's reflection.
"He!" Richard's lip expressed contempt. "A ploughman refuses to peach , and you ask if a Feverel will?" 

 1916 , James Joyce , Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man , paperback edition, Macmillan Press Ltd, page 21 : And his father had told him if he ever wanted anything to write home to him and, whatever he did, never to peach on a fellow. 

 1913 , Rex Stout , Her Forbidden Knight , Carroll & Graf , published 1997 , →ISBN , page 123 : "Do you think we want to peach ? No, thank you. We may be none too good, but we won't hang a guy up, no matter who he is. [ … ] " 

 ( transitive , obsolete ) To inform against.
 1535 , Letters and Papers, Foreign and Domestic of the Reign of Henry VIII , volume 9, published 1886 , page 387 : Complaining of the conduct of Sir Ralph Robinson, parson of Brede, in Sussex, who took from him a psalter book in English, printed cum privilegio regali , and peached him of heresy, whereupon he was put in the stocks by the King's constable for two days. 

 1774 , “The British Theatre”, in London Magazine , volume 43 , page 639 : [ … ] and finding out the residence of his brother Charles, desires him not to peach him, but to lend him a suit of his fine cloaths, that he might see what it was to be a fine gentleman [ … ] 

 1840 , Daniel Defoe, Life of Colonel Jack: And, a True Relation of the Apparition of One Mrs. Veal ‎ [5] : Ay, says Will, I am undone for all that; for the officers are after me; and I am a dead dog if I am taken, for George is in custody, and he has peached me and all the others, to save his life. 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 peacher 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 to inform on someone

 Bulgarian: доноснича   (bg) ( donosniča ) 

 Czech: práskat   (cs)   impf , bonzovat   (cs)   impf , žalovat   (cs)   impf , prásknout   (cs)   pf (koho), udávat   (cs)   impf 

 Hungarian: beárul   (hu) , beköp   (hu) , besúg   (hu) , befúj   (hu) , spicliskedik   (hu) 

 Russian: я́бедничать   (ru)   impf ( jábedničatʹ ) , доноси́ть   (ru)   impf ( donosítʹ ) 

 Etymology 3
 [ edit ] 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 peach ( uncountable ) 

 ( mineralogy , obsolete , Cornwall ) A particular rock found in tin mines, sometimes associated with chlorite .
 1858 , Robert Philips Greg, Manual of the mineralogy of Great Britain & Ireland ‎ [6] : Chlorite forms the characterizing ingredient in chlorite slate; it is common in Cornwall with the tin veins, constituting with quartz the rock commonly known there as killas ; the ordinary name for chlorite is peach . 

 1862 , “Illustrated Notes on Prominent Mines”, in The Mining and Smelting Magazine ‎ [7] , volume 2, page 17 : Peach , which is a word used by the Cornish miners, in a generic sense, to denote all minerals of the chloritic family—and is consequently a very convenient word—seems to be essentially the "mother" of tin; but the experience of Cornwall goes to show that peach alone does not produce a permanent tin mine: an intermixture of quartz is necessary to give what miners call "strength" to the lode. 

 1908 , James Bastian Hill, The Geology of Falmouth and Truro and of the Mining District of Camborne and Redruth ‎ [8] : A quartz (sparry) vein, unless accompanied by other minerals such as peach , chlorite, &c., is considered valueless as an indication of the presence of ore. 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 blue peach 

 green peach 

 peach tourmaline 

 Anagrams
 [ edit ] 

 Pecha , chape , chapé , cheap 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=peach&oldid=92471336 "

 Categories : English 1-syllable words 
 English terms with IPA pronunciation 
 English terms with audio pronunciation 
 Rhymes:English/iːtʃ 
 Rhymes:English/iːtʃ/1 syllable 
 English terms inherited from Middle English 
 English terms derived from Vulgar Latin 
 English terms derived from Old French 
 English terms derived from Middle English 
 English terms derived from Latin 
 English terms derived from Late Latin 
 English terms derived from Ancient Greek 
 English lemmas 
 English nouns 
 English uncountable nouns 
 English countable nouns 
 English terms with quotations 
 English informal terms 
 English adjectives 
 English terms derived from Anglo-Norman 
 English verbs 
 English intransitive verbs 
 English terms with obsolete senses 
 English transitive verbs 
 en:Mineralogy 
 Cornish English 
 en:Fruits 
 en:Oranges 
 en:Pinks 
 en:Prunus genus plants 
 English terms derived from toponyms 

 Hidden categories: Pages using the WikiHiero extension 
 Pages with etymon 
 English entries with etymon 
 Pages with etymology trees 
 English entries with etymology trees 
 Pages using etymon with no ID 
 Pages with entries 
 Pages with 1 entry 
 Entries using missing taxonomic name (species) 
 Entries missing English vernacular names of taxa 
 Entries using missing taxonomic name (variety) 
 English links with redundant wikilinks 
 English links with redundant alt parameters 
 Entries using missing taxonomic name (genus) 
 Entries with translation boxes 
 Terms with Abkhaz translations 
 Terms with Afrikaans translations 
 Assyrian Neo-Aramaic terms with non-redundant manual transliterations 
 Terms with Assyrian Neo-Aramaic translations 
 Terms with Armenian translations 
 Terms with Aromanian translations 
 Terms with Asturian translations 
 Terms with Basque translations 
 Terms with Bulgarian translations 
 Terms with Catalan translations 
 Terms with Mandarin translations 
 Terms with Cornish translations 
 Terms with Czech translations 
 Terms with Danish translations 
 Terms with Dutch translations 
 Terms with Finnish translations 
 Terms with French translations 
 Terms with Friulian translations 
 Terms with Galician translations 
 Terms with Georgian translations 
 Terms with German translations 
 Terms with Greek translations 
 Terms with Pontic Greek translations 
 Terms with Hebrew translations 
 Terms with Hungarian translations 
 Terms with Hunsrik translations 
 Terms with Indonesian translations 
 Terms with Irish translations 
 Terms with Italian translations 
 Terms with Japanese translations 
 Terms with Kaitag translations 
 Terms with Kashmiri translations 
 Terms with Kazakh translations 
 Terms with Korean translations 
 Terms with Central Kurdish translations 
 Terms with Northern Kurdish translations 
 Terms with Kyrgyz translations 
 Terms with Lao translations 
 Terms with Latin translations 
 Terms with Laz translations 
 Terms with Luxembourgish translations 
 Terms with Macanese translations 
 Terms with Macedonian translations 
 Terms with Malay translations 
 Terms with Mongolian translations 
 Terms with Neapolitan translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Bokmål translations 
 Terms with Occitan translations 
 Terms with Okinawan translations 
 Terms with Old English translations 
 Terms with Oromo translations 
 Terms with Pannonian Rusyn translations 
 Terms with Persian translations 
 Terms with Piedmontese translations 
 Terms with Polish translations 
 Terms with Portuguese translations 
 Terms with Romanian translations 
 Terms with Romansh translations 
 Terms with Russian translations 
 Terms with Sardinian translations 
 Terms with Serbo-Croatian translations 
 Terms with Sicilian translations 
 Terms with Spanish translations 
 Terms with Swedish translations 
 Terms with Tagalog translations 
 Terms with Thai translations 
 Terms with Turkish translations 
 Terms with Ukrainian translations 
 Terms with Unami translations 
 Terms with Vietnamese translations 
 Terms with Volapük translations 
 Terms with Welsh translations 
 Terms with Zazaki translations 
 Terms with Zulu translations 
 Terms with Alabama translations 
 Terms with Albanian translations 
 Terms with Amharic translations 
 Terms with Arabic translations 
 Terms with Egyptian Arabic translations 
 Terms with Hijazi Arabic translations 
 Terms with Moroccan Arabic translations 
 Terms with South Levantine Arabic translations 
 Terms with Aragonese translations 
 Mandaic terms with non-redundant manual transliterations 
 Terms with Mandaic translations 
 Terms with Azerbaijani translations 
 Terms with Belarusian translations 
 Terms with Bengali translations 
 Terms with Breton translations 
 Terms with Burmese translations 
 Terms with Carpathian Rusyn translations 
 Terms with Cherokee translations 
 Terms with Chickasaw translations 
 Terms with Cantonese translations 
 Cantonese terms with redundant transliterations 
 Eastern Min terms with non-redundant manual transliterations 
 Terms with Eastern Min translations 
 Mandarin terms with redundant transliterations 
 Terms with Choctaw translations 
 Requests for review of Egyptian translations 
 Terms with Esperanto translations 
 Terms with Estonian translations 
 Terms with Faroese translations 
 Terms with North Frisian translations 
 Terms with West Frisian translations 
 Terms with Ge'ez translations 
 Terms with Alemannic German translations 
 Terms with Ancient Greek translations 
 Terms with Greenlandic translations 
 Terms with Haitian Creole translations 
 Terms with Hawaiian translations 
 Terms with Hindi translations 
 Terms with Icelandic translations 
 Terms with Kabyle translations 
 Kumyk terms with redundant transliterations 
 Terms with Kumyk translations 
 Terms with Ladino translations 
 Terms with Latvian translations 
 Terms with Ligurian translations 
 Terms with Lithuanian translations 
 Terms with Lombard translations 
 Terms with Low German translations 
 Terms with East Frisian Low German translations 
 Terms with Lü translations 
 Terms with Malagasy translations 
 Terms with Maltese translations 
 Terms with Manchu translations 
 Terms with Manx translations 
 Terms with Māori translations 
 Terms with Mauritian Creole translations 
 Terms with Mirandese translations 
 Terms with Navajo translations 
 Terms with Nogai translations 
 Terms with Norman translations 
 Terms with Norwegian translations 
 Terms with Nuosu translations 
 Terms with Ojibwe translations 
 Terms with Pashto translations 
 Terms with Quechua translations 
 Terms with Saaroa translations 
 Terms with Northern Sami translations 
 Terms with Scottish Gaelic translations 
 Terms with Sindhi translations 
 Terms with Slovak translations 
 Terms with Slovene translations 
 Terms with Lower Sorbian translations 
 Terms with Upper Sorbian translations 
 Terms with Swahili translations 
 Terms with Tajik translations 
 Terms with Taos translations 
 Terms with Tigrinya translations 
 Terms with Turkmen translations 
 Terms with Ubykh translations 
 Urdu terms with non-redundant manual transliterations 
 Terms with Urdu translations 
 Terms with Uyghur translations 
 Terms with Uzbek translations 
 Terms with Venetan translations 
 Terms with Winnebago translations 
 Terms with Yiddish translations 

 This page was last edited on 4 September 2026, at 12:09.

 Definitions and other text are available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 

 Privacy policy 

 About Wiktionary 

 Disclaimers 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 peach 

 64 languages 

 Add topic