URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pivot
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:02:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pivot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pivot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pivot 

 pivot (n.) 

 "pin on which a wheel or other object turns," 1610s, from French pivot , from Old French pivot "hinge pin, pivot" (12c.), also "penis," a word of uncertain origin. Pevetsheres , evidently some kind of shears, is mentioned in a will registered in York in 1398. Figurative sense of "turning point, that on which some matter hinges or depends" is recorded from 1813.
 also from 1610s 

 pivot (v.) 

 by 1841, "to turn or swing on or as on a pivot," from French pivoter and from pivot (n.). Mechanical meaning "furnish with a pivot" is by 1851. Related: Pivoted ; pivoting .
 also from 1841 

 Entries linking to pivot 

 pivotal (adj.) 

 "of the nature of a pivot," 1844, in the figurative sense, from pivot (n.) in the sense of "that upon which something turns or depends" + -al (1).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 swivel 

 "coupling device that allows independent rotation of the fastened object or part," c. 1300, from frequentative form of stem of Old English verb swifan "to move in a course, revolve, sweep" (a class I strong verb), from Proto-Germanic *swif-, swip- (source also of Old Frisian swiv

 pin 

 late Old English pinn "peg or bolt of wood or metal used to hold things in place or fasten them together," from Proto-Germanic *penn- "jutting point or peak" (source also of Old Saxon pin "peg," Old Norse pinni "peg, tack," Middle Dutch pin "pin, peg," Old High German pfinn, Germ

 pulley 

 poliva, puliva, which according to Barnhart and Klein is probably from Medieval Greek *polidia, plural of *polidion "little pivot...," diminutive of Greek polos "pivot, axis" (see pole (n.2))....

 kern 

 says it is from French carne "projecting angle, quill of a pen" (12c.), Old North French form of Old French charne "hinge, pivot...

 aleatory 

 chance, hazard, risk; a die, the dice;" perhaps literally "a joint-bone" (marked knuckle-bones used as early dice), "a pivot-bone...

 pole 

 Latin polus "end of an axis;" also "the sky, the heavens" (a sense sometimes used in English from 16c.), from Greek polos "pivot...

 axis 

 1540s, "imaginary motionless straight line around which a body (such as the Earth) rotates," from Latin axis "axle, pivot...

 pirouette 

 in dancing, "a rapid whirling on one leg or on the points of the toes," 1706, from French pirouette "pirouette in dancing," originally "spinning top" (15c.), from Gallo-Roman root *pir- "peg, plug" (source of Italian piruolo "peg top") + diminutive suffix -ette. Hence, probably, 

 runt 

 c. 1500, "old or decayed tree stump" (Douglas), a provincial word of unknown origin. The meaning was extended to "small ox or cow," especially of the breeds characteristic of Wales and the Scottish Highlands (1540s, if indeed this is the same word), and by 1610s generally to unde

 turn 

 late Old English turnian "to rotate, revolve," in part also from Old French torner "to turn away or around; draw aside, cause to turn; change, transform; turn on a lathe" (Modern French tourner), both from Latin tornare "to polish, round off, fashion, turn on a lathe," from tornu

 Share pivot 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pivot Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pivot">Etymology of pivot by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pivot. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pivot Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pivot," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pivot. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pivot." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pivot. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pivot." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pivot (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pivot 
 Pittsburgh 
 pituitary 
 pit-viper 
 pity 
 Pius 
 pivot 
 pivotal 
 pix 
 pixel 
 pixelation 
 pixie 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix