URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/eleven
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:15:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Eleven - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Eleven - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of eleven 

 eleven (num.) 

 "1 more than ten; the number which is one more than ten; a symbol representing this number;" c. 1200, elleovene , from Old English enleofan , endleofan , literally "one left" (over ten), from Proto-Germanic *ainlif- (compare Old Saxon elleban , Old Frisian andlova , Dutch elf , Old High German einlif , German elf , Old Norse ellifu , Gothic ainlif ), a compound of *ain "one" (see one ) + from PIE root *leikw- "to leave."

 FIREFLY: Give me a number from 1 to 10. 

 CHICOLINI: eleven! 

 FIREFLY: Right! 

 ["Duck Soup"] 

 Viking survivors who escaped an Anglo-Saxon victory were daroþa laf "the leavings of spears," while hamora laf "the leavings of hammers" was an Old English kenning for "swords" (both from "The Battle of Brunanburh"). Twelve reflects the same formation. Outside Germanic the only instance of this formation is in Lithuanian, which uses -lika "left over" and continues the series to 19 ( vienuo-lika "eleven," dvy-lika "twelve," try-lika "thirteen," keturio-lika "fourteen," etc.). Meaning "a team or side" in cricket or football is from 1743.
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to eleven 

 one (pron., num.) 

 "being but a single unit or individual; being a single person, thing, etc. of the class mentioned;" as a pronoun, "a single person or thing, an individual, somebody;" as a noun, "the first or lowest of the cardinal numerals; single in kind, the same; the first whole number, consisting of a single unit; unity; the symbol representing one or unity;" c. 1200, from Old English an (adjective, pronoun, noun) "one," from Proto-Germanic *ainaz (source also of Old Norse einn , Danish een , Old Frisian an , Dutch een , German ein , Gothic ains ), from PIE root *oi-no- "one, unique."

 Originally pronounced as it still is in only , atone , alone , and in dialectal good 'un , young 'un , etc.; the now-standard pronunciation "wun" began c. 14c. in southwest and west England (Tyndale, a Gloucester man, spells it won in his Bible translation), and it began to be general 18c. Its use as indefinite pronoun was influenced by unrelated French on and Latin homo .

 Before the name of a person, indicating "hitherto unknown" or not known to the speaker.

 One and only "sweetheart" is from 1906. Slang one-arm bandit for a type of slot machine is recorded by 1938. One-night stand is 1880 in performance sense; 1963 in sexual sense. One of the boys "ordinary amiable fellow" is from 1893. One-track mind "mind capable of only one line of thought or action" is by 1915. Drinking expression one for the road is from 1950 (as a song title). One-man band is by 1909 in a literal sense, 1914 figurative. One of those things "unpredictable occurrence" (also a verbal shrug) is from 1934 (Cole Porter's song is from 1935).

 The conscience clause is one of the weaknesses of the Bill. It is one of those things which tend to create the bitterness. The conscience clause is one of those things which are inseparable from a Bill like this. It is one of those things which divides the sheep from the goats—members can pick them out for themselves—in the playground, in the school. ["Religious Exercises in School Bills," New Zealand Parliamentary Debates, Aug. 13, 1926]

 twelve (num.) 

 "1 more than eleven, twice six; the number which is one more than eleven; a symbol representing this number;" Old English twelf "twelve," literally "two left" (over ten), from Proto-Germanic *twa-lif- , a compound of *twa- (from PIE root *dwo- "two") + *lif- (from PIE root *leikw- "to leave").

 Compare eleven . Cognate with Old Saxon twelif , Old Norse tolf , Old Frisian twelef , Middle Dutch twalef , Dutch twaalf , Old High German zwelif , German zwölf , Gothic twalif . Outside Germanic, an analogous formation is Lithuanian dvylika , with second element -lika "left over." The number of the Apostles, the Tribes of Israel, the zodiac signs, and the labors of Hercules.

 duodecimal 
 eleventh 
 levy 
 *leikw- 
 *oi-no- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 eleventh 

 "next in order after the tenth; an ordinal numeral; being one of eleven equal parts into which a whole is regarded as divided;" late 14c., eleventhe, superseding earlier ellefte (c. 1300), enlefte (early 13c.), from Old English endleofta; see eleven + -th (1). Eleventh hour "last

 possession 

 Phrase possession is nine (or eleven) points of the law is out of a supposed 10 (or 12)....With eleven from 1640s; with nine from 1690s. St. Jerome in his 'Life of St....

 button-hole 

 From nine 'till eleven o'clock, a.m., hobnobbing and canoodling had been the order of the day....

 recorder 

 in "The Descent of Man," says, "The young males continue practising, or as the bird-catchers say, recording, for ten or eleven...

 quarterback 

 also quarter-back, U.S. football position, 1876, from quarter (n.1) + back (n.); so called from his position on the field at the start of play, between the halfback and the center. As a verb, "to play quarterback," by 1945. The figurative sense (the quarterback when on the field 

 tackle 

 mid-13c., takel, "apparatus, gear," especially the rigging of a ship, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German takel "the rigging of a ship," which is perhaps related to Middle Dutch taken "grasp, seize" (see take (v.)). Also compare tack (n.1), which, if not the origin, has influe

 recent 

 early 15c., "recently made," of foods, etc., "fresh, newly made," from Latin recentem (nominative recens) "lately done or made, of recent origin, new, fresh, young," from re- (see re-) + PIE root *ken- "fresh, new, young" (source also of Greek kainos "new;" Sanskrit kanina- "youn

 center 

 late 14c., "middle point of a circle; point round which something revolves," from Old French centre (14c.), from Latin centrum "center," originally the fixed point of the two points of a drafting compass (hence "the center of a circle"), from Greek kentron "sharp point, goad, sti

 squad 

 1640s, "small number of military men detailed for some purpose," from French esquade, from French escadre, from Spanish escuadra or Italian squadra "battalion," literally "square," from Vulgar Latin *exquadra "to square." This is from Latin ex "out" (see ex-) + quadrare "make squ

 tame 

 c. 1200, of persons, "in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior;" mid-13c., of animals, "domesticated, reclaimed from wildness," also, of persons, "meek, gentle-natured, compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities," from oblique forms of Old Engl

 Share eleven 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/eleven Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/eleven">Etymology of eleven by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of eleven. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/eleven Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of eleven," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eleven. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of eleven." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eleven. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of eleven." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/eleven (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near eleven 
 Eleusinian 
 eleutherian 
 elevate 
 elevation 
 elevator 
 eleven 
 eleventh 
 elevon 
 elf 
 elfin 
 elfish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix