URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tribe
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:15:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tribe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tribe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tribe 

 tribe (n.) 

 mid-13c., "one of the twelve divisions of the ancient Hebrews," from Old French tribu or directly from Latin tribus "one of the three political/ethnic divisions of the original Roman state" ( Tites , Ramnes , and Luceres , corresponding, perhaps, to the Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans), a word of unknown origin. The first element generally is held to be tri- "three," and the whole to represent a PIE indication of "tripartite division" (de Vaan).

 The extension to modern ethnic groups or races of people is from 1590s, specifically "a division of a barbarous race of people, usually distinguishable in some way from their congeners, united into a community under a recognized head or chief" [Century Dictionary, 1891], but colloquially of any aggregate of individuals of a kind.

 In reference to the Twelve Tribes of Israel, the oldest sense in English and almost the only one in Middle English, the Latin word is a specialized Church sense, translating Greek phylē "race or tribe of men, body of men united by ties of blood and descent, a clan" (see phylo- ), and English tribe also was used from 17c. of the phylai of the Athenians.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to tribe 

 distribute (v.) 

 early 15c., distributen , "to deal out or apportion, bestow in parts or in due proportion," from Latin distributus , past participle of distribuere "to divide, deal out in portions," from dis- "individually" (see dis- ) + tribuere "to pay, assign, grant," also "allot among the tribes or to a tribe," from tribus (see tribe ). Meaning "separate and put or place in order" is from 1550s. Related: Distributable ; distributed ; distributing .

 distribution (n.) 

 mid-14c., distribucioun , "act of dividing or parceling out," from Old French distribution (13c.) and directly from Latin distributionem (nominative distributio ) "a division, distribution," noun of action from past-participle stem of distribuere "to divide, deal out in portions," from dis- "individually" (see dis- ) + tribuere "to pay, assign, grant," also "allot among the tribes or to a tribe," from tribus (see tribe ).

 Meaning "that which is distributed or apportioned" is from late 14c. Sense of "act of spreading out as over a surface" is from 1580s. Related: Distributional (1804).

 tribal 
 tribesman 
 tribune 
 tribute 
 phylo- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 distribute 

 early 15c., distributen, "to deal out or apportion, bestow in parts or in due proportion," from Latin distributus, past participle of distribuere "to divide, deal out in portions," from dis- "individually" (see dis-) + tribuere "to pay, assign, grant," also "allot among the tribe

 distribution 

 mid-14c., distribucioun, "act of dividing or parceling out," from Old French distribution (13c.) and directly from Latin distributionem (nominative distributio) "a division, distribution," noun of action from past-participle stem of distribuere "to divide, deal out in portions," 

 tribune 

 late 14c., title of an official in ancient Rome, from Latin tribunus "magistrate" (specifically one of the officers appointed to protect the rights and interests of the plebeians from the patricians), originally "head of a tribe" (in the Roman sense), from tribus (see tribe). Als

 clan 

 "a family, a tribe," especially, among the Highlanders of Scotland, a form of social organization consisting of a tribe holding...leadership of a chieftain, early 15c., from Gaelic clann "family, stock, offspring," akin to Old Irish cland "offspring, tribe...

 Leviticus 

 Properly the part of the Pentateuch dealing with the function of the priests who were of the tribe of Levi (a portion of...the tribe acted as assistants to the priests in the temple-worship)....

 endogamy 

 "marriage within the tribe or group," 1865, from endo- on model of polygamy. Related: Endogamous (1865)....To this law, the converse of caste, forbidding marriage within the tribe, Mr....

 Hun 

 person from a tribe from central Asia that overran Europe in the 4c. and 5c., Old English Hunas (plural), from Medieval Latin...Hunni, apparently ultimately from Turkic Hun-yü, the name of a tribe (they were known in China as Han or Hiong-nu)....

 genealogy 

 early 14c., "line of descent, pedigree, descent," from Old French genealogie (12c.), from Late Latin genealogia "tracing of a family," from Greek genealogia "the making of a pedigree," from genea "generation, descent" (from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget," with derivatives re

 folk 

 Old English folc "common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army," from Proto-Germanic *fulka- (source also of Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk, Old High German folc, German Volk "people"). Perhaps originally "host of warri

 relation 

 c. 1300, relacioun, "relationship, connection, correspondence;" late 14c. as "act of telling or relating in words," from Anglo-French relacioun, Old French relacion "report, connection" (14c.) and directly from Latin relationem (nominative relatio) "a bringing back, restoring; a 

 Share tribe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tribe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tribe">Etymology of tribe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tribe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tribe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tribe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tribe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tribe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tribe. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tribe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tribe (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tribe 
 triathlon 
 triaxial 
 tribadism 
 tribal 
 tribalism 
 tribe 
 TriBeCa 
 tribesman 
 tribology 
 tribrach 
 tribulation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close