URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/transit
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:21:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Transit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Transit - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of transit 

 transit (n.) 

 mid-15c., transite , "passageway; c. 1500, "act or fact of passing across or through, the passing of people to and fro," from Latin transitus "a going over, passing over, passage," verbal noun from past participle of transire "cross over, go over, pass over, hasten over, pass away," from trans "across, beyond" (see trans- ) + ire "to go" (from PIE root *ei- "to go").

 The meaning "a passing of a planet across the sun" (as seen from Earth) is from 1660s. The meaning "public transportation" is attested from 1873.

 also from mid-15c. 

 transit (v.) 

 mid-15c., transiten , "pass, pass through or over," from Latin transitus , past participle of transire "cross over, go over, pass over, hasten over, pass away," from trans "across, beyond" (see trans- ) + ire "to go" (from PIE root *ei- "to go"). The astronomical sense of "pass over the disc of a heavenly body" is from 1680s. Related: Transited ; transiting .

 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to transit 

 in-transit (adj.) 

 1907, from commercial verbal phrase in transit "on the way or passage, while passing from one to another" (1819, earlier in Latin form in transitu ), from in + transit (n.).

 paratransit (n.) 

 also para-transit , "public transportation of a flexible, informal kind" (such as taxis, carpools, etc.), 1973, from para- (1) + transit .

 *ei- 
 trans- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 passage 

 early 13c., "a road, a pathway;" c. 1300, "action of crossing from one place to another; a going over or through something; means of crossing," from Old French passage "mountain pass, passage" (11c.), from passer "to go by," from Vulgar Latin *passare "to step, walk, pass," from 

 Sabean 

 In ancient times it was an important transit route to Europe for spices, perfumes, and precious stones from India....

 rapid 

 Rapid-transit first attested 1852, in reference to street railways; rapid eye movement, associated with a certain phase of...

 peregrine 

 The original implications of the term in falconry are not clear; they may have been of a bird "caught in transit," as opposed...

 Greenwich 

 They decided to adopt a single world meridian, passing through the principal Transit Instrument at the observatory at Greenwich...

 society 

 Cook on his third Pacific voyage in honor of the Royal Society, which financed his travels across the world to observe the transit...

 rut 

 habitual mode of behavior or procedure" is attested by 1839 (Carlyle); earlier figurative use was as an obstacle to rapid transit...

 depot 

 1795, "warehouse or storehouse for receiving goods for storage, sale, or transfer," from French dépôt "a deposit, place of deposit," from Old French depost "a deposit or pledge," from Latin depositum "a deposit," noun use of neuter past participle of deponere "lay aside, put down

 bridge 

 [structure that affords passage over a ravine or river] Middle English brigge, from Old English brycge, from Proto-Germanic *brugjo (source also of Old Saxon bruggia, Old Norse bryggja, Old Frisian brigge, Dutch brug, Old High German brucca, German Brücke), from PIE root *bhru "l

 way 

 Old English weg "road, path; course of travel; room, space, freedom of movement;" also, figuratively, "course of life" especially, in plural, "habits of life" as regards moral, ethical, or spiritual choices, from Proto-Germanic *wega- "course of travel, way" (source also of Old S

 Share transit 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/transit Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/transit">Etymology of transit by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of transit. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/transit Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of transit," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/transit. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of transit." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/transit. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of transit." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/transit (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near transit 
 transhuman 
 transience 
 transient 
 transistor 
 transistorize 
 transit 
 transition 
 transitional 
 transitive 
 transitory 
 translatable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix