URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosaic
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:28:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mosaic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mosaic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mosaic 

 mosaic (n.) 

 c. 1400, "process of making patterns of inlaid work in hard materials," from Old French mosaicq "mosaic work," from Italian mosaico , from Medieval Latin musaicum "mosaic work, work of the Muses," noun use of neuter of musaicus "of the Muses," from Latin Musa (see Muse ). Medieval mosaics often were dedicated to the Muses.

 The word was formed in Medieval Latin as though from Greek, but the (late) Greek word for "mosaic work" was mouseion (and Klein says this sense in Greek was borrowed from Latin). Meaning "a piece of mosaic work" is from 1690s. Figurative meaning "anything resembling a mosaic work in composition" is by 1640s. As an adjective in English, "made of small pieces inlaid to form a pattern," from 1580s. Related: Mosaicist .
 also from c. 1400 

 Mosaic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to Moses," 1660s (earlier Mosaical , 1560s), from Modern Latin Mosaicus , from Late Latin Moses (see Moses ).
 also from 1660s 

 Entries linking to mosaic 

 Moses 

 masc. proper name, name of the Hebrew prophet and lawgiver, Middle English Moises , from Latin, from Greek Mouses , from Hebrew Mosheh , which is of unknown origin.

 Most scholars see in it the Hebraization of Egyptian 
 mes, mesu 'child, son,' which is often used in theophorous names. According to this derivation the words of Pharaoh's daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation of the Hebrew name Mosheh, but express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound, and therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew verb 
 mashah 'he drew out,' which is suggestive of the words spoken by Pharaoh's daughter. [Ernest Klein, "A Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the English Language"]

 As an expletive or oath, Oh, Moses , 1840; Holy Moses is attested by 1877.

 muse (v.) 

 "to reflect, ponder, meditate; to be absorbed in thought," mid-14c., from Old French muser (12c.) "to ponder, dream, wonder; loiter, waste time," which is of uncertain origin; the explanation in Diez and Skeat is literally "to stand with one's nose in the air" (or, possibly, "to sniff about" like a dog who has lost the scent), from muse "muzzle," from Gallo-Roman *musa "snout," itself a word of unknown origin. The modern word probably has been influenced in sense by muse (n.). Related: Mused ; musing .

 *men- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to think," with derivatives referring to qualities and states of mind or thought.

 It might form all or part of: admonish ; Ahura Mazda ; ament ; amentia ; amnesia ; amnesty ; anamnesis ; anamnestic ; automatic ; automaton ; balletomane ; comment ; compos mentis ; dement ; demonstrate ; Eumenides ; idiomatic ; maenad ; -mancy ; mandarin ; mania ; maniac ; manic ; mantic ; mantis ; mantra ; memento ; mens rea ; mental ; mention ; mentor ; mind ; Minerva ; minnesinger ; mnemonic ; Mnemosyne ; money ; monition ; monitor ; monster ; monument ; mosaic ; Muse ; museum ; music ; muster ; premonition ; reminiscence ; reminiscent ; summon .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit manas- "mind, spirit," matih "thought," munih "sage, seer;" Avestan manah- "mind, spirit;" Greek memona "I yearn," mania "madness," mantis "one who divines, prophet, seer;" Latin mens "mind, understanding, reason," memini "I remember," mentio "remembrance;" Lithuanian mintis "thought, idea," Old Church Slavonic mineti "to believe, think," Russian pamjat "memory;" Gothic gamunds , Old English gemynd "memory, remembrance; conscious mind, intellect."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tablet 

 c. 1300, "slab or flat surface for an inscription" (especially the two Mosaic tables of stone), from Old French tablete "...

 lawyer 

 "interpreter of Mosaic law."...

 sabbatical 

 by 1886 (the thing itself is attested from 1880, at Harvard), a term perhaps suggested by the sabbatical year (1590s) in Mosaic...

 dispensation 

 Hence "particular period during which a religious system has prevailed" (1640s), with Patriarchal, Mosaic, Christian, etc...

 Samaritan 

 They afterward became monotheists, and observed the Mosaic law very strictly, but with peculiar variations....

 blue laws 

 authorities of the New Haven colony of the Scriptures as their code of law and government, and their strict application of Mosaic...

 tradition 

 14c., "statement, belief, or practice handed down from generation to generation," especially "belief or practice based on Mosaic...

 photo 

 1860, a colloquial shortening of photograph. The verb is by 1865, from the noun. Photo-finish, of a race that ends with two or more competitors crossing the finishing line at nearly the same time (so a photograph taken at the finish line at the moment of crossing is the only way 

 photograph 

 "a picture obtained by any process of photography," 1839, coined by English polymath and photography pioneer Sir John Herschel (son of the astronomer) from photo- "light" + -graph "something written." It won out over other suggestions, such as photogene and heliograph. Photogram 

 pattern 

 a Modern English variant of patron, retaining its other old sense of "outline, plan, model, an original proposed for imitation," from Old French patron "patron, protector; model, pattern." The difference in form and sense between English patron and pattern wasn't firm before 1700

 Share mosaic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosaic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosaic">Etymology of mosaic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mosaic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosaic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mosaic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosaic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mosaic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosaic. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mosaic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mosaic (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mosaic 
 mortise 
 mortmain 
 Morton 
 mortuary 
 Morus 
 mosaic 
 mosasaurus 
 Moscow 
 Moselle 
 Moses 
 mosey 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix