URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/philanthropy
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:35:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Philanthropy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Philanthropy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of philanthropy 

 philanthropy (n.) 

 "love of humankind, especially as evinced in deeds of practical beneficence and work for the good of others," c. 1600, from Late Latin philanthropia , from Greek philanthrōpia "kindliness, humanity, benevolence, love to mankind" (from gods, men, or things), from philanthrōpos (adj.) "loving mankind, useful to man," from phil- "loving" (see philo- ) + anthrōpos "mankind" (see anthropo- ). Originally in English in the Late Latin form; the modern spelling in English is attested from 1620s.
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to philanthropy 

 philanthrope (n.) 

 "a philanthropist," 1734, from Latin philanthropos , from Greek philanthrōpos "loving mankind, humane" (see philanthropy ).

 philanthropic (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to philanthropy; characterized by or originating in love for humankind," 1785, from French philanthropique (18c.), from Greek philanthrōpikos (adj.), from philanthrōpia "humanity, benevolence, kindliness" (see philanthropy ). An earlier word in the same sense was philanthropian (1610s). Related: Philanthropical ; philanthropically (1787).

 philanthropist 
 anthropo- 
 philo- 
 *ner- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 humanity 

 earth; pity," from Latin humanitatem (nominative humanitas) "human nature; the human race, mankind;" also "humane conduct, philanthropy...

 ergophobia 

 He considered that there was too much cheap philanthropy, that life was made too easy for the young poor, and that by modern...

 charity 

 Also from c. 1300 as "an act of kindness or philanthropy," also "alms, that which is bestowed gratuitously on a person or...

 aid 

 early 15c., aide, "war-time tax," also "help, support, assistance," from Old French aide, earlier aiudha "aid, help, assistance," from Late Latin adiuta, noun use of fem. of adiutus, past participle of Latin adiuvare "to give help to," from ad "to" (see ad-) + iuvare "to help, gi

 gift 

 mid-13c. "that which is given" (c. 1100 in surnames), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse gift, gipt "gift; good luck," from Proto-Germanic *geftiz (source also of Old Saxon gift, Old Frisian jefte, Middle Dutch ghifte "gift," German Mitgift "dowry"), from *geb- "to give

 bust 

 1690s, "sculpture of upper torso and head," from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto "upper body," from Latin bustum "funeral monument, tomb," originally "funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned," perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus "burned around," past 

 malignant 

 1560s, in reference to diseases, "virulent, tending to produce death," from French malignant and directly from Late Latin malignantem (nominative malignans) "acting from malice," present participle of malignare "injure maliciously," from Latin malignus "wicked, bad-natured," from

 target 

 c. 1300, "light shield," typically small and round, diminutive of late Old English targe and directly from Old French targete "light shield" (12c.), from Frankish or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *targ- (source also of Old High German zarga "edging, border," Ger

 period 

 early 15c., periode, "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle of the Greek games," from Greek perio

 emanation 

 "act of flowing or issuing from an origin; emission; radiation; what issues, flows, or is given out from any substance or body;" 1560s, from Late Latin emanationem (nominative emanatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin emanare "flow out, spring out of," figurati

 Share philanthropy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/philanthropy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/philanthropy">Etymology of philanthropy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of philanthropy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/philanthropy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of philanthropy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/philanthropy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of philanthropy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/philanthropy. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of philanthropy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/philanthropy (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near philanthropy 
 philander 
 philanderer 
 philanthrope 
 philanthropic 
 philanthropist 
 philanthropy 
 philately 
 -phile 
 Philemon 
 philharmonic 
 philhellene 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix