URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/borough
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:09:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Borough - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Borough - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of borough 

 borough (n.) 

 Old English burg , burh "a dwelling or dwellings within a fortified enclosure," from Proto-Germanic *burgs "hill fort, fortress" (source also of Old Frisian burich "castle, city," Old Norse borg "wall, castle," Old High German burg , buruc "fortified place, citadel," German Burg "castle," Gothic baurgs "city"), which Watkins derives from from PIE root *bhergh- (2) "high," with derivatives referring to hills, hill forts, and fortified elevations.

 In German and Old Norse, chiefly as "fortress, castle;" in Gothic, "town, civic community." The meaning shifted in Old English from "fortress," to "fortified town," then simply "town" (16c., especially one possessing municipal organization or sending representatives to Parliament). In some U.S. states (originally Pennsylvania, 1718) often an incorporated town; in Alaska, however, it is the equivalent of a county. As "one of the five administrative divisions of New York City," it dates from the consolidation of 1898; in London, its use dates from the London Government Act of 1899.

 The Scottish form is burgh . The Old English dative singular byrig survives in many place names as -bury .

 Entries linking to borough 

 broch (n.) 

 prehistoric stone tower of the Scottish Highland and isles, 1650s, from Scottish English broch , from Old Norse borg "castle," cognate with Old English burh (see borough ).

 burg (n.) 

 "town, city," 1843, American English colloquial, from the many place names ending in -burg (see borough ; also see -ville ).

 burglar 
 burrow 
 city 
 faubourg 
 ghetto 
 thorough 
 *bhergh- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 burglar 

 "one who commits robbery by breaking into a house," 1540s, shortened from Anglo-Latin burglator (late 13c.), earlier burgator, from Medieval Latin burgator "burglar," from burgare "to break open, commit burglary," from Latin burgus "fortress, castle," a Germanic loan-word akin to

 city 

 c. 1200, from Old French cite "town, city" (10c., Modern French cité), from earlier citet, from Latin civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally "citizenship, condition or rights of a citizen, membership in the community," later "community of citiz

 faubourg 

 "suburb," late 15c. (early 15c. fabour), from Old French forsbourc, faubourg (12c.) "suburbs, outskirts," literally "that which is outside the town," from fors "outside" (from Latin foris; see foreign) + bourc "town" (a word of Frankish origin cognate with English borough). Alter

 burgess 

 c. 1200, burgeis "citizen of a borough, inhabitant of a walled town," from Old French borjois (Modern French bourgeois),...Applied from late 15c. to borough representatives in Parliament and used later in Virginia and Maryland to denote members...

 Lambeth 

 metonymically for "Church of England, Archbishop of Canterbury," 1859, from the archbishop's palace in Lambeth, a South London borough...Walk was a Cockney song and dance, popularized in Britain 1937 in the revue "Me and my Gal," named for a street in the borough...

 Bronx 

 borough of New York City, named for Jonas Bronck, who settled there in 1641....Jonas Bronck, who arrived at New Amsterdam in 1639, and whose name is perpetuated in Bronx Borough, Bronx Park, Bronxville...

 mayor 

 "principal officer of a municipality, chief magistrate of a city or borough," c. 1300, mair, meir (mid-13c. as a surname)...

 wont 

 "accustomed," Middle English contraction of Old English wunod, past participle of wunian "to dwell, inhabit, exist; be accustomed, be used to," from Proto-Germanic *wunen "to be content, to rejoice" (source also of Old Saxon wunon, Old Frisian wonia "to dwell, remain, be used to,

 town 

 Old English tun "enclosure, garden, field, yard; farm, manor; homestead, dwelling house, mansion;" later "group of houses, village, farm," from Proto-Germanic *tunaz, *tunan "fortified place" (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian tun "fence, hedge," Middle Dutch tuun 

 grave 

 "excavation in earth for reception of a dead body," Old English græf "grave; ditch, trench; cave," from Proto-Germanic *grafa-/graba- (source also of Old Saxon graf, Old Frisian gref, Old High German grab "grave, tomb;" Old Norse gröf "cave," Gothic graba "ditch"), cognate with O

 Share borough 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/borough Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/borough">Etymology of borough by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of borough. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/borough Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of borough," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borough. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of borough." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/borough. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of borough." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/borough (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near borough 
 born-again 
 borne 
 Borneo 
 Bornholm 
 boron 
 borough 
 borrow 
 borscht 
 bort 
 Borussia 
 borzoi 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix