URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/on
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:57:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: On - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

On - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of on 

 on (prep., adv.) 

 "in a position above and in contact with; in such a position as to be supported by;" also noting the goal to which some action is or has been directed; "about, concerning, regarding; in a position to cover;" as an adverb, "in or into a position in contact with and supported by the top or upper part of something; in or into place; in place for use or action; into movement or action; in operation," Old English on , unstressed variant of an "in, on, into," from Proto-Germanic *ana "on" (source also of Dutch aan , German an , Gothic ana "on, upon"), from PIE root *an- (1) "on" (source also of Avestan ana "on," Greek ana "on, upon," Latin an- , Old Church Slavonic na , Lithuanian nuo "down from").

 Also used in Old English in many places where we now would use in . From 16c.-18c. (and still in northern England dialect) often reduced to o' . Phrase on to "aware" is from 1877.

 Entries linking to on 

 a (2) 

 as in twice a day , etc., a reduced form of Old English an "on" (see on (prep.)), in this case "on each." The sense was extended from time to measure, price, place, etc. The habit of tacking a onto a gerund (as in a-hunting we will go ) became archaic after 18c.

 To go a fishing , a begging , a walking , &c., are expressions as current still, in familiar and colloquial use, as they ever were : and though it is difficult to define the force of a , in such phrases, every one by use comprehends it. It is something like a preposition, yet it is not exactly either at , to , in , or any thing else. The force seems to be its own. [Nares's "Glossary," 1822]

 Construction a week "by the week, in the week, weekly" is by mid-13c.

 about (adv., prep.) 

 Middle English aboute , from Old English abutan (adv., prep.), earlier onbutan "on the outside of; around the circumference of, enveloping; in the vicinity of, near; hither and thither, from place to place," also "with a rotating or spinning motion," in late Old English "near in time, number, degree, etc., approximately;" a compound or contraction of on (see on ; also see a- (1)) + be "by" (see by ) + utan "outside," from ut (see out (adv.)).

 By c. 1300 it had developed senses of "around, in a circular course, round and round; on every side, so as to surround; in every direction;" also "engaged in" ( Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business? ), and gradually it forced out Old English ymbe , ymbutan (from PIE root *ambhi- "around") in the sense "round about, in the neighborhood of."

 From mid-13c. as "in the matter, in connection with." From early 14c. as "in partial rotation, so as to face in a different direction." From late 14c. as "near at hand, about one's person." "In a circuitous course," hence "on the move" (late 13c.), and in Middle English "be about to do, be busy in preparation for," hence its use as a future participle in (to be) about to "in readiness, intending." Abouts (late 14c.), with adverbial genitive, still found in hereabouts , etc., probably is a northern dialectal form.

 To bring about "cause or effect" and to come about "happen" are from late 14c. About face as a military command (short for right about face ) is first attested 1861, American English.

 A 
 above 
 acknowledge 
 add-on 
 afar 
 again 
 aloft 
 anlage 
 Anschauung 
 anschluss 
 anvil 
 carry on 
 clip-on 
 get on 
 go on 
 hands-on 
 hang on 
 hard-on 
 head-on 
 See All Related Words (50) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 above 

 Middle English above, aboven (also aboun in northern dialects, abow in southwestern dialects), from Old English abufan (adv., prep.), earlier onbufan "above, in or to a higher place, on the upper side; directly over, in or to a higher place than," a contraction or compound of on 

 acknowledge 

 late 15c., "admit or show one's knowledge," a blend of Middle English aknow "admit or show one's knowledge" and Middle English knowlechen "admit, acknowledge" (c. 1200; see knowledge). Middle English aknow is from Old English oncnawan "understand, come to recognize," from on (see

 again 

 late Old English agan, from earlier ongean (prep.) "toward; opposite, against, contrary to; in exchange for," as an adverb "in the opposite direction, back, to or toward a former place or position," from on "on" (see on (prep.) and compare a- (1)) + -gegn "against, toward." This 

 propinquity 

 affinity," from propinquus "near, neighboring," from prope "near," with loss of second -r- by dissimilation, from PIE *propro "on...and on, ever further" (source also of Sanskrit pra-pra "on and on," Greek pro-pro "before, on and on"), from root *per-...

 propitiation 

 The current explanation of this (as of de Vaan) is that it represents *propre-tio-, from PIE *propro "on and on, ever further..." (source also of Sanskrit pra-pra "on and on," Greek pro-pro "before, on and on"), from root *per- (1) "forward," hence...

 pedestrian 

 1716, "prosaic, dull" (of writing), from Latin pedester (genitive pedestris) "plain, not versified, prosaic," literally "on...foot" (sense contrasted with equester "on horseback"), from pedes "one who goes on foot," from pes (genitive pedis) "foot...Meaning "going on foot" is attested by 1791 in English (it also was a sense of Latin pedester)....

 reel 

 late 14c., relen, "to wind on a reel, wind (yarn, thread, etc.) on a reel," from reel (n.1).... Fishing sense of "wind (the line) on a reel" is from 1849....recite without pause or effort" is from 1837, perhaps an image from spinning (reel off is attested by 1801 as "wind off on...To reel (something) in "recover by winding on the reel after the line has been played" (1881) is an image from fishing....

 along 

 Middle English, from Old English andlang "entire, continuous; extended" (adj.); also "alongside of" (prep.); from and- "opposite, against" (from Proto-Germanic *andi-, *anda-, from PIE *anti "against," locative singular of root *ant- "front, forehead") + lang "long" (see long (ad

 off 

 by c. 1200 as an emphatic form of Old English of (see of), employed in the adverbial use of that word. The prepositional meaning "away from" and the adjectival sense of "farther" were not firmly fixed in this variant until 17c., but once they were they left the original of with t

 Easter 

 Old English Easterdæg, "Easter day," from Eastre (Northumbrian Eostre), from Proto-Germanic *austron-, "dawn," also possibly the name of a goddess whose feast was celebrated in Eastermonað (the Anglo-Saxon month corresponding with April), from *aust- "east, toward the sunrise" (c

 Share on 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/on Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/on">Etymology of on by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of on. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/on Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of on," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/on. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of on." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/on. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of on." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/on (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near on 
 omophagous 
 omphalic 
 omphalo- 
 omphalos 
 omphaloskepsis 
 on 
 on- 
 -on 
 onager 
 onanism 
 onboard 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix