URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sir
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sir - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sir - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sir 

 sir 

 title of honor of a knight or baronet (until 17c. also a title of priests), c. 1300, a variant of sire (q.v.) that was used originally only in unstressed position. It is not an acronym of anything . 

 It was generalized as a respectful form of address by mid-14c., and eventually extended to all equals or used without regard for rank. It has been used as a salutation at the beginning of letters from early 15c. As a noun, "person of rank or importance," from 14c.
 also from 17c. 

 Entries linking to sir 

 sire (n.) 

 c. 1200, a title placed before a name and denoting knighthood, from Old French sire "lord (appellation), sire, my lord," from Vulgar Latin *seior , from Latin senior "older, elder" (from PIE root *sen- "old"). Later sir (q.v.), an alteration of sire , was used for this.

 Wulcume sire Arður, wilcume lauerd.

 [Laʒamon's "Brut," c. 1200]

 Standing alone and meaning "your majesty" it is attested from early 13c. The general sense of "important elderly man" is from mid-14c.; that of "father, male parent, forefather" (as in grandsire ) is from mid-13c., paired with dame . From 1520s as "male parent of a quadruped animal," especially a domestic animal, with dam  (n.2) for the female parent.

 sirloin (n.) 

 early 15c., surloine , shurleyne , surloyne , a cut of beef, from 16c. identified specifically as the upper part of the loin, from French surlonge , literally "upper part of the loin," from sur "over, above" (see sur- ) + longe "loin," from Old French loigne (see loin ).

 The English spelling with sir- dates from 1620s. It is possible that this shift was influenced by sir ; surname in 16c.-17c. often was spelled sirname . There is no evidence for the folk-etymology tale that the cut of beef was "knighted" by an English king for its superiority, a tale variously told of Henry VIII, James I, and Charles II. The story dates to 1655 (Fuller, "Church-History of Britain," who writes parenthetically that it was "so knighted, saith tradition, by this King Henry," meaning Henry VIII).

 The word 
 surloin  or 
 sirloin is often said to be derived from the fact that the loin was knighted as 
 Sir Loin by Charles II, or (according to [early 19c. English dictionary writer Charles] Richardson) by James I. Chronology makes short work of this statement; the word being in use long before James I was born. It is one of those unscrupulous inventions with which English 'etymology' abounds, and which many people admire because they are 'so clever.' The number of those who literally prefer a story about a word to a more prosaic account of it, is only too large. [Walter W. Skeat, "An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language," 1882] 

 sirrah 
 surly 
 yessir 
 *sen- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 surly 

 1570s, "haughty, arrogant, imperious," alteration of Middle English sirly "lordly, imperious" (14c.), literally "like a sir," from sir + -ly (1). The meaning "rude, gruff, sour in nature or disposition" is attested by 1660s. For sense development, compare lordly, and German herri

 mathematical 

 [Sir John Hawkins, "A General History of the Science and Practice of Music," Sir John Hawkins, 1776]...

 Gradgrind 

 person," from the name of the school-board superintendent and mill-owner in Dickens' "Hard Times" (1854): THOMAS GRADGRIND, sir...Thomas Gradgrind, sir - peremptorily Thomas - Thomas Gradgrind....With a rule and a pair of scales, and the multiplication table always in his pocket, sir, ready to weigh and measure any...In such terms, no doubt, substituting the words 'boys and girls,' for 'sir,' Thomas Gradgrind now presented Thomas Gradgrind...

 mister 

 The disappearance of master and mister, and the restricted and obsolescent use of sir, as an unaccompanied term of address...Sir and madam or ma'am as direct terms of address are old-fashioned and obsolescent in ordinary speech, and mister and lady...

 antediluvian 

 Coined by English physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682)....

 callipygian 

 Sir Thomas Browne (1646) refers to "Callipygæ and women largely composed behinde."...

 Sloane Square 

 neighborhood near Chelsea in London, named for Sir Hans Sloane (1660-1753), who purchased the manor of Chelsea in 1712 and...

 man 

 "a featherless plantigrade biped mammal of the genus Homo" [Century Dictionary], Old English man, mann "human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero;" also "servant, vassal, adult male considered as under the control of another person," from Proto-Germanic *mann- (source

 ampersand 

 1797, contraction of and per se and, meaning "(the character) '&' by itself is 'and' " (a hybrid phrase, partly in Latin, partly in English). An earlier form of it was colloquial ampassy (1706). The distinction is to avoid confusion with & in such formations as &c., a

 subsequent 

 "following next in order or time, later," mid-15c., from Old French subsequent (14c.) and directly from Latin subsequentem (nominative subsequens), present participle of subsequi "come after in time, follow closely," figuratively "imitate, conform to," from sub "closely, up to" (

 Share sir 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sir Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sir">Etymology of sir by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sir. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sir Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sir," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sir. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sir." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sir. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sir." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sir (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sir 
 sinusoid 
 Siouan 
 Sioux 
 sip 
 siphon 
 sir 
 sire 
 siren 
 Sirius 
 sirloin 
 sirocco 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix