URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/blister
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:28:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Blister - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Blister - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of blister 

 blister (n.) 

 c. 1300, "thin vesicle on the skin containing watery matter," perhaps via Old French blestre "blister, lump, bump," from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse blastr "a blowing," dative blæstri "swelling"), or from Middle Dutch blyster "swelling;" all perhaps from PIE *bhlei- "to blow, swell," extension of root *bhel- (2) "to blow, swell."
 also from c. 1300 

 blister (v.) 

 late 15c., "to become covered in blisters;," 1540s, "to raise blisters on," from blister (n.). Related: Blistered ; blistering .
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to blister 

 *bhel- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to blow, swell," "with derivatives referring to various round objects and to the notion of tumescent masculinity" [Watkins].

 It might form all or part of: bale (n.) "large bundle or package of merchandise prepared for transportation;" baleen ; ball (n.1) "round object, compact spherical body;" balloon ; ballot ; bawd ; bold ; bole ; boll ; bollocks ; bollix ; boulder ; boulevard ; bowl (n.) "round pot or cup;" bulk ; bull (n.1) "bovine male animal;" bullock ; bulwark ; follicle ; folly ; fool ; foosball ; full (v.) "to tread or beat cloth to cleanse or thicken it;" ithyphallic ; pall-mall ; phallus .

 It might also be the source of: Greek phyllon "leaf," phallos "swollen penis;" Latin flos "flower," florere "to blossom, flourish," folium "leaf;" Old Prussian balsinis "cushion;" Old Norse belgr "bag, bellows;" Old English bolla "pot, cup, bowl;" Old Irish bolgaim "I swell," blath "blossom, flower," bolach "pimple," bolg "bag;" Breton bolc'h "flax pod;" Serbian buljiti "to stare, be bug-eyed;" Serbo-Croatian blazina "pillow."

 An extended form of the root, *bhelgh- "to swell," forms all or part of: bellows ; belly ; bilge ; billow ; bolster ; budget ; bulge ; Excalibur ; Firbolgs .

 An extended form of the root, *bhleu- "to swell, well up, overflow," forms all or part of: affluent ; bloat ; confluence ; effluent ; effluvium ; efflux ; fluctuate ; fluent ; fluid ; flume ; fluor ; fluorescence ; fluoride ; fluoro- ; flush (v.1) "spurt, rush out suddenly, flow with force;" fluvial ; flux ; influence ; influenza ; influx ; mellifluous ; phloem ; reflux ; superfluous .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scald 

 c. 1200, scalden, "to be very hot;" also "to affect (someone) painfully by short exposure to hot liquid or steam," from Old North French escalder "to scald, to scorch" (Old French eschalder "heat, boil up, bubble," Modern French échauder), from Late Latin excaldare "bathe in hot 

 whip 

 mid-13c., wippen "flap violently," not in Old English, of uncertain origin, ultimately from Proto-Germanic *wipjan "to move back and forth" (source also of Danish vippe "to raise with a swipe," Middle Dutch, Dutch wippen "to swing," Old High German wipf "swing, impetus"), from PI

 bladder 

 Middle English bladdre, from Old English blædre (West Saxon), bledre (Anglian) "urinary bladder," also "blister, pimple,"...

 pustule 

 inflammatory sore or tumor containing pus," late 14c., from Old French pustule (13c.) and directly from Latin pustula "blister...

 cantharides 

 especially as dried, ground up, and used medicinally to raise blisters, from Latin plural of cantharis, from Greek kantharis "blister-fly...

 exude 

 by a natural or abnormal discharge, be secreted," as juice or gum from a tree, pus from a wound, or serous fluid from a blister...

 Spanish 

 Spanish fly, the fabled aphrodisiac (ground-up cantharis blister-beetles), is attested from c. 1600....

 swell 

 Middle English swellen, from Old English swellan "grow in bulk, become bigger" (intransitive, past tense sweall, past participle swollen), from Proto-Germanic *swellanan, *swallejanan (source also of Old Saxon swellan, Old Norse svella, Old Frisian swella, Middle Dutch swellen, D

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 modify 

 late 14c., modifien, "alter, amend, adjust, change the properties, form, or function of;" also "set limits, keep within the bounds of reason; choose a middle course," from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare "to limit, measure off, restrain," from modus "measure, ma

 Share blister 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/blister Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/blister">Etymology of blister by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of blister. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/blister Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of blister," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/blister. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of blister." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/blister. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of blister." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/blister (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near blister 
 blinkered 
 blintz 
 blip 
 bliss 
 blissful 
 blister 
 blite 
 blithe 
 blither 
 blithering 
 blithesome 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix