URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/austere
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:27:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Austere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Austere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of austere 

 austere (adj.) 

 early 14c., of persons, manner, etc., "harsh, severe; grim, fierce," from Old French austere "strict, severe, harsh, cruel" (13c., Modern French austère ) and directly from Latin austerus "dry, harsh, sour, tart," from Greek austeros "bitter, harsh," especially "making the tongue dry" (originally used of fruits, wines), metaphorically "austere, harsh," from PIE root *saus- "dry" (see sere (adj.)).

 From late 14c. as "severe, rigid;" by 1590s as "unadorned, simple in style, without luxuries;" by 1660s as "grave, sober." The classical literal sense of "sour, harsh" (1540s) is rare in English. Related: Austerely ; austereness .
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to austere 

 sere (adj.) 

 Middle English sere , "dried up, withered, barren" (of plants, etc.), from Old English sear, from Proto-Germanic *sauzas (source also of Middle Low German sor , Dutch zoor "dry"), from PIE root *saus- "dry" (source also of Sanskrit susyati "dries, withers;" Old Persian uška- "dry" (adj.), "land" (n.); Avestan huška- "dry;" Greek auos "dry," auein "to dry;" Latin sudus "dry"). Related to sear . Figurative use from 1530s. Sere month was an old name for "August."

 austerity (n.) 

 mid-14c., "sternness, harshness," from Old French austerite "harshness, cruelty" (14c.) and directly from Late Latin austeritatem (nominative austeritas ), from austerus "severe, rigid," a figurative use, in classical Latin "harsh, sour" (see austere ).

 From 1580s as "severe self-discipline, ascetic practices;" hence "severe simplicity, absence of adornment or luxuries," applied during World War II to national policies limiting non-essentials as a wartime economy.

 [
 Austerity ] stands just at the edge of that frame of mind which regards self-denial as good for its own sake ; it pushes simplicity of living and the refusal of pleasure beyond what is deemed necessary or helpful to right living by the great mass of those who are equally earnest with the austere in trying to live rightly. [Century Dictionary]

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ascetic 

 1640s, "practicing rigorous self-denial as a religious exercise," from Latinized form of Greek asketikos "rigorously self-disciplined, laborious," from asketēs "monk, hermit," earlier "skilled worker, one who practices an art or trade," especially "athlete, one in training for th

 stern 

 Old English stirne, styrne "severe, harsh, grave; strict, cruel; inflexible, rigid" from Proto-Germanic *sternjaz (source also of Middle High German sterre, German starr "stiff," störrig "obstinate;" Gothic andstaurran "to be stiff;" Old Norse stara; Old English starian "to look 

 severe 

 1540s, "rigorous in condemnation or punishment," from French severe (12c., Modern French sévère) or directly from Latin severus "serious, grave, strict, austere," which is of uncertain origin, but de Vaan supports the theory (also in Watkins) that it probably is a suffixed form P

 persevere 

 steadfastly, persist," from persevereus "very strict, earnest," from per "very" (see per) + severus "serious, grave, strict, austere...

 strait 

 Of a way of life, "severely restricted, austere," c. 1400. Of a garment, strait-waisted is by c. 1400....

 stoic 

 stoicus, from Greek stoikos "pertaining to a member of or the teachings of the school founded by Zeno, characterized by austere...

 Septembrist 

 Pétion goes in tricolor scarf; speaks "the austere language of the law:" the killers give up, while he is there; when his...

 stark 

 Old English stearc "stiff, strong, rigid (as in death), obstinate; stern, severe, hard; harsh, rough, violent," from Proto-Germanic *starka- (source also of Old Norse starkr, Danish sterk, Old Frisian sterk, Middle Dutch starc, Old High German starah, German stark, Gothic *starks

 triage 

 1727, "action of assorting according to quality," from French triage "a picking out, sorting" (14c.), from Old French trier "to pick, cull" (see try (v.)). There seems to be some influence from or convergence with Latin tria "three" (as in triage for "coffee beans of the third or

 vernacular 

 c. 1600, "native to a country," from Latin vernaculus "domestic, native, indigenous; pertaining to home-born slaves," from verna "home-born slave, native," a word of Etruscan origin. Used in English in the sense of Latin vernacula vocabula, in reference to language. As a noun, "n

 Share austere 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/austere Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/austere">Etymology of austere by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of austere. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/austere Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of austere," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/austere. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of austere." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/austere. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of austere." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/austere (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near austere 
 auspex 
 auspices 
 auspicious 
 Aussie 
 auster 
 austere 
 austerity 
 Austin 
 austral 
 Australasia 
 Australia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix