URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinema
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:07:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cinema - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cinema - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cinema 

 cinema (n.) 

 1899, "movie hall," from French cinéma , shortened from cinématographe "device for projecting a series of photographs in rapid succession so as to produce the illusion of movement," coined 1890s by Lumiere brothers, who invented the technology, from Latinized form of Greek kin ē mat- , combining form of kin ē ma "movement," from kinein "to move" (from PIE root *keie- "to set in motion"). For the second element in the French compound, see -graphy .

 The word was earlier in English in its fuller form, cinematograph (1896), but this has been displaced by the short form. Other old words for such a system were vitascope (Edison, 1895) , animatograph (1898). The meaning "movies collectively, especially as an art form" recorded by 1914. Cinéma vérité is 1963, from French.
 also from 1899 

 Entries linking to cinema 

 cine 

 abbreviation of cinema used in compounds or as a stand-alone, 1928, perhaps partly from French ciné (1917).

 CinemaScope (n.) 

 1953, proprietary name for wide-screen movie technology; see cinema + scope (n.2).

 cinematic 
 cinematographer 
 cinematography 
 Cinerama 
 kinema 
 -graphy 
 *keie- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 film 

 Old English filmen "membrane, thin skin, foreskin," from West Germanic *filminjan (source also of Old Frisian filmene "skin," Old English fell "hide"), extended from Proto-Germanic *fello(m) "animal hide," from PIE root *pel- (3) "skin, hide." Sense of "a thin coat of something" 

 celluloid 

 transparent plastic made from nitro-celluloses and camphor, 1871, trademark name (reg. U.S.), a hybrid coined by U.S. inventor John Wesley Hyatt (1837-1900) from cellulose + Greek-based suffix -oid. Its use as a photographic film was noted by 1889. As an adjective, "of or pertain

 cliff-hanger 

 In some U.S. continued-next-week silent cinema serials in the "Perils of Pauline" days, the episode often ended with the...

 deep 

 When 3-D films seemed destined to be the next wave and the biggest thing to hit cinema since talkies, they were known as...

 screen 

 Transferred sense of "cinema world collectively" is attested from 1914; hence screen test "filmed test of performing abilities...

 house 

 Old English hus "dwelling, shelter, building designed to be used as a residence," from Proto-Germanic *hūsan (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian hus, Dutch huis, German Haus), of unknown origin, perhaps connected to the root of hide (v.) [OED]. In Gothic only in gudhus "temple

 theater 

 late 14c., "open air place in ancient times for viewing spectacles and plays," from Old French theatre (12c., Modern French théâtre, improperly accented) and directly from Latin theatrum "play-house, theater; stage; spectators in a theater" (source also of Spanish, Italian teatro

 medium 

 1580s, "a middle ground, quality, or degree; that which holds a middle place or position," from Latin medium "the middle, midst, center; interval," noun use of neuter of adjective medius "in the middle, between; from the middle" (from PIE root *medhyo- "middle"). Many of the seco

 kin 

 c. 1200, from Old English cynn "family; race; kind, sort, rank; nature" (also "gender, sex," a sense obsolete since Middle English), from Proto-Germanic *kunja- "family" (source also of Old Frisian kenn, Old Saxon kunni "kin, kind, race, tribe," Old Norse kyn, Old High German chu

 Share cinema 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinema Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinema">Etymology of cinema by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cinema. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinema Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cinema," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinema. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cinema." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinema. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cinema." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinema (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cinema 
 cincture 
 cinder 
 Cinderella 
 Cindy 
 cine 
 cinema 
 CinemaScope 
 cinematic 
 cinematographer 
 cinematography 
 Cinerama 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix