URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tarragon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:12:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tarragon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tarragon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tarragon 

 tarragon (n.) 

 Artemisia Dracunculus , Eastern European composite plant of the wormwood genus, native to Russia and temperate Asia, 1530s, from Medieval Latin tragonia , from Byzantine Greek tarchon , from Arabic tarkhon , which is said to be (OED, 1989) from a non-Arabic source, perhaps Greek drakon "serpent, dragon" (via drakontion "dragonwort"); see dragon . From the same source come Spanish taragona , Italian targone , French estragon (with unetymological prefix). Its aromatic leaves long have been used for flavoring (especially vinegar).
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to tarragon 

 dragon (n.) 

 mid-13c., dragoun , a fabulous animal common to the conceptions of many races and peoples, from Old French dragon and directly from Latin draconem (nominative draco ) "huge serpent, dragon," from Greek drakon (genitive drakontos ) "serpent, giant seafish," apparently from drak- , strong aorist stem of derkesthai "to see clearly," from PIE *derk- "to see" (source also of Sanskrit darsata- "visible;" Old Irish adcondarc "I have seen;" Gothic gatarhjan "characterize;" Old English torht , Old High German zoraht "light, clear;" Albanian dritë "light").

 Perhaps the literal sense is "the one with the (deadly) glance, the one with (paralyzing) sight." The young are dragonets (c. 1300). Fem. form dragoness is attested from 1630s. Obsolete drake (n.2) "dragon" is an older borrowing of the same word, and a later form in another sense is dragoon . Used in the Bible generally for creatures of great size and fierceness, it translates Hebrew tannin "a great sea-monster," also tan , a desert mammal now believed to be the jackal.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 issue 

 c. 1300, "an exit," from Old French issue "a way out, a going out, exit; final event," from fem. past participle of issir "to go out," from Latin exire "go out, go forth; become public; flow, gush, pour forth" (source also of Italian uscire, Catalan exir), from ex- "out" (see ex-

 trump 

 "playing card of a suit ranking above others," 1520s, alteration of triumph (n.), which also was the name of a card game...."fabricate, devise," 1690s, from trump "deceive, cheat" (1510s), from Middle English trumpen (late 14c.), from Old French tromper "to deceive," of uncertain

 university 

 c. 1300, "institution of higher learning," also "body of persons constituting a university," from Anglo-French université, Old French universite "universality; academic community" (13c.), from Medieval Latin universitatem (nominative universitas), "the whole, aggregate," in Late 

 bachelor 

 c. 1300, "young man;" also "youthful knight, novice in arms," from Old French bacheler, bachelor, bachelier (11c.) "knight bachelor," a young squire in training for knighthood, also "young man; unmarried man," and a university title. A word of uncertain origin. Perhaps it is from

 adamant 

 late 14c., "hard, unbreakable," from adamant (n.). The figurative sense of "unshakeable" (in belief, etc.) is by 1670s. Related: Adamantly; adamance...."a very hard stone," mid-14c., adamant, adamaunt, from Old French adamant "diamond; magnet" or directly from Latin adamantem (no

 concierge 

 1640s, from French concierge "caretaker, doorkeeper of a hotel, apartment house, prison, etc., porter" (12c.), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *conservius, from Latin conservus "fellow slave," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + servius "slav

 seedy 

 mid-15c., sēdi, "fruitful, abundant" (Of bounteuousnesse þat hous was ful sedy), from seed (n.) + -y (2). From 1570s as "abounding in seeds." The modern meaning "shabby, no longer fresh or new" is attested by 1725, slang, originally especially "poor, out of money;" probably in re

 cameo 

 early 15c., kaadmaheu, camew, chamehieux and many other spellings (from early 13c. in Anglo-Latin), "engraving in relief upon a precious stone with two layers of colors" (such as onyx, agate, or shell) and done so as to utilize the effect of the colors, from Old French camaieu an

 loyalty 

 c. 1400, from Old French loialte, leaute "loyalty, fidelity; legitimacy; honesty; good quality" (Modern French loyauté), from loial (see loyal). The Medieval Latin word was legalitas. The earlier Middle English form was leaute (mid-13c.), from the older French form. Loyalty oath 

 Share tarragon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tarragon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tarragon">Etymology of tarragon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tarragon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tarragon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tarragon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tarragon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tarragon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tarragon. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tarragon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tarragon (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tarragon 
 tarot 
 tarp 
 tarpaulin 
 Tarpeian rock 
 tarpon 
 tarragon 
 tarry 
 tarrying 
 tarsal 
 tarsus 
 tart 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix