URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/so%20long
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:37:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: So long - Origin & Meaning of the Phrase

So long - Origin & Meaning of the Phrase 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of so long 

 so long (interj.) 

 parting salutation, 1860, of unknown origin, perhaps from a German idiom (compare German parting salutation adieu so lange , the full sense of which probably is something like "farewell, whilst (we're apart)"); or perhaps from or influenced by Hebrew shalom (via Yiddish sholom ). Some have noted a similarity to Scandinavian leave-taking phrases, such as Norwegian Adjø så lenge, Farvel så lenge, Mor'n så lenge , literally "bye so long, farewell so long, morning so long;" and Swedish Hej så länge "good-bye for now," with så länge "for now" attested since 1850 according to Swedish sources, with sense as in the German phrase. Etymology sources seem to lean toward the German origin. The adverbial so long "for such a long time" is from late Old English ( swa lange ); see so .

 Earlier guesses that it was a sailors' corruption of a South Pacific form of Arabic salaam are not now convincing. "Dictionary of American Slang" also adds to the list of candidates Irish slán "safe," said to be used as a salutation in parting.

 The phrase seems to have turned up simultaneously in America, Britain, and perhaps Canada, originally among lower classes. The first attested use is in title and text of the last poem in Whitman's "Leaves of Grass" in the 1860 edition.

 An unknown sphere, more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts awakening rays about me — So long!

 Remember my words — I may again return,

 I love you — I depart from materials;

 I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead.

 Whitman's friend and fan William Sloane Kennedy wrote in 1923:

 The salutation of parting — 'So long!' — was, I believe, until recent years, unintelligible to the majority of persons in America, especially in the interior, and to members of the middle and professional classes. I had never heard of it until I read it in Leaves of Grass, but since then have quite often heard it used by the laboring class and other classes in New England cities. Walt wrote to me, defining 'so long' thus: "A salutation of departure, greatly used among sailors, sports, & prostitutes — the sense of it is 'Till we meet again,' — conveying an inference that somehow they will doubtless so meet, sooner or later." ... It is evidently about equivalent to our 'See you later.' The phrase is reported as used by farm laborers near Banff, Scotland. In Canada it is frequently heard; 'and its use is not entirely confined to the vulgar.' It is in common use among the working classes of Liverpool and among sailors at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and in Dorsetshire. ... The expression is now (1923) often used by the literary and artistic classes.
 also from 1860 

 Entries linking to so long 

 so (adv., conj.) 

 Middle English so , from Old English swa , swæ (adv., conj., pron.) "in this way, in such a manner that," also "to that extent; so as, consequently, therefore," and purely intensive; from Proto-Germanic *swa (source also of Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Old High German so , Old Norse sva , Danish saa , Swedish så , Old Frisian sa , Dutch zo , German so "so," Gothic swa "as"), from PIE reflexive pronominal stem *swo- "so" (source also of Greek hos "as," Old Latin suad "so," Latin se "himself"), derivative of *s(w)e- , pronoun of the third person and reflexive (see idiom ).

 Old English swa frequently was strengthened by eall , and so also is contained in compounds as , also , such . The -w- was crushed out by contraction from 12c.; compare two , which underwent the same process but retained its spelling.

 As a word confirming a previous statement, late Old English; also from late Old English as an intensive in an affirmative clause (such as so very "exceedingly, extremely"). As an "introductory particle" [OED] from 1590s. Used to add emphasis or contradict a negative from 1913. So in mid-20c. British slang could mean "homosexual" (adj.).

 So? as a term of dismissal is attested from 1886 (short for is that so? , etc.); it is older as an abbreviation of is it so? (1803). So what as an exclamation of indifference dates from 1932, perhaps shortened from phrases such as so what of it? etc.

 The abbreviating phrase and so forth is attested in Old English; and so on is attested from 1724. So far "at such a distance" was in Middle English; so far so good is from 1721, said then to be a Scottish proverb.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 adieu 

 late 14c., adewe, from Old French a Dieu, a Deu, shortened from phrases such as a dieu (vous) commant "I commend (you) to God," from a "to" (see ad-) + dieu "God," from Latin deum, accusative of deus "god" (from PIE *deiwos "god" (from root *dyeu- "to shine"). Originally it was s

 diplodocus 

 genus of long-necked, long-tailed Jurassic dinosaurs, 1884, coined in Modern Latin in 1878 by U.S. paleontologist Othniel...diploos "double" (see diplo-) + dokos "a bearing-beam," connected to dekomai "to take, accept, receive," as an agent-noun, so...The dinosaur was so called for the peculiar structure of the tail bones....

 red herring 

 simply meant "a false lead": Though I have not the honour of being one of those sagacious country gentlemen, who have so...long vociferated for the American war, who have so long run on the red-herring scent of American taxation before they found...

 snipe 

 a name of various small, long-billed marsh birds, early 14c., from Old Norse -snipa in myrisnipa "moor snipe;" perhaps a...Dutch snip, Old High German snepfa, German Schnepfe "snipe," Swedish snäppa "sandpiper"), perhaps originally "snipper" (and so...called for its long, straight bill)....

 novella 

 "a short novel or long short-story," 1901, from Italian; see novel (n.)....It is not quite so clear as to when and where a piece of fiction ceases to be a novella and becomes a novel....The frontiers are so vague that one is obliged to recognize a middle species, or rather a middle magnitude, which paradoxically...

 rickey 

 And as long as there is thirst and limes, or lemons and gin, so long will the Honorable Joe Rickey be remembered in Missouri...

 fuse 

 or tube for lighting an explosive device," also fuze, 1640s, from Italian fuso, literally "spindle" (the ignition device so...called for its shape, because the originals were long, thin tubes filled with gunpowder), from Latin fusus "a spindle,"...Meaning "device that breaks an electrical circuit" is first recorded 1884, so named for its shape, but erroneously attributed...

 long 

 Old English lang "having a great linear extent, that extends considerably from end to end; tall; lasting," from Proto-Germanic *langa- (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang, Old High German and German lang, Old Norse langr, Middle Dutch lanc, Dutch lang, Gothic laggs "lo

 salaam 

 Arabic or Muslim greeting, 1610s, from Arabic salam (also in Urdu, Persian), literally "peace" (compare Hebrew shalom); in full, (as)salam 'alaikum "peace be upon you," from base of salima "he was safe" (compare Islam, Muslim). Formerly used generically of ceremonious salutations

 good 

 Old English gōd (with a long "o") "excellent, fine; valuable; desirable, favorable, beneficial; full, entire, complete;" of abstractions, actions, etc., "beneficial, effective; righteous, pious;" of persons or souls, "righteous, pious, virtuous;" probably originally "having the r

 Share so long 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/so%20long Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/so%20long">Etymology of so long by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of so long. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/so%20long Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of so long," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/so%20long. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of so long." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/so%20long. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of so long." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/so%20long (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near so long 
 snuffle 
 snuffy 
 snug 
 snuggle 
 so 
 so long 
 soak 
 soap 
 soap opera 
 soap-box 
 soap-bubble 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix