URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/aloe
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:38:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Aloe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Aloe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of aloe 

 aloe (n.) 

 name of a group of shrubs or herbs with spiky flowers and thick leaves, yielding bitter juice which was used as a purgative drug, late 14c., originally in reference to the drug, from Latin aloe , from Greek aloē , which is of uncertain origin, probably a loan-word from an Oriental language.

 A secondary sense is older in English: "Fragrant resin or heartwood of an East Indian tree" (Old English alewe , aloe ), which is from misuse of Latin/Greek aloe in Biblical translations for Hebrew akhalim (plural), which ultimately is perhaps from a Dravidian language. OED says the Greek word probably was chosen for sound-resemblance to the Hebrew one.

 The word then was misapplied in 1680s to the American agave plant, which has a similar appearance (and also a Greek name) but is unrelated. The "true aloe" (producing the drug) consequently is called aloe vera (with Latin vera "true;" see very ). Related: Aloetic .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to aloe 

 agave (n.) 

 American aloe plant, 1797, from Latin agave , from Greek agauē , proper name in mythology (mother of Pentheus), from agauos "noble, illustrious," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from agasthai "wonder at," from gaiein "to rejoice, exult," with intensive prefix a- . The name seems to have been taken generically by botanists, the plant perhaps so called for its "stately" flower stem.

 very (adj.) 

 late 13c., verrei , verray "true, real, entitled to the name, genuine;" late 14c. "actual, sheer;" from Anglo-French verrai , Old French verai "true, truthful, sincere; right, just, legal," from Vulgar Latin *veracus , from Latin verax (genitive veracis ) "truthful," from verus "true" (source also of Italian vero ), from PIE root *were-o- "true, trustworthy."

 The meaning "greatly, extremely" is by mid-15c. The word was used as a pure intensive by late 14c. Writers in 16c. introduced verier , veriest . The very thing "just what is suitable or requisite" is by 1690s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mescal 

 "plant of the genus Agave," found in deserts of Mexico and southwestern U.S., especially the American aloe, or maguey plant...

 century 

 The century-plant (American aloe), 1843, was believed to bloom only after a century of growth....

 lark 

 Latin alauda "the lark" (source of Italian aloda, Spanish alondra, Provençal alauza, Old French aloe) is said to be from...

 succulent 

 "full of juice," especially of plants or their parts, c. 1600, from French succulent (16c.), from Latin succulentus "having juice, juicy," from succus "juice, sap;" related to sugere "to suck," and possibly cognate with Old English socian "to soak," sucan "to suck" (see sup (v.2)

 Nicholas 

 masc. proper name, from French Nicolas, from Latin Nicholaus, Nicolaus, from Greek Nikolaos, literally "victory-people," from nikē "victory" (see Nike) + laos "people" (see lay (adj.)). The saint associated with Christmas (died 326 C.E.) was a bishop of Myra in Lycia, patron of s

 OK 

 "all right, correct," 1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c. 1838-9 for abbreviations of common phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings, such as K.G. for "no go," as if spelled know go; N.C. for enough said (" 'nuff ced"); K.Y. for no use ("know yuse")

 laugh 

 late 14c., from Old English (Anglian) hlæhhan, earlier hliehhan, hlihhan "to laugh, laugh at; rejoice; deride," from Proto-Germanic *klakhjan (source also of Old Norse hlæja, Danish le, Old Frisian hlakkia, Old Saxon hlahhian, Middle Dutch and Dutch lachen, Old High German hlahha

 fret 

 Old English fretan "devour, feed upon, consume," from Proto-Germanic compound *fra-etan "to eat up," from *fra- "completely" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through") + *etan "to eat" (from PIE root *ed- "to eat"). Cognates include Dutch vreten, Old High German frezzan

 sophomore 

 1680s, "student in the second year of university study," literally "arguer," altered from sophumer (1650s), from sophume, an archaic variant form of sophism, ultimately from Greek sophistēs "a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever in matters of daily life." The

 Knickerbocker 

 "descendant of Dutch settlers of New York," 1831, from Diedrich Knickerbocker, the name under which Washington Irving published his popular "History of New York" (1809). The pen-name was borrowed from Irving's friend Herman Knickerbocker, and literally means "toy marble-baker," f

 Share aloe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/aloe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/aloe">Etymology of aloe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of aloe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/aloe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of aloe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aloe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of aloe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aloe. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of aloe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/aloe (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near aloe 
 almonry 
 Almoravides 
 almost 
 alms 
 alms-house 
 aloe 
 aloft 
 aloha 
 alone 
 along 
 alongshore 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix