URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pancreas
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:21:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pancreas - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pancreas - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pancreas 

 pancreas (n.) 

 gland of the abdomen, 1570s, from Latinized form of Greek pankreas "sweetbread (pancreas as food), pancreas," literally "entirely flesh," from pan- "all" (see pan- ) + kreas "flesh" (from PIE root *kreue- "raw flesh"), probably so called for the homogeneous substance of the organ. Related: Pancreatic .
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to pancreas 

 pancreatitis (n.) 

 "inflammation of the pancreas," 1824 (Dr. George Pearson Dawson), medical Latin, from combining form of pancreas + -itis "inflammation." Related: Pancreatitic .

 *kreue- 

 *kreuə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "raw flesh."

 It might form all or part of:  creatine ; creosote ; crude ; cruel ; ecru ; pancreas ; raw ; recrudesce ; recrudescence .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit kravis- "raw flesh," krura- "raw, bloody;" Greek kreas "flesh;" Latin crudus "bloody, raw; cruel," cruor "thick blood;" Old Irish cru "gore, blood," Middle Irish cruaid "hardy, harsh, stern;" Old Church Slavonic kry "blood;" Old Prussian krawian , Lithuanian kraūjas "blood;" Old English hreaw "raw," hrot "thick fluid, serum."

 pan- 

 word-forming element meaning "all, every, whole, all-inclusive," from Greek pan- , combining form of pas (neuter pan , masculine and neuter genitive pantos ) "all," from PIE *pant- "all" (with derivatives found only in Greek and Tocharian).

 Commonly used as a prefix in Greek (before a labial pam- ; before a guttural pag- ), in modern times often with nationality names, the first example of which seems to have been Panslavism (1846). Also panislamic (1881), pan-American (1889), pan-German (1892), pan-African (1900), pan-European (1901), pan-Arabism (1930).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mantle 

 Old English mentel "a loose, sleeveless garment worn as an outer covering, falling in straight lines from the shoulders," from Latin mantellum "cloak" (source of Italian mantello, Old High German mantal, German Mantel, Old Norse mötull), perhaps from a Celtic source, or, if the L

 luxury 

 c. 1300, "sexual intercourse;" mid-14c., "lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence;" late 14c., "sensual pleasure," from Old French luxurie "debauchery, dissoluteness, lust" (12c., Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria "excess, extravagant living, profusion; delicacy" (source a

 cohort 

 early 15c., "company of soldiers, band of warriors," from French cohorte (14c.) and directly from Latin cohortem (nominative cohors) "enclosure," with meaning extended to "infantry company" in the Roman army through the notion of "enclosed group, retinue;" from assimilated form o

 America 

 1507, "the western hemisphere, North and South America," in Cartographer Martin Waldseemüller's treatise "Cosmographiae Introductio," from Modern Latin Americanus, traditionally after Amerigo Vespucci (1454-1512) who made two trips to the New World as a navigator and claimed to h

 hearse 

 c. 1300 (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin), "flat framework for candles, hung over a coffin," from Old French herse, formerly herce "large rake for breaking up soil, harrow; portcullis," also "large chandelier in a church," from Medieval Latin hercia, from Latin hirpicem (nominative hirp

 synagogue 

 late 12c., sinagog, "the regular public worship and religious instruction of the Jews," also a place or building for Hebrew worship, from Old French sinagoge "synagogue, mosque, pagan temple" (11c., Modern French synagogue), from Late Latin synagoga "congregation of Jews," from G

 precipitation 

 late 15c., precipitacioun, "a casting down" (of the evil angels from heaven), also, in alchemy "separation of a solid substance from a solution," from Old French precipitation (15c.) and directly from Latin praecipitationem (nominative praecipitatio) "act or fact of falling headl

 porcelain 

 ceramic ware having a translucent body, and, when it is glazed, a translucent glaze, 1530s, from French porcelaine and directly from Italian porcellana "porcelain" (13c.), literally "cowrie shell;" the chinaware being so called from resemblance of its lustrous transparency to the

 connoisseur 

 1714, "a critical judge of any art, one well-acquainted with any of the fine arts and thus competent to pass judgment on its products," from French connoisseur (Modern French connaiseur), from Old French conoisseor "an expert, a judge, one well-versed," from conoistre "to know," 

 enterprise 

 early 15c., "an undertaking," formerly also enterprize, from Old French enterprise "an undertaking," noun use of fem. past participle of entreprendre "undertake, take in hand" (12c.), from entre- "between" (see entre-) + prendre "to take," contraction of prehendere "to catch hold

 Share pancreas 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pancreas Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pancreas">Etymology of pancreas by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pancreas. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pancreas Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pancreas," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pancreas. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pancreas." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pancreas. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pancreas." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pancreas (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pancreas 
 panatela 
 Panavision 
 pancake 
 panchen 
 pancratium 
 pancreas 
 pancreatitis 
 panda 
 pandemic 
 pandemonium 
 pander 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix