URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rare
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:36:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rare - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rare - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rare 

 rare (adj.1) 

 [thin, few, unusual] late 14c., "thin, airy, porous" (opposed to dense ); mid-15c., "few in number and widely separated, sparsely distributed, seldom found, very infrequent;" from Old French rer , rere "sparse" (14c.) and directly from Latin rarus "thinly sown, having a loose texture; not thick; having intervals between, full of empty spaces" (antonym of densus ). Sometimes reconstructed to be from a PIE root *ere- "to separate; adjoin."

 "Having the particles not close together," hence "few in number," hence, "unusual." Sense of "remarkable from uncommonness," especially "uncommonly good" is from late 15c. (Caxton). Related: Rareness . In chemistry, rare earth is from 1818.

 Rare implies that only few of the kind exist : as, perfect diamonds are rare. 
 Scarce properly implies a previous or usual condition of greater abundance. 
 Rare means that there are much fewer of a kind to be found than may be found where 
 scarce would apply. [Century Dictionary, 1895]
 also from late 14c. 

 rare (adj.2) 

 [undercooked] 1650s, a variant of Middle English rere , from Old English hrere "lightly cooked," probably related to hreran "to stir, move, shake, agitate," from Proto-Germanic *hrorjan , which is reconstructed to be from PIE root *kere- "to mix, confuse; cook" (source also of Greek kera- "to mix," krasis "mixture"). Germanic cognates include Old Frisian hrera "to stir, move," Old Saxon hrorian , Dutch roeren , German rühren , Old Norse hroera .

 Originally of eggs, in reference to meat from 1784, and, according to OED (1989), in this sense "formerly often regarded as an Americanism, although it was current in many English dialects ... and used by English writers in the first half of the 19th c."
 also from 1650s 

 rare (v.) 

 "rise up on the hind legs," as a horse, lion, etc., 1833, dialectal variant of rear (v.1). Sense of "eager" (in raring to go ) is recorded by 1909. Related: Rared ; raring .
 also from 1833 

 Entries linking to rare 

 rear (v.1) 

 Middle English reren , from Old English ræran "to raise, lift something, cause to rise;" also "to build up, create, set on end; to arouse, excite, stir up," from Proto-Germanic *raizijanau "to raise," causative of *risanan "to rise" (source of Old English risan ; see rise (v.)). The second -r- is by rhotacism.

 Meaning "bring into being, bring up" (as a child) is recorded by early 15c., perhaps late 14c.; at first it is not easy to distinguish the sense from simply "beget;" the meaning "bring up (animals or persons) by proper nourishment and attention, develop or train physically or mentally" had developed by late 16c.

 The intransitive meaning "raise up on the hind legs" is first recorded late 14c. (compare rare (v.)). As what one does in raising or holding high the head, by 1667 ("Rear'd high thir flourisht heads" - Milton); with ugly by 1851. Related: Reared ; rearing .

 Other uses of rear in Middle English were "set" (fire); "draw" (blood); "wage" (war); "raise" (revenue, tithes); "gather, collect" (a flock of sheep).

 bat (n.2) 

 flying mouse-like mammal (order Chiroptera ), 1570s, a dialectal alteration of Middle English bakke (early 14c.), which is probably related to Old Swedish natbakka , Old Danish nathbakkæ "night bat," and Old Norse leðrblaka "bat," literally "leather flapper," from Proto-Germanic *blak- , from PIE root *bhlag- "to strike" (see flagellum ).

 If so, the original sense of the animal name likely was "flapper." The shift from -k- to -t- may have come through confusion of bakke with Latin blatta "moth, nocturnal insect."

 The Old English word for the animal was hreremus , from hreran "to shake" (see rare (adj.2)), and rattle-mouse , an old dialectal word for "bat," is attested from late 16c. Flitter-mouse (1540s) occasionally is used in English (with variants flinder-mouse , flicker-mouse ) in imitation of German fledermaus "bat," from Old High German fledaron "to flutter."

 As a contemptuous term for an old woman, it is perhaps a suggestion of witchcraft (compare fly-by-night ), or from bat as "prostitute who plies her trade by night" [Farmer, who calls it "old slang" and finds French equivalent "night swallow" ( hirondelle de nuit ) "more poetic"].

 crater 
 idiocrasy 
 idiosyncrasy 
 rara avis 
 rarefy 
 rarely 
 rarity 
 theocrasy 
 uproar 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 crater 

 1610s, "bowl-shaped mouth of a volcano," from a specialized use of Latin crater, from Greek krater "large bowl from which red wine mixed with water was served to guests," from kera- "to mix," from PIE root *kere- "to mix, confuse; cook" (see rare (adj.2)). The extension to volcan

 idiosyncrasy 

 c. 1600, from French idiosyncrasie, from Latinized form of Greek idiosynkrasia "a peculiar temperament," from idios "one's own" (see idiom) + synkrasis "temperament, mixture of personal characteristics," from syn "together" (see syn-) + krasis "mixture," from PIE root *kere- "to 

 rarefy 

 late 14c., rarefien, "make thin, reduce the density of," from Old French rarefier (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin rarificare, from Latin rarefacere "make thin, make rare," from rarus "rare, thin" (see rare (adj.1)) + facere "to make" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, put"). I

 rarefaction 

 "act or process of making rare or expanding a body of matter (originally chiefly gases) so that a smaller number of particles...Medieval Latin rarefactionem (nominative rarefactio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin rarefacere "make rare...

 black swan 

 proverbial for "something extremely rare or non-existent," late 14c., from Juvenal ["Sat." vi. 164], but the real thing turned...ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war—a prodigy as rare...[Juvenal] Blue dahlia also was used 19c. for "something rare and unheard of."...

 extenuate 

 1530s, "make thin, lean, slender, or rare; reduce in thickness or density" (the literal sense, now rare); from Latin extenuatus...

 dependence 

 had French or Latin foremost in mind; the Latin form gradually predominated, and after c. 1800 the spelling dependance is rare...Literal meaning "fact of hanging from something" (1690s) was rare and is obsolete....

 strange 

 c. 1300, straunge, "from elsewhere, foreign, of another country; unknown, unfamiliar, not belonging to the place where found," also of a country, "unfamiliar, unknown, remote," from Old French estrange "foreign, alien, unusual, unfamiliar, curious; distant; inhospitable; estrange

 myriad 

 1550s, "the number of 10,000," also "an indefinitely great number," from French myriade and directly from Late Latin myrias (genitive myriadis) "ten thousand," from Greek myrias (genitive myriados) "a number of ten thousand; countless numbers," from myrios (plural myrioi) "innume

 denomination 

 late 14c., denominacioun, "a naming, act of giving a name to," from Old French denominacion "nominating, naming," from Latin denominationem (nominative denominatio) "a calling by anything other than the proper name, metonymy," noun of action from past-participle stem of denominar

 Share rare 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rare Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rare">Etymology of rare by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rare. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rare Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rare," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rare. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rare." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rare. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rare." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rare (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rare 
 raptor 
 raptorial 
 rapture 
 rapturous 
 rara avis 
 rare 
 rarebit 
 raree show 
 rarefaction 
 rarefy 
 rarely 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix