URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/beverage
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:58:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Beverage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Beverage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of beverage 

 beverage (n.) 

 "drink of any kind," mid-13c., from Anglo-French beverage , Old French bevrage , from Old French boivre "to drink" (Modern French boire ; from Latin bibere "to imbibe;" from PIE root *po(i)- "to drink") + -age , suffix forming mass or abstract nouns (see -age ).
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to beverage 

 bevy (n.) 

 early 15c., collective noun of quails and ladies, from Anglo-French bevée , which is of unknown origin. One supposed definition of the word is "a drinking bout," but this perhaps is a misprint of bever (see beverage ). If not, perhaps the original sense is birds gathered at a puddle or pool for drinking or bathing. But the quest for a clear and logical origin in such a word might be futile. "These old names for companies of men and animals are however very fantastical and far-fetched" [OED].

 -age 

 word-forming element in nouns of act, process, function, condition, from Old French and French -age , from Late Latin -aticum "belonging to, related to," originally neuter adjectival suffix, from PIE *-at- (source of Latin -atus , past participle suffix of verbs of the first conjugation) + *-(i)ko- , secondary suffix forming adjectives (see -ic ).

 *po(i)- 

 *pō(i)- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to drink."

 It might form all or part of: beer ; bever ; beverage ; bib ; bibitory ; bibulous ; hibachi ; imbibe ; imbrue ; pinocytosis ; pirogi ; poison ; potable ; potation ; potion ; symposium .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit pati "drinks," panam "beverage;" Greek pinein "to drink," poton "that which one drinks," potos "drinking bout;" Latin potare "to drink," potio "a potion, a drinking," also "poisonous draught, magic potion;" Old Church Slavonic piti "to drink," pivo "beverage."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 drink 

 Old English drincan "to swallow water or other fluid," also "to swallow up, engulf" (class III strong verb; past tense dranc, past participle druncen), from Proto-Germanic *drenkanan (source also of Old Saxon drinkan, Old Frisian drinka, Dutch drinken, Old High German trinkan, Ge

 Coca-Cola 

 Drink the brain tonic and intellectual soda fountain beverage Coca-Cola....Evening Journal, June 30, 1887] Coca-colanization, also Coca-colonization was coined 1950 during an attempt to ban the beverage...

 cafe 

 The beverage was introduced in Venice by 1615 and in France by 1650s by merchants and travelers who had been to Turkey and...

 chaser 

 The meaning "water or mild beverage taken after a strong drink" is by 1894, U.S. colloquial....

 dunk 

 1919, "to dip (something) into a beverage or other liquid," American English, from Pennsylvania German dunke "to dip," from...

 mead 

 "a strong liquor made from fermented honey and water," a favorite beverage of England in the Middle Ages, Middle English...

 pop 

 Meaning "effervescent carbonated beverage" is from 1812....

 cider 

 late 13c. (in a biblical context), "strong liquor;" mid-14c., "liquor made from the juice of fruits," from Old French cidre, cire "pear or apple cider" (12c., Modern French cidre), variant of cisdre, from Late Latin sicera, Vulgate rendition of Hebrew shekhar, a word used for any

 option 

 c. 1600, "action of choosing;" 1630s, "power or liberty of choosing," from French option (Old French opcion), from Latin optionem (nominative optio) "choice, free choice, liberty to choose," from optare "to desire, pray for, choose," which is of uncertain origin. De Vaan derives 

 potion 

 c. 1300, pocioun "medicinal drink, dose of liquid medicine or poison," from Old French pocion "potion, draught, medicine" (12c.), from Latin potionem (nominative potio) "a potion, a drinking," also "poisonous draught, magic potion" (source also of Spanish pocion "potion," ponzoña

 Share beverage 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/beverage Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/beverage">Etymology of beverage by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of beverage. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/beverage Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of beverage," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/beverage. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of beverage." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/beverage. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of beverage." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/beverage (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near beverage 
 betweenness 
 betwixt 
 Beulah 
 bevel 
 bever 
 beverage 
 Beverly Hills 
 bevy 
 bewail 
 beware 
 beweep 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix