URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/heart
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:24:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Heart - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Heart - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of heart 

 heart (n.) 

 Old English heorte "heart (hollow muscular organ that circulates blood); breast, soul, spirit, will, desire; courage; mind, intellect," from Proto-Germanic *hertan- (source also of Old Saxon herta , Old Frisian herte , Old Norse hjarta , Dutch hart , Old High German herza , German Herz , Gothic hairto ), from PIE root *kerd- "heart."

 Spelling with -ea- is c. 1500, reflecting what then was a long vowel, and the spelling remained when the pronunciation shifted. Most of the modern figurative senses were present in Old English, including "memory" (from the notion of the heart as the seat of all mental faculties, now only in by heart , which is from late 14c.), "seat of inmost feelings; will; seat of emotions, especially love and affection; seat of courage." Meaning "inner part of anything" is from early 14c. In reference to the conventional heart-shape in illustration, late 15c.; heart-shaped is from 1744.

 Heart attack attested from 1875; heart disease is from 1864. The card game hearts is so called from 1886. To have one's heart in the right place "mean well" is from 1774. Heart and soul "one's whole being" is from 1650s. To eat (one's own) heart "waste away with grief, resentment, etc." is from 1580s.

 heart (v.) 

 Old English hiertan "give heart to," from heart (n.). Shakespeare used it as "take to heart" (c. 1600); 1866 of cabbages, "to form a heart." Meaning "to love" is by 1993, from the popular New York state tourism campaign that used the heart symbol in place of the word "love."

 Entries linking to heart 

 bleeding heart (n.) 

 name applied to several types of flowering plant, 1690s; see bleeding (adj.) + heart (n.).

 In the American English sense of "person liberally and excessively sympathetic" (especially toward those the speaker or writer deems not to deserve it) is attested by 1936 in the work of popular conservative newspaper columnist Westbrook Pegler (1894-1969), who first used it in reference to his own feelings about the Republican Party but by 1938 regularly deployed it against the Roosevelt administration and also as a modifier ( bleeding-heart liberal ) in his "Fair Enough" column: 

 And I question the humanitarianism of any professional or semi-pro bleeding heart who clamors that not a single person must be allowed to hunger, but would stall the entire legislative program in a fight to jam through a law intended, at the most optimistic figure, to save 14 lives a year. ["Fair Enough," in Freemont (Ohio) Messenger, Jan. 8, 1938]

 Bleeding in a figurative sense of "generous" is attested from late 16c., and the notion of one's heart bleeding as a figure of emotional anguish is from late 14c.; the exact image here may be the "bleeding heart of Jesus."

 bowel (n.) 

 c. 1300, usually plural, bowels , "human organs of the abdominal cavity," from late 14c. specifically as "human intestines," from Old French boele "intestines, bowels, innards" (12c., Modern French boyau ), from Medieval Latin botellus "small intestine," originally "sausage," diminutive of botulus "sausage," a word borrowed from Oscan-Umbrian.

 The transferred sense of "the viscera as the seat of emotions" is from late 14c.; especially "inner parts as the seat of pity or kindness," hence "tenderness, compassion." Greek splankhnon (from the same PIE root as spleen ) was a word for the principal internal organs, which also were felt in ancient times to be the seat of various emotions. Greek poets, from Aeschylus down, regarded the bowels as the seat of the more violent passions such as anger and love, but by the Hebrews they were seen as the seat of tender affections, especially kindness, benevolence, and compassion.

 Splankhnon was used in Septuagint to translate a Hebrew word, and thence early Bibles in English rendered it in its literal sense as bowels , which thus acquired in English a secondary meaning of "pity, compassion" (late 14c.). But in later editions the word often was translated as heart . Bowel movement is attested by 1874.

 heart-ache 
 heart-beat 
 heartbreak 
 heartburn 
 hearten 
 heart-felt 
 heartful 
 heartland 
 heartless 
 heart-rending 
 heartsick 
 heart-strings 
 heart-throb 
 heart-to-heart 
 heart-warming 
 heart-wood 
 hearty 
 sweetheart 
 See All Related Words (23) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 heartless 

 Old English heortleas "dispirited, dejected;" see heart (n.) + -less. In Middle English with expanded senses "lacking in courage; foolish; listless; half-hearted; sluggish." Sense of "callous, cruel, wanting in kindly feeling" is not certainly attested before Shelley used it thus

 bosom 

 Old English bosm "breast; womb; surface; ship's hold," from West Germanic *bōsmaz (source also of Old Frisian bosm, Old Saxon bosom, Middle Dutch boesem, Dutch boezem, Old High German buosam, German Busen "bosom, breast"), which is perhaps from PIE root *bhou- "to grow, swell," o

 kernel 

 "edible substance in a nut or the stone of a fruit," Old English cyrnel "seed, kernel, pip," from Proto-Germanic *kurnilo- (source also of Middle High German kornel "a grain," Middle Dutch cornel "coarse meal"), from the root of corn "seed, grain" (from PIE root *gre-no- "grain")

 cordial 

 c. 1400, "of or pertaining to the heart" (a sense now obsolete or rare, replaced by cardiac), from Medieval Latin cordialis..."of or for the heart," from Latin cor (genitive cordis) "heart," from PIE root *kerd- "heart."...Meaning "heartfelt, proceeding from the heart as the supposed seat of kindly feelings" is from mid-15c....The noun meaning "something that invigorates" is from late 14c., originally "medicine, food, or drink that stimulates the heart...

 cardiac 

 "of or pertaining to the heart," c. 1600, from French cardiaque (14c.) or directly from Latin cardiacus, from Greek kardiakos..."pertaining to the heart," from kardia "heart" (from PIE root *kerd- "heart")....Confusion of heart and nearby digestive organs also is reflected in Breton kalon "heart," from Old French cauldun "bowels...

 courage 

 c. 1300, corage, "heart (as the seat of emotions)," hence "spirit, temperament, state or frame of mind,"from Old French corage..., Spanish coraje), from Latin cor "heart" (from PIE root *kerd- "heart")....Words for "heart" also commonly are metaphors for inner strength....," careful corage "sad heart," fre corage "free will," wikked corage "evil heart."...

 core 

 early 14c., "heart or inmost part of anything" (especially an apple, pear, etc.), of uncertain origin, probably from Old...French cor, coeur "core of fruit, heart of lettuce," literally "heart," from Latin cor "heart," from PIE root *kerd- "heart...

 recent 

 early 15c., "recently made," of foods, etc., "fresh, newly made," from Latin recentem (nominative recens) "lately done or made, of recent origin, new, fresh, young," from re- (see re-) + PIE root *ken- "fresh, new, young" (source also of Greek kainos "new;" Sanskrit kanina- "youn

 center 

 late 14c., "middle point of a circle; point round which something revolves," from Old French centre (14c.), from Latin centrum "center," originally the fixed point of the two points of a drafting compass (hence "the center of a circle"), from Greek kentron "sharp point, goad, sti

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 Share heart 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/heart Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/heart">Etymology of heart by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of heart. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/heart Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of heart," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/heart. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of heart." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/heart. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of heart." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/heart (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near heart 
 hearing 
 hearken 
 hearkening 
 hearsay 
 hearse 
 heart 
 heart-ache 
 heart-beat 
 heartbreak 
 heart-breaker 
 heartbroken 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close