URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mammal
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:45:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mammal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mammal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mammal 

 mammal (n.) 

 "an animal of the class Mammalia ; an animal that suckles its young," 1826, Englished form of Modern Latin Mammalia (1773), coined 1758 by Linnaeus for that class of animals from neuter plural of Late Latin mammalis "of the breast," from Latin mamma "breast," which is cognate with mamma . With the exception of a few egg-laying species, all bear live young and have the mammary gland for the young to suck. All also are warm-blooded and breathe air. In Middle English, mammille was "a woman's breast" (early 15c.).
 also from 1826 

 Entries linking to mammal 

 mamma (n.) 

 "mother," a word used especially by children and infants, 1570s, representing the native form of the reduplication of *ma- that is nearly universal among the Indo-European languages (Greek mamme "mother, grandmother," Latin mamma , Persian mama , Russian and Lithuanian mama "mother," German Muhme "mother's sister," French maman , Welsh mam "mother").

 Probably a natural sound in baby-talk, perhaps imitative of sound made while sucking. Its late appearance in English is curious, but Middle English had mome (mid-13c.) "an aunt; an old woman," also an affectionate term of address for an older woman.

 In educated usage, the stress is always on the last syllable. In terms of the recorded appearance of the variant or related words in English, mama is from 1707, mum is from 1823, mummy in this sense from 1839, mommy 1844, momma 1810, and mom 1867. Mamma's boy "soft, effeminate male" is by 1901. Insult y o' momma attested with spelling you mammy by 1927.

 Mammalia (n.) 

 "the class of Vertebrata containing all those animals which suckle their young and no other animals," 1773, from Modern Latin (Linnaeus, 1758), from neuter plural of Late Latin mammalis "of the breast," from mamma "breast," from PIE *mama and cognate with mamma . Also see -a (2)).

 mammalian (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to the mammals," 1813, from mammal + -ian . As a noun, "an animal of the class Mammalia ," from 1835.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pinniped 

 "a fin-footed mammal," one having feet like fins or flippers, especially of the group of fin-footed aquatic carnivorous quadruped...

 marsupial 

 As a noun, "a marsupial animal, an implacental didelphian mammal," from 1805....

 echidna 

 Australian egg-laying hedgehog-like mammal, 1810, said to have been named by Cuvier, usually explained as from Greek ekhidna...serpent," in which case the animal was so named for its mixed characteristics (early naturalists doubted whether it was mammal...

 Orca 

 Earlier in English, orc, ork "large marine mammal, deadly sea-creature" (by mid-17c.), from French orque, had been used vaguely...

 rodent 

 "a rodent mammal" 1835 (as an adjective 1833), from Modern Latin Rodentia, the order name, from Latin rodentem (nominative...

 moose 

 "large quadruped mammal of northern North America noted for its enormous horns," 1610s, from an Algonquian language, probably...

 panda 

 1835, in reference to a carnivorous raccoon-like mammal (the lesser panda) of the Himalayas, from French, apparently from...

 hair 

 Old English hær "hair, a hair," from Proto-Germanic *hēran (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old High German har, Old Frisian her, Dutch and German haar "hair"), perhaps from PIE *ghers- "to stand out, to bristle, rise to a point" (source also of Lithuanian šerys "bristle;" s

 coat 

 early 14c., "principal outer garment, tunic, kirtle," typically made of cloth and usually with sleeves, worn alone or under a mantle, from Old French cote "coat, robe, tunic, overgarment," from Frankish *kotta "coarse cloth" or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon kot "w

 stress 

 c. 1300, stresse, "hardship, adversity; constraining or compelling force or pressure, coercion;" the original senses are mostly archaic or obsolete. The word is in part a shortening of distress (n.) and in part from Old French estrece "narrowness, oppression," from Vulgar Latin *

 Share mammal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mammal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mammal">Etymology of mammal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mammal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mammal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mammal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mammal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mammal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mammal. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mammal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mammal (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mammal 
 mama 
 mamba 
 mambo 
 Mameluke 
 mamma 
 mammal 
 Mammalia 
 mammalian 
 mammary 
 mammo- 
 mammogram 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix