URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ionian
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:20:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ionian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Ionian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Ionian 

 Ionian (adj.) 

 1590s, "of Ionia ," the districts of ancient Greece inhabited by the Ionians , one of the three (or four) great divisions of the ancient Greek people. The name (which Herodotus credits to an ancestral Ion , son of Apollo and Creusa) probably is pre-Greek, perhaps related to Sanskrit yoni "womb, vulva," and a reference to goddess-worshipping people. As a noun from 1560s.

 Ionia included Attica, Euboea, and the north coast of the Peloponnesus, but it especially referred to the coastal strip of Asia Minor, including the islands of Samos and Chios. The old Ionic dialect was the language of Homer and Herodotus, and, via its later form, Attic, that of all the great works of the Greeks. The name also was given to the sea that lies between Sicily and Greece, and the islands in it (1630s in English in this sense). The musical Ionian mode (1844) corresponds to our C-major scale but was characterized by the Greeks as soft and effeminate, as were the Ionians generally.

 The Ionians delighted in wanton dances and songs more than the rest of the Greeks ... and wanton gestures were proverbially termed Ionic motions. [Thomas Robinson, 
 "Archæologica Græca," 1807]
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to Ionian 

 Ionic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to Ionia or the Ionians," 1570s of music; 1580s of architecture, from Latin Ionicus , from Greek Ionikos (see Ionian ). In prosody, a foot of two long syllables followed by two short. The Ionic school of philosophers (Thales, Anaxamander, etc.) studied the material world in ways that somewhat anticipated observational science. It also once was the name of an important school of Greek painting, but all of it save the name is lost. Related: Ionicize (1841).

 ionize (v.) 

 1896, from ion + -ize . Related: Ionized ; ionizing . Unrelated to Ionize "to make Ionic in form or fact" (1816), for which see Ionian .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Greek 

 Middle English Grek, from Old English Grecas, Crecas (plural) "Greeks, inhabitants of Greece," an early Germanic borrowing from Latin Graeci "the Hellenes," apparently from Greek Graikoi. The first use of Graikhos as equivalent to Hellenes is found in Aristotle ("Meteorologica" &

 people 

 c. 1300, peple, "humans, persons in general, men and women," from Anglo-French peple, people, Old French pople, peupel "people, population, crowd; mankind, humanity," from Latin populus "a people, nation; body of citizens; a multitude, crowd, throng," a word of unknown origin. Ba

 mode 

 "manner;" late 14c., "melodies, strains of music" (a sense now obsolete; see musical senses below), from Old French mode and directly from Latin modus "measure, extent, quantity; proper measure, rhythm, song; a way, manner, fashion, style" (in Late Latin also "mood" in grammar an

 point 

 c. 1200, pointe, "minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc.," a merger of two words, both ultimately from Latin pungere "to prick, pierce," from a nasalized form of PIE root *peuk- "to prick." The Latin neuter past participle punctum was used as a noun, me

 tabernacle 

 mid-13c., "portable sanctuary carried by the Israelites in the wilderness," from Old French tabernacle "the Jewish Tabernacle; tent, canopy; tomb, monument" (12c.), from Latin tabernaculum "tent," especially "a tent of an augur" (for taking observations), diminutive of taberna "h

 climate 

 late 14c., "horizontal zone of the earth's surface measured by lines parallel to the equator," from Old French climat "region, part of the earth," from Latin clima (genitive climatis) "region; slope of the earth," from Greek klima "region, zone," literally "an inclination, slope,

 Annuit Coeptis 

 words on the Great Seal of the United States of America, condensed by Charles Thompson, designer of the seal in its final form, from Latin Juppiter omnipotes, audacibus annue coeptis "All-powerful Jupiter favor (my) daring undertakings," line 625 of book IX of Virgil's "Aeneid." 

 brute 

 early 15c., "of or belonging to animals, non-human," from Old French brut "coarse, brutal, raw, crude," from Latin brutus "heavy, dull, stupid, insensible, unreasonable" (source also of Spanish and Italian bruto), said to be an Oscan word, from PIE *gwruto-, suffixed form of root

 belong 

 mid-14c., "to go along with, properly relate to," from be- intensive prefix, + longen "to go," from Old English langian "pertain to, to go along with," which is of uncertain origin but perhaps related to the root of long (adj.). The senses of "be the property of" and "be a member

 etiquette 

 1750, from French étiquette "prescribed behavior," from Old French estiquette "label, ticket" (see ticket (n.)). The sense development in French perhaps is from small cards written or printed with instructions for how to behave properly at court (compare Italian etichetta, Spanis

 Share Ionian 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ionian Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ionian">Etymology of Ionian by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Ionian. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ionian Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Ionian," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ionian. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Ionian." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ionian. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Ionian." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ionian (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Ionian 
 iodide 
 iodine 
 iodize 
 -ion 
 ion 
 Ionian 
 Ionic 
 ionization 
 ionize 
 ionosphere 
 iopterous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix