URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/scenario
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Scenario - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Scenario - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of scenario 

 scenario (n.) 

 1868, "sketch of the plot of a dramatic work," from Italian scenario , from Late Latin scenarius "of stage scenes," from Latin scena "scene" (see scene ); earlier in nativized form scenary (1690s). The meaning "imagined situation" is recorded by 1960, in reference to hypothetical nuclear wars.
 also from 1868 

 Entries linking to scenario 

 scene (n.) 

 1530s, "subdivision of an act of a play," also "stage-setting," from French scène (14c.), from Latin scaena , scena "scene, stage of a theater," from Greek skēnē "wooden stage for actors," also "that which is represented on stage," originally "tent or booth," which is related to skia "shadow, shade," via the notion of "something that gives shade" (see Ascians ).

 According to Beekes' sources, the Greek word "originally denoted any light construction of cloth hung between tree branches in order to provide shadow, under which one could shelter, sleep, celebrate festivities, etc."

 A theatrical word; the wider senses come from the notion of the painted drops and hangings on stage as the "setting" for the action. From "stage setting" the sense extended to "material apparatus of a theatrical stage, part of a theater in which the acting is done" (1540s), which led to "setting of any artistic work, place in which the action of a literary work is supposed to occur" and the general (non-literary) sense of "place where anything is done or takes place" (both by 1590s).

 Hence the sense in reference to a (specified) activity and its realm or sphere (1931, as in the poetry scene ) and U.S. slang sense of "setting or milieu or situation for a specific group or activity," attested from 1951 in Beat jargon.

 Meaning "any exhibition, display, or demonstration of strong feeling," especially "stormy encounter between two or more persons," is attested by 1761. By 1650s as "a view presented to the mind or eye." 

 Behind the scenes "having knowledge of affairs not apparent to the public" (1748) is an image from the theater, "amid actors and stage machinery" (back of the visible stage and out of sight of the audience), which is attested from 1660s. Scene of the crime is attested by 1843. To make a scene "make a noisy or otherwise unpleasant demonstration" is by 1831.

 The word was in Middle English in the Latin form, scena , "structure on a stage for dramatic recitations" (late 14c.).

 scenary (n.) 

 1690s, obsolete nativized form of Italian scenario (see scenario ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 continuity 

 The scenario,—that is the division of the synopsis into scenes from which the picture is made—is written by men and women...Continuity writers or those who divide the story into the scenes (continuity and scenario being different names for the same...

 assumption 

 c. 1300, assumpcioun, "the reception, uncorrupted, of the Virgin Mary into Heaven" (also the Aug. 15 Church festival commemorating this, Feast of the Assumption), from Old French assumpcion, asumpsion (13c.) and directly from Latin assumptionem (nominative assumptio) "a taking up

 book 

 Middle English bok, from Old English boc "book, writing, written document," generally referred (despite phonetic difficulties) to Proto-Germanic *bōk(ō)-, from *bokiz "beech" (source also of German Buch "book" Buche "beech;" see beech), the notion being of beechwood tablets on wh

 setting 

 c. 1300, "a fixed time for meals;" late 14c., "fact or action of putting (something) in a place or position; a placing, a planting," also "a place, location, site; the manner or position in which anything is fixed," verbal noun from set (v.). The surgical sense, with reference to

 script 

 late 14c., "something written, a written document," earlier scrite (c. 1300), from Anglo-French scrit, Old French escrit "piece of writing, written paper; credit note, IOU; deed, bond" (Modern French écrit) and directly from Latin scriptum "a writing, book; law; line, mark," noun

 premise 

 late 14c., in logic, "a previous proposition from which another follows, a judgment causing another judgment," from Old French premisse (14c.), from Medieval Latin praemissa (propositio or sententia) "(the proposition) set before," noun use of fem. past participle of Latin praemi

 emprise 

 c. 1300, "chivalrous endeavor," from Old French emprise (12c.) "enterprise, venture, adventure, undertaking," from Vulgar Latin *imprensa (source of Provenal empreza, Spanish empresa, Italian impresa), from *imprendere "to undertake," from in- (from PIE root *en "in") + prehender

 consequence 

 late 14c., "logical inference, conclusion," from Old French consequence "result" (13c., Modern French conséquence), from Latin consequentia, abstract noun from present-participle stem of consequi "to follow after," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + sequi 

 Prometheus 

 in Greek mythology, a demigod (son of the Titan Iapetus) who made man from clay and stole fire from heaven and taught mankind its use, for which he was punished by Zeus by being chained to a rock in the Caucasus, where a vulture came every day and preyed on his liver. The name is

 anathema 

 1520s, "an accursed thing," from Latin anathema "an excommunicated person; the curse of excommunication," from Ecclesiastical Greek anathema "a thing accursed," a slight variation of classical Greek anathama, which meant merely "a thing devoted," literally "a thing set up (to the

 Share scenario 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/scenario Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/scenario">Etymology of scenario by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of scenario. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/scenario Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of scenario," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scenario. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of scenario." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scenario. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of scenario." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/scenario (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near scenario 
 scattering 
 scattershot 
 scavenge 
 scavenger 
 scavenger hunt 
 scenario 
 scenary 
 scene 
 scenery 
 scene-shifter 
 scenic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix