URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sulky
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:02:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sulky - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sulky - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sulky 

 sulky (adj.) 

 "quietly sullen, silently resentful, moody and aloof, disposed to repel friendly advances," 1744, a word of uncertain origin. There is no record of it in Middle English. Connection has been suggested to the obsolete adjective sulke "hard to sell" (1630s) and to Old English asolcen "idle, lazy, slow."

 This is a past-participle adjective from aseolcan "become sluggish, be weak or idle" (related to besylcan "be languid"), from Proto-Germanic *seklan (source also of Middle High German selken "to drop, fall").

 But words of meaning similar to sulky often are held to be imitative (compare miff , mope , pout , boudoir ). Related: Sulkily ; sulkiness .
 also from 1744 

 sulky (n.) 

 "light carriage with two wheels," 1756, said to be a noun use of sulky (adj.), on the notion of "standoffishness," because, the carriage having only one seat, the rider must ride alone.
 also from 1756 

 Entries linking to sulky 

 boudoir (n.) 

 "room where a lady may retire to be alone or to receive her intimate friends," 1777, from French boudoir (18c.), literally "pouting room," from bouder "to pout, sulk," which, like pout and bouffant , probably ultimately is imitative of puffing. Also compare dialectal sumph "be sulky," and sulky (adj.); boudoir was Englished at least once as sulkery (1906).

 miff (n.) 

 1620s, "feeling of petulant displeasure, fit of ill humor," colloquial, perhaps imitative of an exclamation of disgust (compare German muffen "to sulk").

 mope 
 pout 
 sulk 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pout 

 "thrust out the lips, as in sullenness or displeasure," mid-14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish dialectal puta "to be puffed out"), or Frisian (compare East Frisian püt "bag, swelling," Low German puddig "swollen"); related via notion of "inflati

 gloomy 

 1580s, probably from gloom (n.) even though that word is not attested as early as this one. Shakespeare used it of woods, Marlowe of persons. Gloomy has the figurative suggestion of physical gloom or darkness : the gloomy man has little brightness in his mind, or he sees little 

 splenetic 

 Gloomy, Sullen, Sulky, Morose, Splenetic....

 kindergarten 

 1852, from German Kinder-Garten (1840), literally "children-garden, garden of children," a metaphoric name from Kinder "children" (plural of Kind "child;" see kin (n.)) + Garten "garden" (from suffixed form of PIE root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose"). Coined by German educator Fr

 adequate 

 1610s, "equal to what is needed or desired, sufficient," from Latin adaequatus "equalized," past participle of adaequare "to make equal to, to level with," from ad "to" (see ad-) + aequare "make level," from aequus "equal, even" (see equal (adj.)). The sense is of being "equal to

 victim 

 late 15c., "living creature killed and offered as a sacrifice to a deity or supernatural power, or in the performance of a religious rite;" from Latin victima "sacrificial animal; person or animal killed as a sacrifice," a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps related to vicis "turn,

 mature 

 c. 1400, maturen, "encourage suppuration;" mid-15c., of plants, "cause to ripen, bring to maturity," from Latin mātūrare "to ripen, bring to maturity," from mātūrus "ripe, timely, early," related to māne "early, of the morning," from PIE *meh-tu- "ripeness." De Vaan writes that "

 microphone 

 1680s, "ear trumpet for the hard-of-hearing," coined from Greek mikros "small" (see micro-) + phōnē "sound," from PIE root *bha- (2) "to speak, tell, say." The notion is "instrument for augmenting small sounds." Modern sense of "transducer that converts sound into an electrical s

 ecstasy 

 late 14c., extasie "elation," from Old French estaise "ecstasy, rapture," from Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis "entrancement, astonishment, insanity; any displacement or removal from the proper place," in New Testament "a trance," from existanai "displace, put out of plac

 orange 

 late 14c., in reference to the fruit of the orange tree (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), an alteration of Arabic naranj, from P

 Share sulky 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sulky Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sulky">Etymology of sulky by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sulky. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sulky Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sulky," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sulky. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sulky." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sulky. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sulky." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sulky (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sulky 
 sulfureous 
 sulfuric 
 sulfurity 
 sulfurous 
 sulk 
 sulky 
 sullen 
 sully 
 sulphate 
 sulphide 
 sulphite 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix