URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/seethe
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:59:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Seethe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Seethe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of seethe 

 seethe (v.) 

 Middle English sethen , from Old English seoþan "to boil, be heated to the boiling point, prepare (food) by boiling," also figurative, "be troubled in mind, brood" (class II strong verb; past tense seaþ , past participle soden ), from Proto-Germanic *seuthan (source also of Old Norse sjoða , Old Frisian siatha , Dutch zieden , Old High German siodan , German sieden "to seethe"), from PIE root *seut- "to seethe, boil."

 Driven out of its literal meaning by boil (v.); it survives largely in metaphoric extensions. Of a liquid, "to rise, surge, or foam" without reference to heat, from 1530s. Figurative use, of persons or populations, "to be in a state of inward agitation" is recorded from 1580s (implied in seething ). It had transitive figurative uses in Old English, such as "to try by fire, to afflict with cares, be tossed about as in turbulent water." Now conjugated as a weak verb, its old past participle sodden (q.v.) is no longer felt as connected.

 Entries linking to seethe 

 boil (v.) 

 early 13c. (intransitive) "to bubble up, be in a state of ebullition," especially from heat, from Old French bolir "boil, bubble up, ferment, gush" (12c., Modern French bouillir ), from Latin bullire "to bubble, seethe," from PIE *beu- "to swell" (see bull (n.2)). The native word is seethe . The figurative sense, of passions, feelings, etc., "be in an agitated state" is from 1640s.

 I am impatient, and my blood boyls high. [Thomas Otway, "Alcibiades," 1675]

 The transitive sense "put into a boiling condition, cause to boil" is from early 14c. The noun is from mid-15c. as "an act of boiling," 1813 as "state of boiling." Related: Boiled ; boiling . Boiling point "temperature at which a liquid is converted into vapor" is recorded from 1773.

 sodden (adj.) 

 "soaked or softened in water, having the appearance of having been boiled for a while," 1820, earlier "resembling something that has been boiled a long time" (1590s), originally "boiled" (c. 1300), from Old English soden "boiled," the strong past participle of seoþan "to cook, boil" (see seethe ). For sense evolution from "heat in water" to "immerse in water" compare bath .

 seether 
 suds 
 sutler 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 suds 

 1540s, "dregs, leavings, muck" (a sense now obsolete), a word of uncertain etymology. By 1590s it is used among writers from East Anglia as "ooze left by flood," and according to OED this might be the original English sense. The word is perhaps borrowed from Middle Dutch sudse "m

 sutler 

 formerly also suttler, "person who follows an army to sell provisions, liquor, etc. to soldiers," 1580s, from Middle Dutch soeteler "small tradesman, peddler, victualer, camp cook" (Dutch zoetelaar), cognate with Middle Low German suteler, sudeler "person who performs dirty tasks

 buzz 

 late 15c. (buzzing is from late 14c.), echoic of bees and other insects. The aviation sense of "fly low and close" is by 1941 (see buzz (n.)). Related: Buzzed. To buzz off "go away quickly" (1914) originally meant "to ring off on the telephone," from the use of buzzers to signal 

 ferment 

 fermentation, leaven, drink made of fermented barley," perhaps contracted from *fervimentum, from root of fervere "to boil, seethe...

 warm 

 the source of Old Church Slavonic goriti "to burn," varŭ "heat," variti "to cook, boil;" and Lithuanian vérdu, virti "to seethe...

 foam 

 Middle English fom, fome (c. 1300), from Old English fam "foam, saliva froth; sea," from West Germanic *faimo- (source also of Old High German veim, German Feim), from PIE root *(s)poi-mo- "foam, froth" (source also of Sanskrit phenah; Latin pumex "pumice," spuma "foam;" Old Chur

 forth 

 Old English forð "forward, onward, farther; continually;" as a preposition, "during," perfective of fore, from Proto-Germanic *furtha- "forward" (source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon forth "forward, onward," Old Norse forð, Dutch voort, German fort), from extended form of PIE ro

 roll 

 c. 1200, rolle, "rolled-up piece of parchment or paper, scroll" (especially one inscribed with an official record), from Old French rolle "document, parchment scroll, decree" (12c.), Medieval Latin rotulus "a roll of paper" (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian rullo), from Lati

 teem 

 "abound, swarm, be prolific," Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) "beget, give birth to, bring forth, produce, propagate," from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE root *deuk- "to lead." Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of "f

 meet 

  Middle English mēten, from Old English metan "to find, find out; fall in with, encounter, come into the same place with; obtain," from Proto-Germanic *motjanan (source also of Old Norse mæta, Old Frisian meta, Old Saxon motian "to meet," Gothic gamotijan), from PIE root *mo

 Share seethe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/seethe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/seethe">Etymology of seethe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of seethe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/seethe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of seethe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/seethe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of seethe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/seethe. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of seethe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/seethe (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near seethe 
 seep 
 seepage 
 seer 
 seersucker 
 see-saw 
 seethe 
 seether 
 see-through 
 *segh- 
 segment 
 segmental 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix