URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputnik
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sputnik - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sputnik - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sputnik 

 sputnik (n.) 

 "artificial satellite," extended from the name of the one launched by the Soviet Union on Oct. 4, 1957, from Russian sputnik "satellite," literally "traveling companion" (in this use short for sputnik zemlyi , "traveling companion of the Earth") from Old Church Slavonic supotiniku , from so- , s- "with, together" + put' "path, way," from Old Church Slavonic poti , from PIE *pent- "to tread, go" (see find (v.)) + agent suffix -nik .

 The impact of the launch on the mind of the West can be gauged by the number of new formations in -nik around this time (the suffix had been present in a Yiddish context for at least a decade before); Laika, the stray dog launched aboard Sputnik 2 (Nov. 2, 1957), was dubbed muttnik in the Detroit Free Press, etc. The rival U.S. satellite which failed to reach orbit in 1957 (because the Vanguard rocket blew up on the launch pad) was derided as a kaputnik (in the Daytona Beach Morning Journal), a dudnik (Christian Science Monitor), a flopnik (Youngstown Vindicator, New York Times), a pffftnik (National Review), and a stayputnik (Vancouver Sun).

 Entries linking to sputnik 

 find (v.) 

 Old English findan "come upon, meet with; discover; obtain by search or study" (class III strong verb; past tense fand , past participle funden ), from Proto-Germanic *findan "to come upon, discover" (source also of Old Saxon findan , Old Frisian finda , Old Norse finna , Middle Dutch vinden , Old High German findan , German finden , Gothic finþan ), originally "to come upon."

 According to Watkins the Germanic word is from PIE root *pent- "to tread, go" (source also of Old High German fendeo "pedestrian;" Sanskrit panthah "path, way;" Avestan panta "way;" Greek pontos "open sea," patein "to tread, walk;" Latin pons (genitive pontis ) "bridge;" Old Church Slavonic pǫti "path," pęta "heel;" Russian put' "path, way;" Armenian hun "ford," Old Prussian pintis "road"). The prehistoric sense development in Germanic would be from "to go" to "to find (out)," but Boutkan has serious doubts about this.

 Germanic *-th- in English tends to become -d- after -n- . The change in the Germanic initial consonant is from Grimm's Law. To find out "to discover by scrutiny" is from 1550s (Middle English had a verb, outfinden , "to find out," c. 1300).

 beatnik (n.) 

 coined 1958 by San Francisco newspaper columnist Herb Caen (1916-1997) during the heyday of -nik suffixes in the wake of Sputnik . The first element is from Beat generation (1952), which is associated with beat (n.) in its meaning "rhythm (especially in jazz)" as well as beat (adj.) "worn out, exhausted." Century Dictionary (1902) has slang beat (n.) "a worthless, dishonest, shiftless fellow." Originator Jack Kerouac in 1958 connected it with beatitude .

 The origins of the word beat are obscure, but the meaning is only too clear to most Americans. More than the feeling of weariness, it implies the feeling of having been used, of being raw. It involves a sort of nakedness of the mind. [New York Times Magazine, Oct. 2, 1952]

 "Beat" is old carny slang. According to Beat Movement legend (and it is a movement with a deep inventory of legend), Ginsberg and Kerouac picked it up from a character named Herbert Huncke, a gay street hustler and drug addict from Chicago who began hanging around Times Square in 1939 (and who introduced William Burroughs to heroin, an important cultural moment). The term has nothing to do with music; it names the condition of being beaten down, poor, exhausted, at the bottom of the world. [Louis Menand, New Yorker, Oct. 1, 2007]

 -nik 

 as in beatnik, etc., suffix used in word formation from c. 1945, from Yiddish -nik (as in nudnik "a bore"), from Russian -nik, common personal suffix meaning "person or thing associated with or involved in" (compare nudnik ; kolkhoznik "member of a kolkhoz "). Rocketed to popularity with sputnik (q.v.), hence its brief vogue in English word-formation, as in robotnik "person behaving with mindless obedience" (1960).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 satellite 

 1540s, "follower or attendant of a superior person" (but rare in this sense before late 18c.), from French satellite (14c.), from Latin satellitem (nominative satelles)  "an attendant" upon a distinguished person; "a body-guard, a courtier; an assistant," in Cicero often in 

 hustle 

 1680s (trans.), "to shake to and fro" (especially of money in a cap, as part of a game called hustle-cap), metathesized from Dutch hutselen, husseln "to shake, to toss," frequentative of hutsen, variant of hotsen "to shake." "The stems hot-, hut- appear in a number of formations 

 slang 

 1756, "special vocabulary of tramps or thieves" or any set of persons of low character, later "jargon of a particular profession" (1801). The sense of "very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty" is by 1818. Anatoly Liberman writes here an extensive account of 

 abuse 

 early 15c., "to misuse, misapply" (power, money, etc.), from Old French abuser "deceive, abuse, misuse" (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *abusare, from Latin abusus "an abusing; a using up," past participle of abuti "use up, consume," also "to misuse, abuse, misapply, outrage," from ab 

 dogma 

 "a settled opinion, a principle held as being firmly established," c. 1600 (in plural dogmata), from Latin dogma "philosophical tenet," from Greek dogma (genitive dogmatos) "opinion, tenet," literally "that which one thinks is true," from dokein "to seem good, think" (from PIE ro

 grace 

 late 12c., "God's unmerited favor, love, or help," from Old French grace "pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks; elegance, virtue" (12c., Modern French grâce), from Latin gratia "favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will, gratitude" (source of Italian grazia, Spanis

 acolyte 

 early 14c., "inferior officer in the church," from Old French acolite or directly from Medieval Latin acolytus (Late Latin acoluthus), from Greek akolouthos "following, attending on," as a noun, "a follower, attendant," literally "having one way," from a- "together with," copulat

 surmise 

 c. 1400, surmisen, in law, "to charge, allege, accuse" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French surmis, past participle of surmettre "to accuse," from sur- "upon" (see sur- (1)) + mettre "put," from Latin mittere "to send" (see mission). The meaning "infer conjecturally, infer or 

 chess 

 very ancient game of skill with 32 pieces, played by two on a checkered board of 64 squares, 13c., from Old French esches "chessmen," plural of eschec "game of chess, chessboard; checkmate" (see check (n.1)), so called from the key move of the game. Modern French distinguishes éc

 preposition 

 late 14c., preposicioun, in grammar, "indeclinable part of speech regularly placed before and governing a noun in an oblique case and showing its relation to a verb, adjective, or other noun," from Latin praepositionem (nominative praepositio) "a putting before, a prefixing," nou

 Share sputnik 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputnik Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputnik">Etymology of sputnik by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sputnik. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputnik Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sputnik," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputnik. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sputnik." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputnik. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sputnik." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputnik (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sputnik 
 spurious 
 spurn 
 spurrier 
 spurt 
 sputative 
 sputnik 
 sputter 
 sputum 
 spy 
 spyglass 
 spyware 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix