URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ladder
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:00:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ladder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ladder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ladder 

 ladder (n.) 

 "frame of wood, rope, etc., consisting of two side-pieces and cross-rungs or rounds, by which a person may ascend," Middle English laddere , from Old English hlæder "ladder, steps," from Proto-Germanic *hlaidri (source also of Old Frisian hledere , Middle Dutch ledere , Old High German leitara , German Leiter ), which is reconstructed to be from a suffixed form of PIE root *klei- "to lean" (source also of Greek klimax "ladder").

 Figuratively, of any means of ascending or rising, from late Old English. In late Old English, rungs were læddrestæfæ and the side pieces were ledder steles . The superstitious avoidance of walking under a ladder is attested by 1787, but it also is sound advice. Related: Ladderway .

 Entries linking to ladder 

 ladder-back (adj.) 

 by 1867 as a type of chair, from ladder (n.) + back (n.); so called for the horizontal slats across the back that resemble rungs of a ladder.

 step-ladder (n.) 

 also stepladder , one with flat steps rather than rungs, 1728, from step (n.) + ladder .

 *klei- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to lean."

 It might form all or part of: acclivity ; anticline ; clemency ; client ; climate ; climax ; cline ; clinic ; clinical ; clino- ; clitellum ; clitoris ; decline ; declivity ; enclitic ; heteroclite ; incline ; ladder ; lean (v.); lid ; low (n.2) "small hill, eminence;" matroclinous ; patroclinous ; polyclinic ; proclitic ; proclivity ; recline ; synclinal ; thermocline .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit srayati "leans," sritah "leaning;" Old Persian cay "to lean;" Lithuanian šlyti "to slope," šlieti "to lean;" Latin clinare "to lean, bend," clivus "declivity," inclinare "cause to bend," declinare "bend down, turn aside;" Greek klinein "to cause to slope, slant, incline;" Old Irish cloin "crooked, wrong;" Middle Irish cle , Welsh cledd "left," literally "slanting").

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 run 

 Old English, "move swiftly by using the legs, go on legs more rapidly than walking," also "make haste, hurry; be active, pursue or follow a course," and, of inanimate things, "to move over a course." The modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which t

 ravel 

 1580s, "to entangle, become entwined confusedly," also "to untangle, disentangle, unwind" (originally with out), from Dutch ravelen "to tangle, fray," rafelen "to unweave," from rafel "frayed thread," which is of uncertain origin. The seemingly contradictory senses of this word (

 scale 

 "to climb (a wall) by or as by a ladder; attack with scaling ladders," late 14c., scalen, from Latin scala "ladder, flight...Middle English scale, "ladder used in sieges," is attested c. 1400, from the Latin noun....

 escalade 

 assault with ladders on a fortification," from Italian scalata, fem. past participle of scalare "to climb by means of a ladder...," from scala "ladder," related to Latin scandere "to climb" (see scan)....

 Milky Way 

 Old native names for it include Jacob's Ladder, the Way to St. James's, and Watling Street (late 14c.)....

 urn 

 late 14c., "large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead," from Latin urna "a jar, vessel of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead" (also used as a ballot box and for drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus "pitcher, jug," and 

 velar 

 1726, from Latin velaris, from velum "sail, curtain" (see veil (n.)). Originally an architect's term for a type of cupola resembling a swelling sail; phonetics sense is from 1876, on notion of "pertaining to the velum," the anatomist's name for the soft palate (velum in this sens

 damage 

 c. 1300, "harm, injury; hurt or loss to person, character, or estate," from Old French damage, domage  "loss caused by injury" (12c., Modern French dommage), from dam "damage," from Latin damnum "loss, hurt, damage" (see damn). In law (as damages) "the value in money of what

 Share ladder 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ladder Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ladder">Etymology of ladder by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ladder. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ladder Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ladder," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ladder. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ladder." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ladder. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ladder." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ladder (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ladder 
 lacunae 
 lacustrine 
 lacy 
 lad 
 ladanum 
 ladder 
 ladder-back 
 laddie 
 laddish 
 lade 
 laden 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix