URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Columbia
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:11:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Columbia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Columbia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Columbia 

 Columbia 

 poetic name for United States of America, earlier for the British colonies there, 1730s, also the nation's female personification, from name of Christopher Columbus (also see Colombia ) with Latin "country" ending -ia .

 A popular name for places and institutions in the U.S. in the post-Revolutionary years, when former tributes to king and crown were out of fashion: such as Columbia University (New York, U.S.) founded in 1754 as King's College; re-named 1784. Also District of Columbia (1791, as Territory of Columbia ); " Hail, Columbia, " Joseph Hopkinson's patriotic song that served in 19c. as an unofficial national anthem (1798); "Columbiad," Joel Barlow's attempt to write an epic for the United States (1807). Columbiad also was the name of a heavy, cast-iron, smooth-bore cannon introduced in the U.S. in 1811. Related: Columbian .
 also from 1730s 

 Entries linking to Columbia 

 Colombia 

 South American nation, independent from 1819 as part of Gran Colombia (after its breakup in 1830, known as New Granada , then Colombia from 1863); named for Italian explorer Christopher Columbus (Italian Colombo , Portuguese Colom , Spanish Colón ). Related: Colombian .

 Columbus 

 his name is Latinized from his native Italian Cristoforo Colombo , in Spanish Cristóbal Colón .

 America was discovered accidentally by a great seaman who was looking for something else, and most of the exploration for the next fifty years was done in the hope of getting through or around it. [S.E. Morison, "The Oxford History of the United States," 1965]

 -ia 

 word-forming element in names of countries, diseases, and flowers, from Latin and Greek -ia , noun ending, in Greek especially used in forming abstract nouns (typically of feminine gender); see -a (1). The classical suffix in its usual evolution (via French -ie ) comes to Modern English as -y (as in familia / family , also -logy , -graphy ). Compare -cy .

 In paraphernalia , Mammalia , regalia , etc. it represents Latin or Greek -a (see -a (2)), plural suffix of nouns in -ium (Latin) or -ion (Greek), with formative or euphonic -i- .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 D.C. 

 abbreviation of District of Columbia, apparently not widely used before 1820, but eventually it became necessary to distinguish...The city and the district were named in 1791 (at first known as Territory of Columbia; the territory was organized as a "...

 Chinook 

 name for a group of related native people in the Columbia River region of Washington and Oregon, from Salishan /činuk/, name...

 dalle 

 employees of the Hudson's Bay Company and its successors to certain situations of rivers, the best-known being the one on the Columbia...

 LP 

 The disks, released a few weeks ago by Columbia Records and made of Vinylite, have phenomenally narrow grooves (.003 of an...

 revenge 

 ["The Columbia Guide to Standard American English," 1993]...

 hail 

 "Hail, Columbia," the popular patriotic song, also was a euphemism for "hell" in American English slang from c. 1850-1910...

 ivy 

 reference to a conference of football teams agreeing to organize teams and play games by set rules; it consists of Brown, Columbia...

 New York 

 former New Amsterdam (city), New Netherlands (colony), renamed after British acquisition in 1664 in honor of the Duke of York and Albany (1633-1701), the future James II, who had an interest in the territory. See York. Related: New Yorker. Latinized Noveboracensian "of or pertain

 Canada 

 1560s (implied in Canadian), said to be a Latinized form of a word for "village" in an Iroquoian language of the St. Lawrence valley that had gone extinct by 1600. Most still-spoken Iroquoian languages have a similar word (such as Mohawk kana:ta "town"). In early 18c. Canada mean

 Missouri 

 originally a name for a group of native peoples among Chiwere (Siouan) tribes, from an Algonquian word recorded c. 1700, said to mean literally "people of the big canoes." Formed as a U.S. territory in 1812 (out of the whole of the Louisiana Purchase not admitted that year as the

 Share Columbia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Columbia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Columbia">Etymology of Columbia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Columbia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Columbia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Columbia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Columbia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Columbia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Columbia. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Columbia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Columbia (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Columbia 
 colour 
 colposcopy 
 colt 
 coltish 
 columbarium 
 Columbia 
 columbine 
 Columbus 
 column 
 columnar 
 columnist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix