URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/auger
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:05:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Auger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Auger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of auger 

 auger (n.) 

 "instrument for boring larger holes," c. 1500, a faulty separation of Middle English a nauger , from Old English nafogar "nave (of a wheel) drill," from Proto-Germanic *nabo-gaizaz (source also of Old Norse nafarr , Old Saxon nabuger , Old High German nabuger ), a compound whose first element is related to nave (n.2) and whose second is identical to Old English gar "a spear, borer" (see gar ). For similar misdivisions, see adder . The same change took place in Dutch ( avegaar , egger ).
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to auger 

 adder (n.) 

 Middle English naddre , from Old English (West Saxon) næddre (Mercian nedre , Northumbrian nedra ), "a snake; the Serpent in the Garden of Eden," from Proto-Germanic *naethro "a snake" (source also of Old Norse naðra , Middle Dutch nadre , Old High German natra , German Natter , Gothic nadrs ), from PIE root *nētr- "snake" (source also of Latin natrix "water snake" (the sense is probably by folk-association with nare "to swim"); Old Irish nathir , Welsh neidr "snake, serpent").

 The modern form represents a faulty separation 14c.-16c. of a nadder into an adder , for which see also apron , auger , nickname , orange , humble pie , aitchbone , umpire . Nedder is still a northern English dialect form.

 Since Middle English the word has been restricted to use as the common name of the viper, the only venonous British reptile (though not generally fatal to humans), then by extension it was applied to venomous or similar snakes elsewhere ( puff-adder , etc.). Folklore connection with deafness is via Psalm lviii.1-5. The adder is said to stop up its ears to avoid hearing the snake charmer called in to drive it away.

 gar (n.) 

 pike-like fish, 1765, American English, shortening of garfish (mid-15c.), from fish (n.) + Middle English gare , gore "a spear," from Old English gar "spear," from Proto-Germanic *gaisa- "spear" (source also of Old Norse geirr "spear; point of an anvil," Old Saxon, Old High German ger , German Ger "spear"), from PIE *ghaiso- "a stick, spear" (see goad (n.)). The fish so called for its long sharp snout. Compare Edgar , garlic .

 nave 
 apron 
 N 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nave 

 "main part of a church," the middle part, lengthwise, extending typically from the main entrance to the choir or chancel, 1670s, from Medieval Latin navem (nominative navis) "nave of a church," a special use of Latin navis "ship" (from PIE root *nau- "boat"), on some fancied rese

 apron 

 "apparel for covering the front of a person" (especially while at work, to keep clothes clean), mid-15c., faulty separation (as also in adder, auger, umpire) of a napron (c. 1300), from Old French naperon "small table-cloth," diminutive of nappe "cloth," from Latin mappa "napkin.

 gimlet 

 type of boring tool, mid-14c., gymbelette, from Anglo-French and Old French guimbelet, guibelet (12c., Modern French gibelet), which is probably of Germanic origin, perhaps from Middle Dutch wimmelkijn (with substitute of French diminutive suffix), diminutive of wimmel "auger, dr

 trepan 

 from Medieval Latin trepanum "a saw for cutting out small pieces of bone from the skull," from Greek trypanon "a borer, an auger...

 N 

 But it is more common for an English word to lose an -n- to a preceding a: apron, auger, adder, umpire, humble pie, etc....

 drill 

 "tool for making holes in hard substances," 1610s, from Dutch dril, drille "a hole, instrument for boring holes," from drillen "to bore (a hole), turn around, whirl," from PIE root *tere- (1) "to rub, turn."..."small furrow; trench or channel in which seeds are deposited," 1727; 

 snake 

 Middle English snake, "a long, limbless reptile," from Old English snaca, from Proto-Germanic *snakon (source also of Old Norse snakr "snake," Swedish snok, German Schnake "ring snake"), from PIE root *sneg- "to crawl, creeping thing" (source also of Old Irish snaighim "to creep,

 sneak 

 1550s (implied in sneakish), "creep or steal about privately; move or go in a stealthy, slinking way" (intransitive); perhaps from some dialectal survival of Middle English sniken "to creep, crawl" (c. 1200), which is from Old English snican "to sneak along, creep, crawl," from P

 abandon 

 late 14c., "to give up (something) absolutely, relinquish control, give over utterly;" also reflexively, "surrender (oneself), yield (oneself) utterly" (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandonner "surrender, release; give freely, permit," also reflexive, "devote 

 diversity 

 mid-14c., diversite, "variety, diverseness;" late 14c., "quality of being diverse, fact of difference between two or more things or kinds; variety; separateness; that in which two or more things differ," mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversete "difference, diversity,

 Share auger 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/auger Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/auger">Etymology of auger by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of auger. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/auger Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of auger," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/auger. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of auger." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/auger. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of auger." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/auger (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near auger 
 Audrey 
 Audubon 
 Aufklarung 
 *aug- 
 Augean 
 auger 
 aught 
 augment 
 augmentation 
 augmentative 
 augmented 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix