URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rumor
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:29:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rumor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rumor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rumor 

 rumor (n.) 

 "unsubstantiated report, gossip, hearsay;" also "tidings, news, a current report with or without foundation," late 14c., from Old French rumor "commotion, widespread noise or report" (Modern French rumeur ), from Latin rumorem (nominative rumor ) "noise, clamor; common talk, hearsay, popular opinion," which is related to ravus "hoarse" (from PIE *reu- "to bellow").

 Dutch rumoer , German Rumor are from French. The sense of "loud protest, clamor, outcry" also was borrowed in Middle English but is now archaic or poetic. Also compare rumorous "making a loud, confused sound" (1540s). Rumor-monger is by 1884 (earlier in that sense was rumorer , c. 1600). The figurative rumor mill is by 1887.
 also from late 14c. 

 rumor (v.) 

 1590s, transitive, "spread a rumor; tell by way of report," from rumor (n.). Related: Rumored ; rumoring .
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to rumor 

 rumour 

 chiefly British English spelling of rumor ; see -or . Related: Rumoured ; rumouring .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hearsay 

 "information communicated by another, gossip," mid-15c., from phrase to hear say (Middle English heren seien, Old English herdon secgan). The notion is "hear (some people) say;" from hear (v.) + say (v.). As an adjective from 1570s. Hearsay evidence (1670s) is that which the witn

 fame 

 13c., "character attributed to someone;" late 13c., "celebrity, renown," from Old French fame "fame, reputation, renown, rumor..." (12c.), from Latin fama "talk, rumor, report; reputation, public opinion; renown, good reputation," but also "ill-fame,...The goddess Fama was the personification of rumor in Roman mythology....

 grapevine 

 Meaning "a rumor; a secret or unconventional method of spreading information" (1863) is from the use of grapevine telegraph...as "secret source of information and rumor" in the American Civil War; in reference to Southerners under northern occupation...

 defamatory 

 to spread abroad by ill report, make a scandal of," from dis-, here probably suggestive of ruination, + fama "a report, rumor...

 Pericles 

 far-famed," from peri "all around" (see peri-) + -kles "fame," a common ending in Greek proper names, related to kleos "rumor...

 gossip 

 The sense was further extended 1811 to "trifling talk, groundless rumor."...

 Cleopatra 

 The name is Latinized Greek, probably meaning "glory of her father," from kleos "rumor, report, news; good report, fame,...

 comment 

 late 14c., "explanation, spoken or written remark," from Old French coment "commentary" or directly from Late Latin commentum "comment, interpretation," in classical Latin "invention, fabrication, fiction," neuter past participle of comminisci "to contrive, devise," from com-, he

 Easter 

 Old English Easterdæg, "Easter day," from Eastre (Northumbrian Eostre), from Proto-Germanic *austron-, "dawn," also possibly the name of a goddess whose feast was celebrated in Eastermonað (the Anglo-Saxon month corresponding with April), from *aust- "east, toward the sunrise" (c

 mentor 

 "wise adviser, intimate friend who also is a sage counselor," especially to one who is young or inexperienced, 1750, from Greek Mentor, in the Odyssey" the name of the friend of Odysseus and adviser of Telemachus (but often actually Athene appearing in disguise). The name perhaps

 Share rumor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rumor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rumor">Etymology of rumor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rumor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rumor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rumor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rumor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rumor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rumor. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rumor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rumor (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rumor 
 ruminant 
 ruminate 
 rumination 
 rummage 
 rummy 
 rumor 
 rumour 
 rump 
 Rumpelstiltskin 
 rumple 
 rumpus 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix