URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alum
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:48:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alum - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alum 

 alum (n.) 

 "whitish mineral salt used as an astringent, dye, etc.," late 14c., from Old French alum , alun , from Latin alumen "alum," also "the alum plant," from Proto-Italic *alu- "bitter substance" literally "bitter salt," cognate with Greek aludoimos "bitter" and perhaps with English ale and some Balto-Slavic words for "beer" (such as Lithuanian alus). The plant's medicinal use on wounds was known to Pliny.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to alum 

 ale (n.) 

 "intoxicating liquor made by malt fermentation," Old English ealu "ale, beer," from Proto-Germanic *aluth- (source also of Old Saxon alo , Old Norse öl ), which is of uncertain origin. Perhaps from a PIE root meaning "bitter" (source also of Latin alumen "alum"), or from PIE *alu-t "ale," from root *alu- , which has connotations of "sorcery, magic, possession, and intoxication" [Watkins]. The word was borrowed from Germanic into Lithuanian ( alus ) and Old Church Slavonic ( olu ).

 In the fifteenth century, and until the seventeenth, ale stood for the unhopped fermented malt liquor which had long been the native drink of these islands. Beer was the hopped malt liquor introduced from the Low Countries in the fifteenth century and popular first of all in the towns. By the eighteenth century, however, all malt liquor was hopped and there had been a silent mutation in the meaning of the two terms. For a time the terms became synonymous, in fact, but local habits of nomenclature still continued to perpetuate what had been a real difference: 'beer' was the malt liquor which tended to be found in towns, 'ale' was the term in general use in the country districts. [Peter Mathias, "The Brewing Industry in England," Cambridge University Press, 1959]

 Meaning "festival or merry-meeting at which much ale was drunk" was in Old English (see bridal ).

 aluminum (n.) 

 by 1812, from alumina , alumine , the name given by French chemists late 18c. to aluminum oxide, from Latin alumen "alum" (see alum ). Sir Humphry Davy, working to isolate it, called it alumium (1808), later he used aluminum (by 1812), which remains the U.S. word.

 The form aluminium , the modern preferred British word, was proposed by January 1811 in an account of Davy's published experiments written by William Hyde Wollaston (discoverer of palladium and rhodium) and printed in The Critical Review:

 Potassium, acting upon alumine and glucine, produces pyrophoric substances of a dark grey colour, which burnt, throwing off brilliant sparks, and leaving behind alkali and earth, and which, when thrown into water, decomposed it with great violence. The result of this experiment is not wholly decisive as to the existence of what might be called aluminium and glucinium .

 It better harmonizes with the other metallic element names ( sodium , potassium ).

 Aluminium, for so we shall take the liberty of writing the word, in preference to aluminum, which has a less classical sound. [Quarterly Review, September 1812]

 Aluminum foil attested by 1859; popularized in food packaging from c. 1950.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 graduate 

 early 15c., "one who holds a degree" (originally with man; as a stand-alone noun from mid-15c.), from Medieval Latin graduatus, past participle of graduari "to take a degree," from Latin gradus "a step; a step climbed (on a ladder or stair);" figuratively "a step toward something

 student 

 late 14c., studient, "studious person, one who pursues knowledge," from Old French estudiant "student, scholar, one who is studying" (Modern French étudiant), noun use of present participle of estudiier, from Medieval Latin studiare "to study," from Latin studium (see study (v.))

 scholar 

 Middle English scolere, from Old English scolere "student, one who receives instruction in a school, one who learns from a teacher," from Medieval Latin scholaris, "a pupil, scholar," noun use of Late Latin scholaris "of a school," from Latin schola (see school (n.1), and compare

 styptic 

 late 14c., stiptik, in medicine, "astringent, causing bodily tissue to contract," to check bleeding, etc. (also of tastes, "harsh"); from Old French stiptique or directly from Latin stypticus "astringent," from Greek styptikos, from styphein "to constrict, draw together." As a no

 manual 

 "of or pertaining to the hand; done, made, or used by hand;" c. 1400, from Latin manualis "of or belonging to the hand; that can be thrown by hand," from manus "hand, strength, power over; armed force; handwriting," from PIE root *man- (2) "hand." The military manual exercise (17

 astringent 

 1540s, "binding, contracting," from Latin astringentum (nominative astringens), present participle of astringere "to bind fast, tighten, contract," from assimilated form of ad "to" (see ad-) + stringere "draw tight" (see strain (v.)). Related: Astringently; astringency. As a noun

 drag 

 late 14c., draggen, "to draw a grapnel along the bottom of a river, lake, etc., in search of something;" late 15c., "to draw away by force, pull haul," from Old Norse draga, or a dialectal variant of Old English dragan "to draw," both from Proto-Germanic *draganan "to draw, pull,

 potash 

 "vegetable alkali; substance obtained originally by leaching wood-ashes and evaporating the solution obtained in a large iron pot or pan; one of the fixed alkalis," 1751, earlier pot-ash (1640s), a loan-translation of older Dutch potaschen, literally "pot ashes" (16c.); see pot (

 ammonia 

 volatile alkali, a colorless gas with a strong pungent smell, 1799, coined in scientific Latin 1782 by Swedish chemist Torbern Bergman as a name for the gas obtained from sal ammoniac, salt deposits containing ammonium chloride found near temple of Jupiter Ammon in Libya (see Amm

 idea 

 late 14c., "archetype, concept of a thing in the mind of God," from Latin idea "Platonic idea, archetype," a word in philosophy, the word (Cicero writes it in Greek) and the idea taken from Greek idea "form; the look of a thing; a kind, sort, nature; mode, fashion," in logic, "a 

 Share alum 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alum Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alum">Etymology of alum by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alum. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alum Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alum," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alum. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alum." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alum. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alum." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alum (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alum 
 altogether 
 alto-rilievo 
 altruism 
 altruist 
 altruistic 
 alum 
 aluminium 
 aluminum 
 alumna 
 alumnae 
 alumni 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix