URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/syphilis
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:17:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Syphilis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Syphilis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of syphilis 

 syphilis (n.) 

 infectious venereal disease, 1718, Modern Latin, originally from the title of a poem, "Syphilis, sive Morbus Gallicus" "Syphilis, or the French Disease," published 1530, by Veronese doctor Girolamo Fracastoro (1483-1553), which tells the tale of the shepherd Syphilus , supposed to be the first sufferer from the disease. Fracastoro first used the word as a generic term for the disease in his 1546 treatise "De Contagione." 

 Why he chose the name and what it meant to him are unknown; it may be intended as Latinized Greek for "Pig-lover" (with Latin sus "pig"). That and derivation from syn- "with" + philos "loving" form "the usual conjectures" [Century Dictionary], but there was as well a Sipylus , a son of Niobe, in Ovid.
 also from 1718 

 Entries linking to syphilis 

 syphilitic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or of the nature of syphilis," 1786, from Modern Latin syphiliticus , from syphilis (see syphilis ). As a noun from 1881, "person infected with syphilis."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Neapolitan 

 In early 18c., Neapolitan consolation meant "syphilis."...

 sarsaparilla 

 .-17c. the dried roots were held to be efficient in treatment of syphilis....

 dose 

 early 15c., "the giving of medicine (in a specified amount or at a stated time)," from Old French dose (15c.) or directly from Medieval Latin dosis, from Greek dosis "a portion prescribed," literally "a giving," used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medici

 bless 

 Middle English blessen, from Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian "to consecrate by a religious rite, make holy, give thanks," from Proto-Germanic *blodison "hallow with blood, mark with blood," from *blotham "blood" (see blood (n.)). Originally a blood sprinkli

 course 

 c. 1300, "onward movement, motion forward, a running in a prescribed direction or over a prescribed distance; path or distance prescribed for a race, a race-course" from Old French cors "course; run, running; flow of a river" (12c.), from Latin cursus "a running; a journey; direc

 record 

 c. 1200, recorden, "to repeat, reiterate, recite; rehearse, get by heart" (senses now obsolete), from Old French recorder "tell, relate, repeat, recite, report, make known" (12c.) and directly from Latin recordari "remember, call to mind, think over, be mindful of," from re-, her

 Mercury 

 "the Roman god Mercury," herald and ambassador of his father, Jupiter, mid-12c., Mercurie, from Latin Mercurius "Mercury," originally a god of tradesmen and thieves, from merx "merchandise" (see market (n.)); or perhaps [Klein, Tucker] from Etruscan and influenced by merx. De Vaa

 sanction 

 1560s, "a law or decree," from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) "act of decreeing or ordaining," also "a decree, an ordinance, a law," noun of action from past-participle stem of sancire "to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred" (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecc

 Anglo-Saxon 

 Old English Angli Saxones (plural), from Latin Anglo-Saxones, in which Anglo- is an adjective, thus literally "English Saxons," as opposed to those of the Continent (now called Old Saxons). Properly in reference to the Saxons of ancient Wessex, Essex, Middlesex, and Sussex. I am

 trust 

 c. 1200, "reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious faith," from Old Norse traust "help, confidence, protection, support," from Proto-Germanic abstract noun *traustam (source also of Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost "comfort, consolat

 Share syphilis 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/syphilis Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/syphilis">Etymology of syphilis by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of syphilis. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/syphilis Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of syphilis," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syphilis. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of syphilis." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syphilis. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of syphilis." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/syphilis (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near syphilis 
 synthesise 
 synthesize 
 synthesizer 
 synthetic 
 syntropic 
 syphilis 
 syphilitic 
 Syracuse 
 Syria 
 Syriac 
 syringe 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix