URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/infest
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:21:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Infest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Infest - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of infest 

 infest (v.) 

 late 15c., infesten , "to attack, assail, hurt, distress, annoy," from Old French infester (14c.), from Latin infestare "to attack, disturb, trouble," from infestus "unsafe, hostile, threatening, dangerous," originally "inexorable, not able to be handled," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + -festus , perhaps "(able to be) seized" (see manifest (adj.)). The sense of "swarm over in large numbers, attack parasitically" is recorded by c. 1600. Related: Infested ; infesting .
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to infest 

 manifest (adj.) 

 late 14c., "clearly revealed to the eye or the understanding, open to view or comprehension," from Old French manifest "evident, palpable," (12c.), or directly from Latin manifestus "plainly apprehensible, clear, apparent, evident;" of offenses, "proved by direct evidence;" of offenders, "caught in the act," probably from manus "hand" (from PIE root *man- (2) "hand") + -festus , which apparently is identical to the second element of infest .

 De Vaan writes, "If manifestus may be interpreted as 'caught by hand', the meanings seem to point to 'grabbing' or 'attacking' for -festus ." But he finds none of the proposed ulterior connections compelling, and concludes that, regarding infestus and manifestus , "maybe the two must be separated." If not, the sense development might be from "caught by hand" to "in hand, palpable." 

 Manifest destiny , "that which clearly appears destined to come to pass; a future state, condition, or event which can be foreseen with certainty, or is regarded as inevitable" was much used in American politics from about the time of the Mexican War "by those who believed that the United States were destined in time to occupy the entire continent" [Century Dictionary].

 Other nations have tried to check ... the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the Continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions. [John O'Sullivan (1813-1895), "U.S. Magazine & Democratic Review," July 1845]

 The phrase apparently is O'Sullivan's coinage; the notion is as old as the republic.

 infestation (n.) 

 early 15c., infestacioun , "a being infested," from Old French infestacion , from Late Latin infestationem (nominative infestatio ) "a troubling, a disturbing, a molesting," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin infestare "to attack, disturb" (see infest ).

 in- (1) 

 word-forming element meaning "not, opposite of, without" (also im- , il- , ir- by assimilation of -n- with following consonant, a tendency which began in later Latin), from Latin in- "not," cognate with Greek an- , Old English un- , all from PIE root *ne- "not."

 In Old French and Middle English often en- , but most of these forms have not survived in Modern English, and the few that do ( enemy , for instance) no longer are felt as negative. The rule of thumb in English has been to use in- with obviously Latin elements, un- with native or nativized ones.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 overrun 

 also over-run, Middle English overrennen, from Old English oferyrnan "to run across, pass over;" see over- + run (v.). Meaning "continue beyond a specified time" is from early 14c. Meaning "to ravage (a land), maraud, plunder" is by mid-14c. Of weeds, etc., "to grow over, cover a

 occupy 

 mid-14c., occupien, "to take possession of and retain or keep," also "to take up space or room or time; employ (someone)," irregularly borrowed from Old French ocuper, occuper "occupy (a person or place), hold, seize" (13c.) or directly from Latin occupare "take over, seize, take

 ace 

 c. 1300, "one at dice," from Old French as "one at dice" (12c.), from Latin as "a unit, one, a whole, unity;" also the name of a small Roman coin (originally a rectangular bronze plaque weighing one pound, it eventually was reduced by depreciation to half an ounce; in imperial ti

 errand 

 Old English ærende "message, mission; answer, news, tidings," from Proto-Germanic *airundija- "message, errand" (source also of Old Saxon arundi, Old Norse erendi, Danish ærinde, Swedish ärende, Old Frisian erende, Old High German arunti "message"), which is of uncertain origin. 

 bust 

 1690s, "sculpture of upper torso and head," from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto "upper body," from Latin bustum "funeral monument, tomb," originally "funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned," perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus "burned around," past 

 apparition 

 early 15c., "supernatural appearance or manifestation," from Anglo-French aparicion, Old French aparicion, aparoison (15c.), used in reference to the Epiphany (the revealing of the Christ child to the Wise Men), from Late Latin apparitionem (nominative apparitio) "an appearance,"

 Arab 

 "one of the native people of Arabia and surrounding regions," late 14c. (Arabes, a plural form), from Old French Arabi, from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem), from Greek Araps (genitive Arabos), from Arabic 'arab, indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally "inhabitant of the

 abound 

 "be in great plenty," early 14c., from Old French abonder "to abound, be abundant, come together in great numbers" (12c.), from Latin abundare "overflow, run over," from Latin ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + undare "rise in a wave," from unda "a wave" (from PIE *unda-, nasalized 

 salvation 

 c. 1200, savacioun, saluatiun, sauvacioun, etc., originally in the Christian sense, "the saving of the soul, deliverance from the power of sin and admission to eternal bliss," from Old French salvaciun and directly from Late Latin salvationem (nominative salvatio, a Church Latin 

 Share infest 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/infest Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/infest">Etymology of infest by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of infest. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/infest Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of infest," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/infest. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of infest." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/infest. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of infest." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/infest (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near infest 
 inferiority 
 infernal 
 inferno 
 infertile 
 infertility 
 infest 
 infestation 
 infibulate 
 infibulation 
 infidel 
 infidelity 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix