URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Buddha
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:14:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Buddha - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Buddha - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Buddha 

 Buddha (n.) 

 an epithet applied to the historical founder of Buddhism, 1680s, from Pali, literally "awakened, enlightened," past participle of budh "to awake, know, perceive," which is related to Sanskrit bodhati "is awake, observes, understands," from PIE root *bheudh- "be aware, make aware." Title given by his adherents to the man who taught this path, Siddhartha Gautama , also known to them as Sakyamuni "Sage of the Sakyas" (his family clan), who lived in northern India 5c. B.C.E.
 also from 1680s 

 Entries linking to Buddha 

 Gautama 

 surname of the Buddha , from Sanskrit Gotamah , properly a patronymic, literally "descendant of the greatest ox," from superlative of gauh "ox, bull, cow."

 Bodhisattva (n.) 

 "one of a class of beings in Mahayana Buddhism who have attained supreme wisdom," 1828, from Sanskrit, literally "one whose essence is perfect knowledge," from bodhi "perfect knowledge" (see Buddha ) + sattva "reality, being," from sat- , sant- "existing, true, virtuous," from PIE root *es- "to be."

 Buddhism 
 Buddhist 
 *bheudh- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nirvana 

 also Nirvana, Nirwana, 1836, in Buddhism, "the condition of a Buddha," from Sanskrit nirvana-s "extinction, disappearance...

 Islam 

 religion, along with Buddhism (if we consider the name of the religion to come from Budd, the Divine Intellect, and not the Buddha...

 stain 

 mid-14c., steinen, "ornament with a design;" late 14c., "damage or blemish the appearance of," also "impart color, dye;" the word is probably a merger of Old Norse steina "to paint, color, stain," and a shortened form of Middle English disteynen "to discolor or stain," from Old F

 saint 

 early 12c. as an adjective, seinte, "holy, divinely inspired, worthy of worship," used before proper names (Sainte Marian Magdalene, etc.), from Old French saint, seinte "holy, pious, devout," from Latin sanctus "holy, consecrated," past participle of sancire "consecrate" (see sa

 satin 

 "smooth, lustrous silken cloth; silk fabric with a very glossy surface and the back less so," mid-14c., from Old French satin (14c.), perhaps from Arabic (atlas) zaytuni, literally "(satin) from Zaitun," name of a place in China, perhaps modern Quanzhou in Fukien province, a majo

 glean 

 early 14c., "to gather by acquisition, scrape together," especially grains left in the field after harvesting, but the earliest use in English is figurative, from Old French glener "to glean" (14c., Modern French glaner) "to glean," from Late Latin glennare "make a collection," o

 angel 

 "one of a class of spiritual beings, attendants and messengers of God," a c. 1300 fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele. Both are from Late Latin angelus, from Greek angelos, literally "messenger, envoy, one that announces," in the New Testament "divin

 angle 

 "to fish with a hook," mid-15c., from Old English angel (n.) "angle, hook, fish-hook," related to anga "hook," from Proto-Germanic *angul-, from PIE *ankulo-, suffixed form of root *ang-/*ank- "to bend" (see angle (n.)). Compare Old English angul, Old Norse öngull, Old High Germa

 battery 

 1530s, "action of battering," in law, "the unlawful beating of another," from French batterie, from Old French baterie "beating, thrashing, assault" (12c.), from batre "to beat," from Latin battuere (see batter (v.)). The meaning shifted in French from "bombardment" ("heavy blows

 militia 

 1580s, "system of military discipline," from Latin militia "military service, warfare," from miles "soldier" (see military (adj.)). The sense of "citizen army" (as distinct from professional soldiers) is first recorded 1690s, perhaps from a sense in French cognate milice. Histori

 Share Buddha 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Buddha Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Buddha">Etymology of Buddha by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Buddha. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Buddha Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Buddha," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Buddha. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Buddha." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Buddha. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Buddha." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Buddha (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Buddha 
 buck-tooth 
 buckwheat 
 bucolic 
 bud 
 Budapest 
 Buddha 
 Buddhism 
 Buddhist 
 budding 
 buddy 
 budge 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix