URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/xiphoid
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:39:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Xiphoid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Xiphoid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of xiphoid 

 xiphoid (adj.) 

 in anatomy, "sword-shaped, resembling a sword," 1746, with -oid + Greek xiphos "a sword," a word of unknown origin (Klein suggests a Semitic source and compares Hebrew sayif , Arabic sayf ).
 also from 1746 

 Entries linking to xiphoid 

 xiphias (n.) 

 genus of swordfish, 1660s, from Greek xiphias "swordfish," from xiphos "a sword" (see xiphoid ). Related: Xiphioid .

 ziphoid (adj.) 

 1870, in zoology, "resembling or related to Ziphius ," a genus of toothed whales (Cuvier, 1834), Modern Latin, from Greek Greek  xiphias  "swordfish" (see xiphoid ).

 -oid 

 word-forming element meaning "like, like that of, thing like a ______," from Latinized form of Greek -oeidēs (three syllables), from eidos "form," related to idein "to see," eidenai "to know;" literally "to see" (from PIE *weid-es- , from root *weid- "to see"). The -o- is connective or a stem vowel from the previous element. Often implying an incomplete or imperfect resemblance to the thing indicated.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 assess 

 early 15c., "to fix the amount (of a tax, fine, etc.)," from Anglo-French assesser, from Medieval Latin assessare "fix a tax upon," originally frequentative of Latin assessus "a sitting by," past participle of assidere/adsidere "to sit beside" (and thus to assist in the office of

 honor 

 c. 1200, onur, "glory, renown, fame earned," from Anglo-French honour, Old French onor, honor "honor, dignity, distinction, position; victory, triumph" (Modern French honneur), from Latin honorem (nominative honos, the form used by Cicero, but later honor) "honor, dignity, office

 folk 

 Old English folc "common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army," from Proto-Germanic *fulka- (source also of Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk, Old High German folc, German Volk "people"). Perhaps originally "host of warri

 fiasco 

 1855, theater slang for "a failure in performance;" by 1862 it had acquired the general sense of "any ignominious failure or dismal flop," on or off the stage. It comes via the French phrase faire fiasco "turn out a failure" (19c.), from Italian far fiasco "suffer a complete brea

 period 

 early 15c., periode, "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle of the Greek games," from Greek perio

 eerie 

 also eery, c. 1300, "timid, affected by superstitious fear," north England and Scottish variant of Old English earg "cowardly, fearful, wretched; slow, indolent, useless," from Proto-Germanic *arh- (source also of Old Frisian erg "evil, bad," Middle Dutch arch "bad," Dutch arg, O

 mirage 

 "optical illusion of objects reflected in a sheet of water in hot, sandy deserts," 1800, in translations of French works, from French mirage (1753), from se mirer "to be reflected," from Latin mirare (see mirror (n.)). Or the French word is from Latin mirus "wonderful" (see mirac

 catholic 

 mid-14c., catholik, "of the doctrines of the ancient Church" (before the East/West schism), literally "universally accepted," from French catholique, from Church Latin catholicus "universal, general," from Greek katholikos, from phrase kath' holou "on the whole, in general," from

 magistrate 

 late 14c., "a civil officer in charge of administering laws," also "office or function of a magistrate," from Old French magistrat, from Latin magistratus "a magistrate, public functionary," originally "magisterial rank or office," from magistrare "serve as a magistrate," from ma

 nation 

 c. 1300, nacioun, "a race of people, large group of people with common ancestry and language," from Old French nacion "birth, rank; descendants, relatives; country, homeland" (12c.) and directly from Latin nationem (nominative natio) "birth, origin; breed, stock, kind, species; r

 Share xiphoid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/xiphoid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/xiphoid">Etymology of xiphoid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of xiphoid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/xiphoid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of xiphoid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/xiphoid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of xiphoid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/xiphoid. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of xiphoid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/xiphoid (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near xiphoid 
 Xerxes 
 Xhosa 
 xi 
 -xion 
 xiphias 
 xiphoid 
 Xmas 
 X-ray 
 xylem 
 xylene 
 xylo- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix