URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarrel
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:23:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Quarrel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Quarrel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of quarrel 

 quarrel (n.1) 

 [angry dispute] mid-14c., querele , "dispute, altercation," also "ground for complaint," from Old French querele "matter, concern, business; dispute, controversy" (Modern French querelle ) and directly from Latin querella "complaint, accusation; lamentation," from queri "to complain, lament," from Proto-Italic *kwese- , of uncertain etymology, perhaps, via the notion of "to sigh," from a PIE root *kues- "to hiss" (source also of Sanskrit svasiti "to hiss, snort"), which is not very compelling, but no better etymology has been offered. 

 In Middle English also of armed combat. Old English had sacan . Sense of "angry contention between persons" is from 1570s.

 A 
 quarrel is a matter of ill feeling and hard words in view of supposed wrong : it stops just short of blows; any use beyond this is now figurative. [Century Dictionary, 1897]
 also from mid-14c. 

 quarrel (n.2) 

 "short, heavy, square-headed, four-edged bolt or arrow for a crossbow," mid-13c., from Old French quarel , carrel "bolt, arrow," from Vulgar Latin *quadrellus , diminutive of Late Latin quadrus (adj.) "square," related to quattuor "four" (from PIE root *kwetwer- "four"). Now-archaic sense of "square or diamond-shaped plane of glass" is recorded from mid-15c., from Medieval Latin quadrellus "a square tile."
 also from mid-13c. 

 quarrel (v.) 

 late 14c., querelen , "to raise an objection, dispute; rebel;" 1520s as "to contend violently, dispute angrily, fall out," from quarrel (n.1) and in part from Old French quereler (Modern French quereller ). Related: Quarrelled ; quarrelling .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to quarrel 

 quarrelsome (adj.) 

 "apt to quarrel, given to contention," 1590s, from quarrel (n.1) + -some (1). Related: Quarrelsomely; quarrelsomeness . Older quarrellous (c. 1400) is now obsolete.

 querulous (adj.) 

 "habitually complaining; expressing complaint," c. 1400, querelous , from Old French querelos "quarrelsome, argumentative" and directly from Late Latin querulosus , from Latin querulus "full of complaints, complaining," from queri "to complain," from Proto-Italic *kwese- , of uncertain etymology, perhaps, via the notion of "to sigh," from a PIE root *kues- "to hiss" (source also of Sanskrit svasiti "to hiss, snort"), which is not very compelling, but no better etymology has been offered.

 It retains the original vowel of quarrel (n.1). Related: Querulously ; querulousness .

 *kwetwer- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "four."

 It might form all or part of: cadre ; cahier ; carillon ; carrefour ; catty-cornered ; diatessaron ; escadrille ; farthing ; firkin ; fortnight ; forty ; four ; fourteen ; fourth ; quadrant ; quadraphonic ; quadratic ; quadri- ; quadrilateral ; quadriliteral ; quadrille ; quadriplegia ; quadrivium ; quadroon ; quadru- ; quadruped ; quadruple ; quadruplicate ; quarantine ; quarrel (n.2) "square-headed bolt for a crossbow;" quarry (n.2) "open place where rocks are excavated;" quart ; quarter ; quarterback ; quartermaster ; quarters ; quartet ; quarto ; quaternary ; quatrain ; quattrocento ; quire (n.1) "set of four folded pages for a book;" squad ; square ; tessellated ; tetra- ; tetracycline ; tetrad ; tetragrammaton ; tetrameter ; tetrarch ; trapezium .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit catvarah , Avestan čathwaro , Persian čatvar , Greek tessares , Latin quattuor , Oscan petora , Old Church Slavonic četyre , Lithuanian keturi , Old Irish cethir , Welsh pedwar .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dispute 

 c. 1300, "engage in argumentation or discussion," from Old French desputer (12c.) "dispute, fight over, contend for, discuss" and directly from Latin disputare "weigh, examine, discuss, argue, explain," from dis- "separately, apart" (see dis-) + putare "to count, consider," origi

 scrap 

 [small piece, fragment] late 14c., scrappe, "piece of food remaining after a meal" (usually plural), from Old Norse skrap "scraps; trifles," from skrapa "to scrape, scratch, cut" (see scrape (v.)). Hence, "any remnant or small, detached piece" (1580s), typically negative (not a s

 row 

 "series of people or things in a more or less straight line," Middle English reue, from late Old English reawe, rewe, earlier ræw "a row, line; succession, hedge-row," probably from Proto-Germanic *rai(h)waz (source also of Middle Dutch rie, Dutch rij "row;" Old High German rihan

 controversy 

 "disputation, debate, prolonged agitation of contrary opinions," late 14c., from Old French controversie "quarrel, disagreement..." or directly from Latin controversia "a turning against; contention, quarrel, dispute," from controversus "turned in an...

 obstreperous 

 strepere "make a noise," from PIE *strep-, said to be imitative (compare Latin stertare "to snore," Old Norse þrefa "to quarrel...," þrapt "chattering, gossip," Old English þræft "quarrel")....

 litigation 

 Late Latin litigationem (nominative litigatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin litigare "to dispute, quarrel...; sue, go to court," from phrase litem agere "to drive a suit," from litem (nominative lis) "lawsuit, dispute, quarrel, strife...

 Nike 

 with their Victoria), literally "victory, upper hand" (in battle, in contests, in court), probably connected with neikos "quarrel..., strife," neikein "to quarrel with," a word of uncertain etymology and perhaps a pre-Greek word....

 difference 

 mid-14c., "condition or relation of being other or different," also "any special mode of non-identity," from Old French difference "difference, distinction; argument, dispute" (12c.) and directly from Latin differentia "diversity, difference," from differentem (nominative differe

 fence 

 early 14c., "action of defending, resistance; means of protection, fortification," shortening of defens (see defense). The same pattern also yielded fend, fender; and obsolete fensive "defensive" (late 16c.). Spelling alternated between -c- and -s- in Middle English. Sense of "en

 debate 

 late 14c., "to quarrel, dispute," also "to combat, fight, make war" (senses now archaic), also "discuss, deliberate upon the pros and cons of," from Old French debatre (13c., Modern French débattre), originally "to fight," from de- "down, completely" (see de-) + batre "to beat," 

 Share quarrel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarrel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarrel">Etymology of quarrel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of quarrel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarrel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of quarrel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarrel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of quarrel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarrel. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of quarrel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/quarrel (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near quarrel 
 quantitive 
 quantity 
 quantum 
 quarantine 
 quark 
 quarrel 
 quarrelsome 
 quarry 
 quarryman 
 quart 
 quartan 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix