URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dram
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:19:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dram - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dram - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dram 

 dram (n.) 

 mid-15c., "small weight of apothecary's measure," a phonetic spelling, from Anglo-Latin dragma , Old French drame , from Late Latin dragma , from Latin drachma "drachma," from Greek drakhma "measure of weight," also, "silver coin," literally "handful" (of six obols , the least valuable coins in ancient Athens), akin to drassesthai "to grasp" (see drachma ). The fluid dram is one-eighth of a fluid ounce, hence "a small drink of liquor" (1713). Hence dram shop (1725), where liquor was sold by the shot.
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to dram 

 drachma (n.) 

 late 14c., dragme , "ancient Athenian coin," the principal silver coin of ancient Greece; mid-15c. as the name of a coin used in Syria, from Old French dragme , from Medieval Latin dragma , from Latinized form of Greek drakhme , an Attic coin and weight, probably originally "a handful" (of six obols, the least valuable coins in ancient Athens), akin to drassesthai "to grasp," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps Pre-Greek. Arabic dirham , Armenian dram are from Greek.

 Middle English also used the word in the "weight" sense, as a unit of apothecary's weight of one-eighth of an ounce, which became dram .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dream 

 mid-13c., probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish drøm, Swedish dröm, Old Saxon drom "merriment, noise," Old Frisian dram...

 ounce 

 unit of weight, the twelfth part of a pound, early 14c., from Old French once, unce, a measure of weight or time (12c.), from Latin uncia "one-twelfth part" (of a pound, a foot, etc.), from Latin unus "one" (from PIE root *oi-no- "one, unique"). The Latin word had been adopted in

 grain 

 early 14c., "a small, hard seed," especially of one of the cereal plants, also as a collective singular, "seed of wheat and allied grasses used as food;" also "something resembling grain; a hard particle of other substances" (salt, sand, later gunpowder, etc.), from Old French gr

 scruple 

 "moral misgiving, pang of conscience," late 14c., scrupul, from Old French scrupule (14c.), from Latin scrupulus "uneasiness, anxiety, pricking of conscience," also, literally, "small sharp stone," a diminutive of scrupus "sharp stone or pebble," used figuratively by Cicero for a

 shop 

 c. 1300, "booth or shed for trade or work," perhaps from Old English scoppa, a rare word of uncertain meaning, apparently related to scypen "cowshed," from Proto-Germanic *skoppan "small additional structure" (source also of Old High German scopf "building without walls, porch," 

 sublime 

 1580s, of language, style, etc., "expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner," from French sublime (15c.), or directly from Latin sublimis "uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished," possibly originally "sloping up to the lintel," from sub "up to" (se

 autumn 

 season after summer and before winter, late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus "increase"), which is of unknown origin. Perhaps it is from Etruscan, but Tucker suggest

 forsake 

 Old English forsacan "object to, oppose, refuse, deny; give up, renounce" (past tense forsoc, past participle forsacen), from for- "completely" + sacan "to struggle, dispute, wrangle; accuse, blame" (see sake (n.1)). Related: Forsaking. Similar formation in Old Saxon farsakan, Du

 angel 

 "one of a class of spiritual beings, attendants and messengers of God," a c. 1300 fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele. Both are from Late Latin angelus, from Greek angelos, literally "messenger, envoy, one that announces," in the New Testament "divin

 minion 

 c. 1500, "a favorite; a darling, one who or that which is beloved" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French mignon "a favorite, darling" (n.), also a term of (probably homosexual) abuse; as an adjective, "dainty, pleasing, favorite," from mignot "pretty, attractive, dainty, gracio

 Share dram 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dram Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dram">Etymology of dram by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dram. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dram Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dram," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dram. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dram." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dram. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dram." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dram (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dram 
 dragoon 
 dragster 
 drain 
 drainage 
 drake 
 dram 
 drama 
 Dramamine 
 dramatic 
 dramatis personae 
 dramatist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix