URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Europe
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:38:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Europe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Europe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Europe 

 Europe 

 from Latin Europa "Europe," from Greek Europ ē , which is of uncertain origin; as a geographic name first recorded in the Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier):

 "Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring perfect hecatombs, both those who live in rich Peloponnesus and those of Europe and all the wave-washed isles, coming to seek oracles."

 Often explained as "broad face," from eurys "wide" (see eury- ) + ops "face," literally "eye" (from PIE root *okw- "to see"). But also traditionally linked with Europa , Phoenician princess in Greek mythology. Klein (citing Heinrich Lewy) suggests a possible Semitic origin in Akkad. erebu "to go down, set" (in reference to the sun) which would parallel occident . Another suggestion along those lines is Phoenician 'ereb "evening," hence "west."

 Entries linking to Europe 

 occident (n.) 

 late 14c., "western part" (of the heavens or the earth), from Old French occident (12c.) or directly from Latin occidentem (nominative occidens ) "western sky, sunset, part of the sky in which the sun sets," noun use of adjective meaning "setting," from present participle of occidere "fall down, go down" (see occasion (n.)). As a geopolitical term, sometimes with a capital O, always somewhat imprecise.

 With the definite article, the west; western countries; specifically, those countries lying to the west of Asia and of that part of eastern Europe now or formerly constituting in general European Turkey; Christendom. Various countries, as Russia, may be classed either in the Occident or in the Orient. [Century Dictionary, 1895]

 European 

 c. 1600 (adj.); 1630s (n.), from French Européen , from Latin Europaeus , from Greek Europaios "European," from Europe (see Europe ).

 europium 
 eury- 
 *okw- 
 Euro- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 care package 

 1945, originally CARE package, supplies sent out by "Cooperative for American Remittances to Europe," established 1945 by...U.S. private charities to coordinate delivery of aid packages to displaced persons in Europe after World War II and obviously...

 Galicia 

 region in Central Europe, perhaps ultimately from Lithuanian galas "end, peak," in reference to the Carpathian Mountains...Related: Galician (1749 of Spain, 1835 of Eastern Europe)....

 oriole 

 1776, "the golden oriole," a bird of Europe, so called from its rich yellow color, from French oriol, Old Provençal auriol...Originally in reference to Oriolus galbula, a bird of black and yellow plumage that summers in Europe (but is uncommon in...

 Mediterranean 

 "the sea between southern Europe and northern Africa," 1590s, earlier Mediterranie (c. 1400), from Late Latin Mediterraneum...mediterraneus "midland, surrounded by land, in the midst of an expanse of land" (but in reference to the body of water between Europe...

 May Day 

 "first of May," on which the opening of the season of flowers and fruit formerly was celebrated throughout Europe, mid-13c...By 1890 strikes, protests, and rallies were being held in Europe by socialist and labor organizations on May 1, at first...

 old-world 

 The Known World is usually divided into four Parts, Europe, Asia, Africk and America....Viz. the Known World, first into two Parts, the Old and the New World; then the Old World into three, Europe, Asia, and Africa...

 hussar 

 They were widely imitated elsewhere in Europe, hence the spread of the name....

 Hungary 

 c. 1300, from Medieval Latin Hungaria (also source of French Hongrie), probably literally meaning "land of the Huns," who ruled a vast territory from there under Attila in 5c. The people's name for themselves we transliterate as Magyar. Middle English uses the same words for both

 Scandinavia 

 1765, from Late Latin Scandinavia (Pliny), Skandinovia (Pomponius Mela), name of a large and fruitful island vaguely located in northern Europe, a mistake (with unetymological -n-) for Scadinavia, which is from a Germanic source (compare Old English Scedenig, Old Norse Skaney "so

 Netherlands 

 European nation along the North Sea west of Germany, from Dutch Nederland, literally "lower land" (see nether); said to have been used especially by the Austrians (who ruled much of the southern part of the Low Countries from 1713 to 1795), by way of contrast to the mountains the

 Share Europe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Europe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Europe">Etymology of Europe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Europe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Europe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Europe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Europe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Europe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Europe. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Europe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Europe (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Europe 
 eureka 
 Euripus 
 Euro- 
 Euro 
 Eurocentric 
 Europe 
 European 
 europium 
 eury- 
 Eurydice 
 eurypterid 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix