URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nice
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:30:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nice - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nice - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nice 

 nice (adj.) 

 late 13c., in reference to persons, "foolish, ignorant, frivolous, senseless," from Old French nice (12c.) "careless, clumsy; weak; poor, needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish," from Latin nescius "ignorant, unaware," literally "not-knowing," from ne- "not" (from PIE root *ne- "not") + stem of scire "to know" (see science ).

 "The sense development has been extraordinary, even for an adj." [Weekley] — from "foolish" to "timid, faint-hearted" (pre-1300), to "fussy, fastidious" (late 14c.), to "dainty, delicate" (c. 1400), to "precise, careful" (1500s, preserved in such terms as nice distinction and nice and early ); to "agreeable, delightful" (1769), to "kind, thoughtful" (1830).

 In many examples from the 16th and 17th centuries it is difficult to say in what particular sense the writer intended it to be taken. [OED, 1989]

 By 1926, nice was said to be "too great a favorite with the ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality and converted it into a mere diffuser of vague and mild agreeableness." [Fowler]

 "I am sure," cried Catherine, "I did not mean to say anything wrong; but it is a nice book, and why should I not call it so?" "Very true," said Henry, "and this is a very nice day, and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are two very nice young ladies. Oh! It is a very nice word indeed! It does for everything." [Jane Austen, "Northanger Abbey," 1803]

 For sense evolution, compare fond , innocent , lewd , also silly , simple (adj.).

 also from late 13c. 

 Nice 

 Mediterranean seaport of France, ceded to France in 1860 by Sardinia; ancient Nicaea , from Greek nikaios "victorious," from nikē "victory" (see Nike ). Nizzard "a resident of Nice" is from Nizza , the Italian form of the city name. 
 also from 1860 

 Entries linking to nice 

 fond (adj.) 

 late 14c., "deranged, insane;" also "foolish, silly, unwise," from fonned , past-participle adjective from obsolete verb fon , fonne (Middle English fonnen ) "be foolish, be simple," from Middle English fonne "a fool, stupid person" (early 14c.), which is of uncertain origin but perhaps from Scandinavian. Related: Fonder ; fondest .

 The meaning evolved via "foolishly tender" to "having strong affections for" (by 1570s; compare doting under dote ). Another sense of the verb fon was "to lose savor" (late 14c. in Middle English past participle fonnyd ), which may be the original meaning of the word:

 Gif þe salt be fonnyd it is not worþi [Wycliffe, Matthew v.13, c. 1380]

 innocent (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "doing no evil; free from sin, guilt, or moral wrong," from Old French inocent "harmless; not guilty; pure" (12c.), from Latin innocentem (nominative innocens ) "not guilty, blameless; harmless; disinterested," from in- "not" (see in- (1)) + nocentem (nominative nocens ), present participle of nocere "to harm," from *nok-s- , suffixed form of PIE root *nek- (1) "death."

 Meaning "free from guilt of a specific crime or charge" is from late 14c., as is the meaning "with childlike simplicity or artlessness." Humorous sense "free, devoid of" is from 1706. The noun meaning "person who is innocent of sin or evil, artless or simple person" is from c. 1200, especially a young child (who presumably has not yet sinned actively). The Holy Innocents (early 14c.) were the young children slain by Herod after the birth of Jesus (Matthew ii.16), hence Innocents day (Dec. 28).

 Indo-European words for "innocent" are generally negative compound of the word for "guilty." An exception is the Germanic group represented by Gothic swikns (also "pure, chaste"), Old Norse sykn "free from guilt, innocent" (especially as a law term), Old English swicn "clearance from a charge," also "cleansing," but these are of uncertain origin.

 lewd 
 Nike 
 science 
 silly 
 simple 
 comely 
 daft 
 nicely 
 niceness 
 nicety 
 overnice 
 pretty 
 *ne- 
 *skei- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lewd 

 Middle English leued, from Old English læwede "nonclerical, unlearned," of uncertain origin but according to OED probably ultimately from Vulgar Latin *laigo-, from Late Latin laicus "belonging to the people" (see lay (adj.)). Sense of "unlettered, uneducated" (early 13c.) descen

 science 

 mid-14c., "state or fact of knowing; what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information;" also "assurance of knowledge, certitude, certainty," from Old French science "knowledge, learning, application; corpus of human knowledge" (12c.), from Latin scientia "kn

 simple 

 c. 1200, "free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless," also "ignorant, uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish," also as a surname, from Old French simple (12c.) "plain, decent; friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid," hence also "wretche

 fop 

 Sense of "dandy, coxcomb, man ostentatiously nice in manner and appearance" is from 1670s, perhaps given in derision by those...He was ablaze with jewelry, took snuff with an incomparable air out of a box studded with diamonds, and excelled in the "nice...

 Irredentist 

 demanded the annexation of neighboring regions where a part of the population was Italian-speaking (Trieste, South Tyrol, Nice...

 nance 

   Nancy, Miss, an opprobrious epithet for an exceedingly effeminate, over-nice young man....She was extremely vain and nice about her dress, and as she lay in state, attended by two noblemen, she was attired, as she...

 spicy 

 The earlier adjective was spiced "flavored with spice" (early 14c.), which had a figurative sense of "over-nice, fastidious...

 decent 

 1530s, "proper to one's station or rank," also "tasteful, proper with regard to modesty or social standards," from French décent, or directly from Latin decentem (nominative decens) "becoming, seemly, fitting, proper," present participle of decere "to be fitting or suitable" (fro

 tansy 

 perennial herb native to northern Eurasia, used medicinally or in cooking, mid-13c., tansei, from Old French tanesie (13c., Modern French tanaisie), from Vulgar Latin *tanaceta (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Late Latin tanacetum "wormwood," from shortened form o

 dainty 

 c. 1300, deinte, "delightful, pleasing" (late 12c. as a surname), from dainty (n.); see below. Meaning evolved in Middle English to "choice, excellent" (late 14c.) to "delicately pretty, exhibiting exquisite taste or skill" (c. 1400). Sense of "fastidious, affectedly fine, weak, 

 Share nice 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nice Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nice">Etymology of nice by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nice. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nice Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nice," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nice. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nice." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nice. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nice." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nice (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nice 
 nibble 
 Nibelungenlied 
 niblick 
 nibs 
 Nicaragua 
 nice 
 nicely 
 Nicene 
 niceness 
 nicety 
 niche 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close