URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Roger
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:05:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Roger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Roger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Roger 

 Roger 

 masc. proper name, from Old French Rogier , from Old High German Hrotger , literally "famous with the spear," from hruod- "fame, glory" + ger "spear" (see gar (n.)). "The name was introduced from Norman where OG Rodger was reinforced by the cognate ON Hroðgeirr " [Dictionary of English Surnames]. Pet forms include Hodge and Dodge . As a generic name for "a person," attested from 1630s. In 16c.-17c. cant, "a goose." Slang meaning "penis" was popular c. 1650-c. 1870; hence the slang verb sense of "to copulate with (a woman)," which is attested from 1711.

 The use of the word in radio communication to mean "yes, I understand" is attested from 1941, from the U.S. military phonetic alphabet word for the letter -R- , in this case an abbreviation for "received." It is said to have been used likewise by the R.A.F. since 1938. " Roger de Coverley ," once a favorite English country dance, is said to have been so called from 1685. Addison took him early 18c. as the name of a recurring character in the "Spectator."

 THE first of our society is a gentleman of Worcestershire, of ancient descent, a baronet, his name Sir Roger de Coverley. His great-grandfather was inventor of that famous country-dance which is called after him. All who know that shire are very well acquainted with the parts and merits of Sir Roger. [Addison]

 Entries linking to Roger 

 gar (n.) 

 pike-like fish, 1765, American English, shortening of garfish (mid-15c.), from fish (n.) + Middle English gare , gore "a spear," from Old English gar "spear," from Proto-Germanic *gaisa- "spear" (source also of Old Norse geirr "spear; point of an anvil," Old Saxon, Old High German ger , German Ger "spear"), from PIE *ghaiso- "a stick, spear" (see goad (n.)). The fish so called for its long sharp snout. Compare Edgar , garlic .

 fanny (n.) 

 "buttocks," 1919, American English, from earlier British meaning "vulva" (1741, perhaps 1725 where "Fanny Fire" is given as a humorous name for a prostitute). A popular theory that it stems from the name of John Cleland's erotic novel "Fanny Hill or Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure" (1748) is improbable as the term was already in use before the novel. The fem. proper name is a diminutive of Frances ; compare dick , roger as terms for a penis. The genital sense is still the primary one outside U.S., but is not current in American English, a difference which can have consequences when U.S. TV programs and movies air in Britain.

 Jolly Roger 
 Rogers 
 Roget 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hick 

 late 14c., Hikke, a popular pet form of the masc. proper name Richard (compare Hod from Robert, Hodge from Roger)....

 redbone 

 Roger D. Williams, "The American Foxhound," in "Dogs," New York: 1907]...

 Southron 

 country, and of trampling on the proud heart of the Southron villain who had dared to inflict disgrace upon the cheek of Roger...

 ducat 

 Apparently so called for the name or effigy of Roger II of Sicily, Duke of Apulia, which first issued the coins (c. 1140)...

 rogue 

 1560s, "idle vagrant, sturdy beggar, one of the vagabond class," a word of shadowy origin, perhaps a shortened form of roger...

 treason 

 [Roger Kimball, introduction to 2007 English edition] ...

 be 

 Roger Lass ("Old English") describes the verb as "a collection of semantically related paradigm fragments," while Weekley...

 feature 

 early 14c., "make, form, fashion" (obsolete), from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture "deed, action; fashion, shape, form; countenance," from Latin factura "a formation, a working," from past participle stem of facere "make, do, perform" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, pu

 constitution 

 mid-14c., constitucioun, "law, regulation, edict; body of rules, customs, or laws," from Old French constitucion (12c.) "constitution, establishment," and directly from Latin constitutionem (nominative constitutio) "act of settling, settled condition, anything arranged or settled

 ballpark 

 also ball-park, "baseball stadium," 1893, short for baseball (or football) park; see ball (n.1) + park (n.). To be in the ballpark in the figurative sense of "within an acceptable range of approximation" is first recorded 1954, originally in the jargon of atomic weapons scientist

 Share Roger 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Roger Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Roger">Etymology of Roger by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Roger. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Roger Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Roger," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Roger. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Roger." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Roger. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Roger." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Roger (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Roger 
 roe 
 roebuck 
 roentgen 
 rofl 
 rogation 
 Roger 
 Rogers 
 Roget 
 rogue 
 roguery 
 roguish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix