URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/average
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:48:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Average - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Average - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of average 

 average (n.) 

 late 15c., "any small charge over freight cost, payable by owners of goods to the master of a ship for his care of the goods," also "financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit," from French avarie "damage to ship," and Italian avaria . A word from 12c. Mediterranean maritime trade (compare Spanish averia ), of uncertain origin; sometimes traced to Arabic 'awariya "damaged merchandise" but OED asserts this is a modern word derived from the western use. Dutch avarij , German haferei , etc., also are from Romanic languages. "Few words have received more etymological investigation" [OED].

 Thus, when for the safety of a ship in distress any destruction of property is incurred, either by cutting away the masts, throwing goods overboard, or in other ways, all persons who have goods on board or property in the ship (or the insurers) contribute to the loss according to their average, that is, according to the proportionate value of the goods of each on board. [Century Dictionary]

 The meaning developed to "equal sharing of loss by the interested parties." The transferred sense of "statement of a medial estimate, proportionate distribution of inequality among all," is attested by 1735. The mathematical sense of "a mean proportion arrived at by arithmetical calculation" is from 1755. The sports sense, in reference to batting, is attested by 1845 in cricket.
 also from late 15c. 

 average (adj.) 

 1770, "estimated by averaging," from average (n.). By 1803 as "equal in amount to the sum of all particular quantities divided by the number of them," hence "of medium character."
 also from 1770 

 average (v.) 

 1769, "to amount to," from average (n.). By 1831 as "find the arithmetical mean of unequal quantities;" 1914 as "divide among a number proportionately" (usually with out ). Related: Averaged ; averaging .
 also from 1769 

 Entries linking to average 

 tariff (n.) 

 1590s, "arithmetical table," also "official list or table of customs duties on goods for import or export;" also "a law regulating import duties," from Italian tariffa "tariff, price, assessment," Medieval Latin tarifa "list of prices, book of rates," ultimately from Arabic ta'rif "information, notification, a making known; inventory of fees to be paid," verbal noun from arafa "he made known, he taught." A word passed to English from the commercial jargon of the medieval Mediterranean (compare garble , jar (n.), average (perhaps), orange , tabby , etc.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 norm 

 "a standard, pattern, or model," 1821 (Coleridge), from French norme, from Latin norma "carpenter's square, rule, pattern," a word of unknown origin. Klein suggests a borrowing (via Etruscan) of Greek gnōmōn "carpenter's square." The Latin form of the word, norma, was used in Eng

 ordinary 

 c. 1400, ordinarie, "regular, customary, belonging to the usual order or course, conformed to a regulated sequence or arrangement," from Old French ordinarie "ordinary, usual" and directly from Latin ordinarius "customary, regular, usual, orderly," from ordo (genitive ordinis) "r

 medium 

 1580s, "a middle ground, quality, or degree; that which holds a middle place or position," from Latin medium "the middle, midst, center; interval," noun use of neuter of adjective medius "in the middle, between; from the middle" (from PIE root *medhyo- "middle"). Many of the seco

 Joe 

 range of invented names meaning "typical male example of," for example Joe college "typical college man" (1932); Joe Blow "average..."Dictionary of American Slang" lists, among other examples, Joe Average, Beige, Lunch Bucket, Public, Sad, Schmoe, Six-pack...

 sustainability 

 Sustainability is defined as a requirement of our generation to manage the resource base such that the average quality of...Development is sustainable if it involves a non-decreasing average quality of life. [Geir B....

 Mendoza line 

 in baseball, "a low batting average," (somewhere around .200) with the suggestion that any player hitting below it ought...former Pirate, Mariner, and Ranger shortstop Mario Mendoza, who was noted for his defense but whose .215 lifetime batting average...

 middlebrow 

 "having average or moderate cultural interest;" 1912 (n.)..."person of average or moderate cultural interests," from middle (adj.) + brow (compare highbrow, lowbrow)....

 attain 

 c. 1300, "succeed in reaching, come so near as to touch," from ataign-, stem of Old French ataindre "to come up to, reach, attain, endeavor, strive" (11c., Modern French atteindre), from Vulgar Latin *attangere, corresponding to Latin attingere "to touch; arrive at," from ad "to"

 fair 

 Old English fæger "pleasing to the sight (of persons and body features, also of objects, places, etc.); beautiful, handsome, attractive," of weather, "bright, clear, pleasant; not rainy," also in late Old English "morally good," from Proto-Germanic *fagraz (source also of Old Sax

 name 

 "word by which a person or thing is denoted," Old English nama, noma "name, reputation," from Proto-Germanic *naman- (source also of Old Saxon namo, Old Frisian nama, Old High German namo, German Name, Middle Dutch name, Dutch naam, Old Norse nafn, Gothic namo "name"), from PIE r

 Share average 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/average Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/average">Etymology of average by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of average. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/average Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of average," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/average. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of average." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/average. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of average." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/average (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near average 
 Ave Maria 
 avenge 
 avenger 
 avenue 
 aver 
 average 
 Avernus 
 Averroes 
 averse 
 aversion 
 avert 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix