URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/life
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:14:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Life - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Life - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of life 

 life (n.) 

 Old English life (dative lif ) "animated corporeal existence; lifetime, period between birth and death; the history of an individual from birth to death, written account of a person's life; way of life (good or bad); condition of being a living thing, opposite of death; spiritual existence imparted by God, through Christ, to the believer," from Proto-Germanic *leiban (source also of Old Norse lif "life, body," Old Frisian, Old Saxon lif "life, person, body," Dutch lijf "body," Old High German lib "life," German Leib "body"), properly "continuance, perseverance," reconstructed in Watkins to be from PIE root *leip- "to stick, adhere."

 The transition toward 'live', etc. is only Gmc. and disputed, but semantically comprehensible: stick → remain (also Tocharian) → live (Gmc.). [Boutkan]

 The noun associated with live (v.) "to live," which is literally "to continue, remain."

 The sense was extended by 1703 to inanimate objects, "term of duration or existence." The sense of "vitality, energy in action, expression, etc." is from 1580s. The meaning "conspicuously active part of human existence, pleasures or pursuits of the world or society" is attested by 1770s.

 The meaning "cause or source of living" led to the sense of "vivifying or animating principle," and thus "one who keeps things lively" in life of the party (1787). The meaning "imprisonment for life, a life sentence" is by 1903. Paired alliteratively with limb from 1640s. Not on your life "by no means" is attested from 1896.

 In gaming, "an additional turn at play for a character," it is a transferred use prefigured by similar uses in card-playing (1806), billiards (1856), etc., in reference to a certain number of chances or required objects without which one's turn at the game fails. The life "the living form or model, semblance" is from 1590s.

 THE Latin language and the English are alike poorer than the Greek, in having but one word, the Latin 'vita,' the English 'life,' to express these two Greek. There would, indeed, be no comparative poverty here, if [ zōē ] and [ bios ] were merely duplicates; but, covering as they do very different spaces of meaning, it is certain that we, having but one word for them both, must use this one in very diverse senses; it is possible that by this equivocation we may, without being aware of it, conceal very real and important differences from ourselves; for, indeed, there is nothing so potent to do this as the equivocal use of a word. [Archbishop Trench, "Synonyms of the New Testament," 1854]

 Life-and-death "of dire importance" is from 1822; life-or-death (adj.) "critical, desperate" is attested from 1856.

 Life-jacket is from 1840; life-preserver from 1630s of anything that is meant to save a life, 1803 of devices worn to prevent drowning. Life-saver is from 1883, figurative use from 1909, as a brand of hard sugar candy from 1912, so called for shape.

 Life-form is attested by 1861. Life-work "the labor to which one's life has been devoted" is from 1848.

 The expression this is the life is from 1919; the verbal shrug that's life is attested by 1884 (sometimes that's life in a nutshell ; earlier such is life , 1778); earlier that's life! was an affirmation of vivid experience, "that's living! that's being alive!"

 And when, at the last, he wuz lyin'

   At the end o' the toil an' the strife,

 An' the preacher says: "Ol' man, you're dyin'."

   He whistled and said, "Well, that's life!"

 [Frank L. Stanton, "A True Philosopher," 1898]

 Entries linking to life 

 live (v.) 

 Middle English liven , from Old English lifian (Anglian), libban (West Saxon) "to be, be alive, have life; continue in life; to experience," also "to supply oneself with food, procure a means of subsistence; pass life in a specified fashion," from Proto-Germanic *libejanan (source also of Old Norse lifa "to be left; to live; to live on," of fire, "to burn;" Old Frisian libba , German leben , Gothic liban "to live"), from PIE root *leip- "to stick, adhere," forming words meaning "to remain, continue."

 Meaning "to make a residence, dwell" is from c. 1200. Meaning "express in one's life" ( live a lie ) is from 1540s. Intensified sense "have life abundantly, make full use of life's opportunities" is from c. 1600. Related: Lived ; living .

 To live it up "live gaily and extravagantly" is from 1903. To live up to "act in accordance with, not live below the standard of" is 1690s, from earlier live up "live on a high (moral or mental) level" (1680s). To live (something) down "cause (something disreputable) to be forgotten by subsequent blameless course, live so as to disprove" is from 1842. To live with "cohabit as husband and wife" is attested from 1749; sense of "to put up with" is attested from 1937. Expression live and learn is attested from c. 1620.

 According to the Dutch Prouerbe ... 
 Leuen ende laetan leuen , To liue and to let others liue. [Gerard de Malynes, 1622]

 afterlife (n.) 

 also after-life , 1590s, "a future life" (especially after resurrection), from after + life .

 A Dialogue between two Infants in the womb concerning the state of this world, might handsomly illustrate our ignorance of the next, whereof methinks we yet discourse in Platoes denne, and are but Embryon Philosophers. [Browne, "Urn-Burial," 1658]

 alive 
 enliven 
 half-life 
 lebensform 
 lebensraum 
 lifeblood 
 life-boat 
 life-cycle 
 life-expectancy 
 lifeguard 
 life-history 
 lifeless 
 lifelike 
 life-line 
 lifelong 
 lifer 
 life-raft 
 life-saving 
 See All Related Words (34) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 alive 

 c. 1200, "in life, living," contraction of Old English on life "in living, not dead," from a- (1) + dative of lif "life" (see life). The full form on live was still current 17c. Of abstract things (love, lawsuits, etc.) "in a state of operation, unextinguished," c. 1600. From 170

 lifeless 

 Old English lifleas "inanimate; dead;" see life + -less. Figurative sense from early 13c. Meaning "with no living things" is from 1728. Related: Lifelessly; lifelessness. A common Germanic compound (compare Old Frisian liflas, Middle Low German liflos, Swedish liflös, Danish livl

 animation 

 1590s, "action of imparting life" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin animationem (nominative animatio) "an animating," noun of action from past-participle stem of animare "give breath to," also "to endow with a particular spirit, to give courage to, enliven," from anima "life, br

 quicken 

 c. 1300, quikenen, "come to life, receive life," also transitive, "give life to," also "return to life from the dead;" see...Also, of a woman, "enter that state of pregnancy in which the child gives indications of life;" of a child, "begin to manifest...signs of life in the womb" (usually about the 18th week of pregnancy); probably originally in reference to the child but...

 hygiene 

 sound, hearty," literally "living well" (personified as the goddess Hygieia), from PIE *eyu-gwie-es- "having a vigorous life...," from root *aiw-, *ayu- "vital force, life, long life, eternity; in the prime of life, young" (source of Latin aevus, English...

 biography 

 lives, as a branch of literature," probably from Medieval Latin biographia, from later Greek biographia "description of life..." (which was not in classical Greek, bios alone being the word there for it), from Greek bios "life" (from PIE root *gwei...The meaning "a history of some one person's life" is from 1791....The meaning "life course of any living being" is by 1854....

 secularism 

 "exclusive attention to the present life and its duties; doctrine that morality should be based on the well-being of man...in the present life, without regard to religious belief or a hereafter," 1843, from secular + -ism....Secularity (late 14c., seculerte ) was used for "civil or temporal power, the business of layman life; quality or condition...

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 Share life 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/life Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/life">Etymology of life by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of life. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/life Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of life," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/life. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of life." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/life. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of life." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/life (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near life 
 lieno- 
 lier 
 lieu 
 lieutenancy 
 lieutenant 
 life 
 life of Riley 
 lifeblood 
 life-boat 
 life-cycle 
 life-expectancy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close