URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fungus
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fungus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fungus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fungus 

 fungus (n.) 

 1520s, "a mushroom," from Latin fungus "a mushroom, fungus;" used in English at first as a learned alternative to mushroom ( funge was used in this sense late 14c.). The Latin word is believed to be cognate with (or derived from) Greek sphongos , the Attic form of spongos "sponge" (see sponge (n.)). "Probably a loanword from a non-IE language, borrowed independently into Greek, Latin and Armenian in a form *sphong- ...." [de Vaan]
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to fungus 

 sponge (n.) 

 Old English sponge , spunge , "absorbent and porous part of certain aquatic organisms," from Latin spongia "a sponge," also "sea animal from which a sponge comes," from Greek spongia , which is related to spongos "sponge," which is of unknown origin; Beekes calls it "an old Wanderwort." "Probably a loanword from a non-IE language, borrowed independently into Greek, Latin and Armenian in a form *sphong- " [de Vaan]. The Latin word is the source of Old Saxon spunsia , Middle Dutch spongie , Old French esponge , Spanish esponja , Italian spugna .

 In English the word is used in reference to the marine animal from 1530s; of any sponge-like substance from c. 1600. Figurative use in reference to one who absorbs without discrimination is by c. 1600. The meaning "one who persistently and parasitically lives on others" is by 1838 (compare the verb, and see sponger ).

 To throw in the sponge "quit, submit" (1860) is from prizefighting, in reference to the sponges used to cleanse the faces of combatants between rounds (compare later throw in the towel ). Sponge-cake , light and sweet, is attested by 1801, so called for its substance.

 fungal (adj.) 

 1835, from Modern Latin fungalis , from fungus (see fungus ). As a noun, "a fungus" (1845). Earlier adjective was fungic 1804.

 fungi 
 fungicide 
 fungiform 
 fungivorous 
 fungous 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mildew 

 "minute parasitic fungus that appears on plants or decaying organic matter," mid-14c., a transferred sense of a word that...As a kind of morbid fungus or blight, it presumably is so called from its being sticky and growing on plants....

 mold 

 also mould, "minute, furry fungus," especially the types growing on neglected food and decaying organic matter, c. 1400,...

 pixie 

 Pixie-puff (1847) was a species of fungus; pixie-purse is an ovicapsule of a shark, skate, or ray found washed up on the...

 fungo 

 It formally resembles the Spanish and Italian words for "fungus."...

 swamp 

 , of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] a dialectal survival from an Old English cognate of Old Norse svöppr "sponge, fungus...

 darnel 

 , derne "stunned, dazed, drunk," the weed being so called from its well-known inebriating quality (actually caused by a fungus...

 Dutch 

 Dutch elm disease (1927) so called because it was first discovered in Holland (caused by fungus Ceratocystis ulmi)....

 cap 

 late Old English cæppe "hood, head-covering, cape," a general Germanic borrowing (compare Old Frisian and Middle Dutch kappe, Old High German chappa) from Late Latin cappa "a cape, hooded cloak" (source of Spanish capa, Old North French cape, French chape), a word of uncertain or

 must 

 auxiliary of prediction, "be obliged, be necessarily impelled," from Old English moste, past tense of motan "have to, be able to," from Proto-Germanic *motanan (source also of Old Saxon motan "to be obliged to, have to," Old Frisian mota, Middle Low German moten, Dutch moeten, Ge

 smut 

 1660s, "black mark, stain," from verb smutten "debase, defile" (late 14c.), later specifically "stain or mark made with soot, etc." (1580s), cognate with Middle High German smotzen "make dirty," from West Germanic *smutt- (source also of Middle High German smuz "grease, dirt;" Ge

 Share fungus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fungus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fungus">Etymology of fungus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fungus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fungus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fungus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fungus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fungus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fungus. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fungus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fungus (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fungus 
 fungicide 
 fungiform 
 fungivorous 
 fungo 
 fungous 
 fungus 
 funicular 
 funipendulous 
 funk 
 funky 
 fun-loving 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix