URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pagoda
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:15:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pagoda - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pagoda - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pagoda 

 pagoda (n.) 

 1580s, in Burma, India, Siam, China, etc., "a sacred tower, richly adorned," pagode, pagody (modern form from 1630s), from Portuguese pagode (early 16c.), perhaps from a corruption of Persian butkada , from but "idol" + kada "dwelling." Or perhaps from or influenced by Tamil pagavadi "house belonging to a deity," from Sanskrit bhagavati "goddess," fem. of bhagavat "blessed, adorable," from *bhagah "good fortune," from PIE root *bhag- "to share out, apportion; to get a share."
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to pagoda 

 *bhag- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to share out, apportion; to get a share."

 It might form all or part of: aphagia ; Bhagavad-Gita ; baksheesh ; esophagus ; nebbish ; pagoda ; -phage ; phago- ; -phagous ; porgy ; sarcophagus .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit bhajati "assigns, allots, apportions, enjoys, loves," bhagah "allotter, distributor, master, lord," bhaksati "eats, drinks, enjoys;" Persian bakhshidan "to give;" Greek phagein "to eat," literally "to have a share of food;" Old Church Slavonic bogatu "rich."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 banyan 

 modern Bandar Abbas) on the Iranian coast of the Persian Gulf, near which the Hindu merchants known as banians had built a pagoda...

 temple 

 "building for worship, edifice dedicated to the service of a deity or deities," Old English tempel, from Latin templum "piece of ground consecrated for the taking of auspices, building for worship of a god," of uncertain signification. Commonly referred to PIE root *tem- "to cut,

 but 

 Old English butan, buton "unless; with the exception of; without, outside," from West Germanic *be-utan, a compound of *be- "by" (see by) + *utana "out, outside; from without," from ut "out" (see out (adv.)). Not used as a conjunction until late Old English, "on the contrary." Se

 comedy 

 late 14c., "narrative with a happy ending; any composition intended for amusement," from Old French comedie (14c.), "a poem" (not in the theatrical sense) and directly from Latin comoedia, from Greek kōmōidia "a comedy, amusing spectacle," probably [Beekes] from kōmōidos "actor o

 silhouette 

 "portrait in black showing the profile," 1798, from French silhouette, in reference to Étienne de Silhouette (1709-1767), French minister of finance in 1759. The usual reason given is that it was an inexpensive way to make a likeness of someone, and thus the name was a derisive r

 deception 

 early 15c., decepcioun, "act of misleading, a lie, a falsehood," from Old French déception (13c., decepcion) or directly from Late Latin deceptionem (nominative deceptio) "a deceiving," noun of state or action from past-participle stem of Latin decipere "to ensnare, take in, begu

 image 

 c. 1200, "piece of statuary; artificial representation that looks like a person or thing," from Old French image "image, likeness; figure, drawing, portrait; reflection; statue," earlier imagene (11c.), from Latin imaginem (nominative imago) "copy, imitation, likeness; statue, pi

 energy 

 1590s, "force of expression," from French énergie (16c.), from Late Latin energia, from Greek energeia "activity, action, operation," from energos "active, working," from en "at" (see en- (2)) + -ergos "that works," from ergon "work, that which is wrought; business; action" (from

 empathy 

 1908, modeled on German Einfühlung (from ein "in" + Fühlung "feeling"), which was coined 1858 by German philosopher Rudolf Lotze (1817-1881) as a translation of Greek empatheia "passion, state of emotion," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + pathos "feeling" (from PI

 ragamuffin 

 mid-14c., "demon;" late 14c., "a ragged lout," also in surnames (Isabella Ragamuffyn, 1344), from Middle English raggi "ragged" ("rag-y"?) + "fanciful ending" [OED], or else perhaps second the element is Middle Dutch muffe "mitten." Or, as Johnson has it, "From rag and I know not

 Share pagoda 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pagoda Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pagoda">Etymology of pagoda by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pagoda. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pagoda Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pagoda," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pagoda. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pagoda." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pagoda. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pagoda." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pagoda (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pagoda 
 pageant 
 pageantry 
 pager 
 paginate 
 pagination 
 pagoda 
 Pahlavi 
 pahoehoe 
 Paige 
 pail 
 paillard 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix