URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/he
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:59:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: He - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

He - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of he 

 he (pron.) 

 Old English he , pronoun of the third person (see paradigm of Old English third person pronoun below), from Proto-Germanic *hi- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch he , hi , Dutch hy , Old High German he ), from PIE *ki- , variant of root *ko- , the "this, here" (as opposed to "that, there") root, and thus the source of the third person pronouns in Old English. The feminine, hio , was replaced in early Middle English by forms from other stems (see she ), while the h- wore off Old English neuter hit to make modern it . The Proto-Germanic root also is the source of the first element in German heute "today," literally "the day" (compare Old English heodæg ).

 The paradigm in Old English was: MASCULINE SINGULAR : he (nominative), hine (accusative), his (genitive), him (dative); FEMININE SINGULAR : heo, hio (nom.), hie, hi (acc.), hire (gen. and dat.); NEUTER SINGULAR : hit (nom. and acc.), his (gen.), him (dat.); PLURAL : (all genders) hie, hi (nom. and acc.), hira, heora (gen.), him, heom (dat.).

 Pleonastic use with the noun ( "Mistah Kurtz, he dead" ) is attested from late Old English. With animal words, meaning "male" ( he-goat , etc.) from c. 1300.

 Entries linking to he 

 it (pron.) 

 Old English hit , neuter nominative and accusative of third person singular pronoun, from Proto-Germanic demonstrative base *khi- (source also of Old Frisian hit , Dutch het , Gothic hita "it"), from PIE *ko- "this" (see he ). Used in place of any neuter noun, hence, as gender faded in Middle English, it took on the meaning "thing or animal spoken about before."

 The h- was lost due to being in an unemphasized position, as in modern speech the h- in "give it to him ," "ask her ," is heard only "in the careful speech of the partially educated" [Weekley].

 It "the sex act" is from 1610s; meaning "sex appeal (especially in a woman)" attested by 1904 in works of Rudyard Kipling, popularized 1927 as title of a book by Elinor Glyn, and by application of It Girl to silent-film star Clara Bow (1905-1965). In children's games, the meaning "the one who must tag or catch the others" is attested from 1842.

 From Old English as nominative of an impersonal verb or statement when the thing for which it stands is implied ( it rains , it pleases me ). After an intransitive verb, used transitively for the action denoted, from 1540s (originally in fight it out ). A common Elizabethan idiom (as in Rowley "Trip it, gipsies, trip it fine") and Fuller's 1650 natural and geographical account of Palestine notes that "Authors have affirmed that hyssope doth tree it in Judea."

 That's it "there is no more" is from 1966; this is it "the anticipated or dreaded moment has arrived" is from 1942. All there is to it "the whole of the matter" is by 1883.

 she (pron.) 

 "the female person referred to," third person nominative fem. pronoun, used as a substitute for the name of a female or anything regarded as female, mid-12c., probably evolving from Old English seo , sio (accusative sie ), fem. of the demonstrative pronoun (masc. se ) "the," from PIE root *so- "this, that" (see the ).

 The Old English word for "she" was heo , hio , however by 13c. the pronunciation of this had converged by phonetic evolution with he "he," which apparently led to the fem. demonstrative pronoun being used in place of the pronoun (compare similar development in Dutch zij , German sie , Greek he , etc.).

 The original h- survives in her . A relic of the Old English pronoun is in Manchester-area dialectal oo "she." As a noun meaning "a female human being, a woman," she is attested from early 14c. Also used to signify "female" with the names of other creatures (late 14c.; she-wolf , etc.). The attempted gender-neutral pronoun form s/he is attested by 1977.

 he-man 
 her 
 here 
 him 
 hin 
 his 
 s/he 
 they 
 *ko- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 here 

 Old English her "in this place, where one puts himself; at this time, toward this place," from Proto-Germanic pronominal stem *hi- (from PIE *ki- "this;" see he) + adverbial suffix -r. Cognate with Old Saxon her, Old Norse, Gothic her, Swedish här, Middle Dutch, Dutch hier, Old H

 his 

 Old English his (genitive of he), from Proto-Germanic *hisa (source also of Gothic is, Old Saxon is, German es). Originally also the neuter possessive pronoun, but in English it was replaced in that sense c. 1600 by its. In Middle English, hisis was tried for the absolute pronoun

 they 

 c. 1200, from a Scandinavian source (Old Norse þeir, Old Danish, Old Swedish þer, þair), originally masculine plural demonstrative pronoun, from Proto-Germanic *thai, nominative plural pronoun, from PIE *to-, demonstrative pronoun (see that). Gradually replaced Old English hi, hi

 Catch-22 

 thus he is eligible to be relieved from duty....All he had to do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would have to fly more missions....Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn't, but if he was sane he had to fly them....If he flew them he was crazy and didn't have to; but if he didn't want to he was sane and had to....

 solitude 

 [OED] A man can be himself only so long as he is alone; ... if he does not love solitude, he will not love freedom; for...it is only when he is alone that he is really free....

 Peter Pan 

 Standing on the ledge he could see trees far away, which were doubtless the Kensington Gardens, and the moment he saw them...he entirely forgot that he was now a little boy in a nightgown, and away he flew, right over the houses to the Gardens....It is wonderful that he could fly without wings, but the place itched tremendously, and, perhaps we could all fly if we were...

 naturalist 

 Suddenly he experienced a new shudder of terror, as he remembered an article which he had inserted in the Belfast Review,...and in which he had himself declared that crocodiles climb trees like cats....He would gladly have thrown this article into the fire, but it was too late, all Belfast had read it, it had been translated...

 helium 

 1868, coined from Greek hēlios "sun" (from PIE root *sawel- "the sun"), because the element was detected in the solar spectrum during the eclipse of Aug. 18, 1868, by English astronomer Sir Joseph N. Lockyer (1836-1920) and English chemist Sir Edward Frankland (1825-1899). It was

 letter 

 c. 1200, "graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character conveying information about sound in speech," from Old French letre "character, letter; missive, note," in plural, "literature, writing, learning" (10c., Modern French lettre), from Latin littera (also litera) "letter o

 element 

 c. 1300, "earth, air, fire, or water; one of the four things regarded by the ancients as the constituents of all things," from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementum "rudiment, first principle, matter in its most basic form" (translating Greek stoikheion), origin and ori

 Share he 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/he Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/he">Etymology of he by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of he. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/he Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of he," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/he. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of he." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/he. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of he." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/he (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near he 
 hazel 
 hazelnut 
 hazing 
 hazmat 
 hazy 
 he 
 head 
 -head 
 head over heels 
 head shop 
 headache 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix