URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/barometer
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T14:59:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Barometer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Barometer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of barometer 

 barometer (n.) 

 "instrument for measuring the weight or pressure of the atmosphere," 1660s, from Greek baros "weight" (from suffixed form of PIE root *gwere- (1) "heavy") + -meter . The name probably was coined (and certainly popularized) by English scientist Robert Boyle (1627-1691). The instrument was invented 1643 by Italian physicist Evangelista Torricelli and was at first known as the Torricelli tube .
 also from 1660s 

 Entries linking to barometer 

 barometric (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or indicated by a barometer," 1780, from barometer + -ic . The older word is barometrical (1660s).

 *gwere- (1) 

 gwerə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "heavy."

 It might form all or part of: aggravate ; aggravation ; aggrieve ; bar (n.4) "unit of pressure;" bariatric ; baritone ; barium ; barometer ; blitzkrieg ; brig ; brigade ; brigand ; brigantine ; brio ; brut ; brute ; charivari ; gravamen ; grave (adj.); gravid ; gravimeter ; gravitate ; gravity ; grief ; grieve ; kriegspiel ; guru ; hyperbaric ; isobar ; quern ; sitzkrieg .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit guruh "heavy, weighty, venerable;" Greek baros "weight," barys "heavy in weight," often with the notion of "strength, force;" Latin gravis , "heavy, ponderous, burdensome, loaded; pregnant;" Old English cweorn "quern;" Gothic kaurus "heavy;" Lettish gruts "heavy."

 -meter 

 word-forming element meaning "device or instrument for measuring;" commonly -ometer , occasionally -imeter ; from French -mètre , from Greek metron "a measure," from PIE root *me- (2) "to measure."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 weatherman 

 Weather-prophet is from 1784 as "barometer;" 1827 as "person who predicts the weather."...

 rise 

 English; that sense may have developed from the use of the verb in reference to the behavior of fluid in a thermometer or barometer...

 tube 

 1610s, from French tube (15c.), from Latin tubus "tube, pipe," a word of unknown origin. The London subway was christened the Twopenny Tube by 1900 (H.D. Browne, in the "Londoner" of June 30); tube for "cylindrical railway tunnel" is attested from 1847. The meaning "TV as a mediu

 chicken 

 Middle English chiken, from Old English cicen (plural cicenu) "young of the domestic hen, the young of any bird;" by early Middle English, "any chicken," regardless of age, from Proto-Germanic *kiukinam (source also of Middle Dutch kiekijen, Dutch kieken, Old Norse kjuklingr, Swe

 buck 

 "male deer," c. 1300, earlier "male goat;" from Old English bucca "male goat," from Proto-Germanic *bukkon (source also of Old Saxon buck, Middle Dutch boc, Dutch bok, Old High German boc, German Bock, Old Norse bokkr), perhaps from a PIE root *bhugo (source also of Avestan buza 

 diligent 

 "constant in effort to accomplish what is undertaken," mid-14c., from Old French diligent (14c.) and directly from Latin diligentem (nominative diligens) "attentive, assiduous, careful," present-participle adjective from diligere "single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; as

 sheepish 

 c. 1200, shepishe, "of, pertaining to, or resembling a sheep" in some perceived characteristic, from sheep + -ish. Originally "meek, modest, docile, simple," often as qualities of good Christians. With suggestions of "easy to deceive" by c. 1400. The sense of "bashful, over-modes

 prophet 

 late 12c., "person who speaks for God; one who foretells, inspired preacher," from Old French prophete, profete "prophet, soothsayer" (11c., Modern French prophète) and directly from Latin propheta, from Greek prophētēs (Doric prophatēs) "an interpreter, spokesman, proclaimer; a 

 follow 

 Middle English folwen, from Old English folgian, fylgian, fylgan "to accompany (especially as a disciple), move in the same direction as; follow after, pursue, move behind in the same direction," also "obey (a rule or law), conform to, act in accordance with; apply oneself to (a 

 censor 

 1530s, "Roman magistrate of 5c. B.C.E. who took censuses and oversaw public manners and morals," from French censor and directly from Latin censor, from censere "to appraise, value, judge," from PIE root *kens- "speak solemnly, proclaim" (source also of Sanskrit amsati "recites, 

 Share barometer 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/barometer Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/barometer">Etymology of barometer by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of barometer. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/barometer Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of barometer," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/barometer. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of barometer." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/barometer. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of barometer." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/barometer (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near barometer 
 Barn-burner 
 barney 
 barnstorm 
 Barnum 
 barnyard 
 barometer 
 barometric 
 baron 
 baroness 
 baronet 
 baronial 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix