URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hone
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:21:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hone - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hone - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hone 

 hone (n.) 

 Old English han "a stone, rock, (boundary) stone," from Proto-Germanic *haino (source also of Old Norse hein "hone"), from PIE *ko- "to sharpen, whet." The specific sense "whetstone, stone used for sharpening tools that require a delicate edge" emerged in Middle English (early 14c.). "A hone differs from a whetstone in being of finer grit and more compact texture" [Century Dictionary].

 hone (v.) 

 "rub or sharpen on or as on a hone," 1788, from hone (n.). Related: Honed ; honing . The verb form in Middle English ( hene ) and Old English ( hænan ) meant "cast stones at."
 also from 1788 

 Entries linking to hone 

 honer (n.) 

 1826, agent noun from hone (v.); early 13c. as a surname.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 perfect 

 early 15c. classical correction of Middle English parfit "flawless, ideal" (c. 1300), also "complete, full, finished, lacking in no way" (late 14c.), from Old French parfit "finished, completed, ready" (11c.), from Latin perfectus "completed, excellent, accomplished, exquisite," 

 round 

 c. 1300 (early 13c. as a surname), "spherical in shape; circular in outline," of persons or animals, "well-fed;" from Anglo-French rounde, Old French roont (12c., Modern French rond), probably originally *redond, from Vulgar Latin *retundus (source also of Provençal redon, Spanis

 prefect 

 mid-14c., "civil or military official, governor, magistrate," from Old French prefect (12c., Modern French préfet) and directly from Latin praefectus "public overseer, superintendent, director," a title of certain magistrates, noun use of past participle of praeficere "to put in 

 polish 

 early 14c., polishen "make smooth or glossy" by friction or coating (of the surface of wood, stone, metal, etc.), from Old French poliss-, present participle stem of polir (12c.) "to polish, decorate, see to one's appearance," from Latin polire "to polish, make smooth; decorate, 

 sharpen 

 late 14c., sharpenen, "intensify;" mid-15c., "make a point sharp or sharper," from sharp (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Sharpened; sharpening. The older verb was simply sharp (Middle English sharpen), from the adjective and partly from Old English gescirpan (West Saxon), scerpan (Ang

 meliorate 

 1550s, "to make better, improve" (transitive), a back-formation from melioration or else from Late Latin melioratus, past participle of meliorare "improve," from Latin melior "better," used as comparative of bonus "good," but probably originally meaning "stronger," from PIE root 

 set 

 Middle English setten, from Old English settan (transitive) "cause to sit; make or cause to rest as on a seat; cause to be put, placed, or seated;" also "put in a definite place," also "arrange, fix adjust; fix or appoint (a time) for some affair or transaction," and "cause (thou

 amend 

 early 13c., amenden, "to free from faults, rectify," from Old French amender "correct, set right, make better, improve" (12c.), from Latin emendare "to correct, free from fault," from ex "out" (see ex-) + menda, mendum "fault, physical blemish; error," from PIE *mend- "physical d

 improve 

 late 15c., "to use to one's profit, to increase (income)," from Anglo-French emprouwer "to turn to profit" (late 13c.), from Old French en-, a causative prefix or from em-, + prou "profit," from Latin prode "advantageous" (see proud (adj.)). Spelling with -v- was rare before 17c.

 better 

 Middle English bettre, from Old English bettra, earlier betera "of superior quality or excellence," from Proto-Germanic *batizo-, perhaps from PIE *bhad- "good," but Boutkan finds no good IE etymology. For etymology and evolution, see best. Cognate words also have become the comp

 Share hone 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hone Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hone">Etymology of hone by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hone. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hone Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hone," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hone. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hone." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hone. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hone." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hone (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hone 
 homunculus 
 homy 
 hon 
 honcho 
 Honduras 
 hone 
 honer 
 honest 
 honestly 
 honesty 
 honey 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix