URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/starch
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Starch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Starch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of starch 

 starch (v.) 

 late 14c., sterchen , "stiffen with starch," probably from Old English *stercan (Mercian), *stiercan (West Saxon) "make rigid," the past-participle of which seems to be preserved in stercedferhð "fixed, hard, resolute." It is related to stearc "stiff," from Proto-Germanic *starkjanan "to make hard" (source also of Old Norse staerkja, Old Saxon stercian , Old Frisian sterka , Middle Dutch sterken  "strengthen," Swedish stärka "to starch"), from PIE root *ster- (1) "stiff." Also compare German Stärke "strength; starch." Related: Starched ; starching .
 also from late 14c. 

 starch (n.) 

 "pasty substance made from flour and used to stiffen or whiten cloth," mid-15c., sterche , from starch (v.). The figurative sense of "stiffness and formality of manner" is recorded from 1705.
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to starch 

 starchy (adj.) 

 1778, "resembling or abounding in starch," from starch (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense of "stiff, precise, formal in manner" is by 1828. Related: Starchily ; starchiness .

 *ster- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "stiff."

 It might form all or part of: cholesterol ; redstart ; starch ; stare ; stark ; stark-naked ; start ; startle ; starve ; stere ; stereo- ; stern (adj.); stork ; strut ; torpedo ; torpid ; torpor .

 It might also be the source of: Greek stereos "solid," sterizein "to support," sterphnios "stiff, rigid," sterphos "hide, skin;" Sanskrit sthirah "hard, firm," Persian suturg "strong;" Lithuanian storas "thick," strėgti "to become frozen;" Old Church Slavonic trupeti , Lithuanian tirpstu, tirpti "to become rigid;" Old Church Slavonic strublu "strong, hard," staru "old" (hence Russian stary "old"); Old English starian "to stare," stearc "stiff, strong, rigid," steorfan "to die," literally "become stiff," styrne "severe, strict."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 amyl 

 hydrocarbon radical, 1850 (amyle), from Latin amylum "starch," from Greek amylon "fine meal, starch," noun use of neuter...So called because it was first obtained from the distilled spirits of potato or grain starch (though it also is obtained...English amyl meant "starch, fine flour."...

 grouch 

 He carried a Facial Expression that frightened little Children in Street Cars and took all the Starch out of sentimental...

 malt 

 "grain (usually barley) in which, by heat, the starch is converted to sugar," Old English malt (Anglian), mealt (West Saxon...

 corn 

 Corn-starch is from 1850. Corn-silk is attested from 1852....

 preparation 

 late 14c., preparacioun, "act of preparing or making ready, preliminary act or operation, a previous setting in order," from Old French preparacion (13c.) and directly from Latin praeparationem (nominative praeparatio) "a making ready," noun of action from past participle stem of

 anomic 

 1898, from French anomique (Durkheim, 1897); see anomie. A more important form of suicide is that which the author terms "anomic," by which he means the suicides produced by any sudden social shock or disturbance such as that due to economic disasters. Men commit egoistic suicid

 flamboyant 

 1832, originally in reference to a 15c.-16c. architectural style with wavy, flame-like curves, from French flamboyant "flaming, wavy," present participle of flamboyer "to flame," from Old French flamboiier "to flame, flare, blaze, glow, shine" (12c.), from flambe "a flame, flame 

 Memphis 

 ancient city of Egypt, from Memphis, the Greek form of Egyptian Mennefer, literally "his beauty," from men "his" + nefer "beauty" (as in Queen Nefertiti, literally "Beauty has Come"). A reference to pharaoh Pepi I (24c. B.C.E.). The city in Tennessee, U.S., was so named 1826 for 

 face 

 c. 1300, "the human face, a face; facial appearance or expression; likeness, image," from Old French face "face, countenance, look, appearance" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *facia (source also of Italian faccia), from Latin facies "appearance, form, figure," and secondarily "visage,

 curious 

 mid-14c., "subtle, sophisticated;" late 14c., "eager to know, inquisitive, desirous of seeing" (often in a bad sense), also "wrought with or requiring care and art;" from Old French curios "solicitous, anxious, inquisitive; odd, strange" (Modern French curieux) and directly from 

 Share starch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/starch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/starch">Etymology of starch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of starch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/starch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of starch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/starch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of starch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/starch. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of starch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/starch (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near starch 
 stapler 
 star 
 Star Chamber 
 Star Wars 
 starboard 
 starch 
 starchy 
 stardom 
 stardust 
 stare 
 stare decisis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix