URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/file
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:48:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: File - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

File - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of file 

 file (v.1) 

 "place (papers) in consecutive order for future reference," mid-15c., filen , from Old French filer "string documents on a thread or wire for preservation or reference" (15c.), earlier "to spin thread," from fil "thread, string" (12c.), from Latin filum "a thread, string; thread of fate; cord, filament," which is reconstructed to be from PIE *gwhis-lom , suffixed form of root *gwhi- "thread, tendon." The notion is of documents hung up on a line in consecutive order for ease of reference.

 File (filacium) is a threed or wyer, whereon writs, or other exhibits in courts, are fastened for the better keeping of them. [Cowel, "The Interpreter," 1607]

 Methods have become more sophisticated, but the word has stuck. The meaning "to place among the records of a court or office" is from 1510s; in reference to newspaper reporters sending in copy, 1954. The intransitive sense of "march in a line (as soldiers do) one after another" is from 1610s. Related: Filed ; filing .
 also from mid-15c. 

 file (n.1) 

 1520s, "string or wire on which documents are strung," from French file "a row" (15c.), noun derived from filer "string documents; spin thread" (see file (v.1)). The literal sense explains why from the beginning until recently things were generally on file (or upon file ). The meaning "collection of papers systematically arranged for ready reference" is from 1620s; computer sense is from 1954. The sense "row of persons or things one behind another" (1590s) is originally military, from the French verb in the sense of "march in file." Meaning "line of squares on a chessboard running directly from player to player" is from 1610s.
 also from 1520s 

 file (n.2) 

 metal tool for abrading or smoothing, Old English feol (Mercian fil ) "file," from Proto-Germanic *fihalo "cutting tool," which is probably from PIE root *peig- "to cut, mark by incision" (source also of Old Church Slavonic pila "file, saw," Lithuanian piela "file"). Germanic cognates include Old Saxon fila , Old High German fila , Middle Dutch vile , Dutch vijl , German Feile . Century Dictionary (1906) lists and names 60 types of them for various purposes. Nail file (for the fingernails) is by 1819.

 file (v.2) 

 "to smooth or abrade with a file," early 13c., from Old English filian , from the source of file (n.2). Related: Filed ; filing .
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to file 

 filing (n.) 

 1712, verbal noun from file (v.1). Filing cabinet is from 1883.

 enfilade (n.) 

 1706, a string of things in a straight line, from French enfilade , from Old French enfiler (13c.) "to thread (a needle) on a string; pierce from end to end," from en- "put on" (see en- (1)) + fil "thread" (see file (v.1)). Used of rows of apartments and lines of trees before military sense came to predominate: "a firing with a straight passage down ranks of men, channels in fortifications, etc." (1796). As a verb from 1706 in the military sense, "rake with shot through the full length." Related: Enfiladed ; enfilading . The Old French verb was borrowed in Middle English as enfile "to put (something) on a thread or string."

 fillet 
 nail-file 
 paint 
 rank and file 
 *gwhi- 
 *peig- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 paint 

 mid-13c., peinten, "represent (someone or something) in paint;" c. 1300, "decorate (something or someone) with drawings or pictures;" early 14c., "put color or stain on the surface of; coat or cover with a color or colors;" from Old French peintier "to paint," from peint, past pa

 charge 

 early 13c., chargen, "to load, put a burden on or in; fill with something to be retained," from Old French chargier "to load, burden, weigh down," from Late Latin carricare "to load a wagon or cart," from Latin carrus "two-wheeled wagon" (see car). The senses of "entrust," "comma

 lodge 

 Middle English logge, mid-13c. in surnames and place names; late 13c. as "small building or hut," from Old French loge "arbor, covered walk; hut, cabin, grandstand at a tournament" (12c.), from Frankish *laubja "shelter" (cognate with Old High German louba "porch, gallery," Germa

 defile 

 a mountain region," 1640s, especially in a military sense, "a narrow passage down which troops can march only in single file...," from French défilé, noun use of past participle of défiler "march by files" (17c.), from de- "off" (see de-) + file "row...The verb, "to march off in a line or file," is by 1705, from French défiler....

 swerve 

 or aside;" c. 1300, "to turn aside, deviate from a straight course;" in form from Old English sweorfan "to rub, scour, file...The Old English word is from Proto-Germanic *swerb- (cf Old Norse sverfa "to scour, file," Old Saxon swebran "to wipe off...

 conga 

 type of Latin American dance, "usu. performed by several people in single file and consisting of three steps forward followed...

 cadre 

 "permanently organized framework of a military unit" (the officers, etc., as opposed to the rank-and-file), 1851; earlier...

 smooth 

 "having a uniform surface, not rough," a Middle English form, from Old English smoð, a variant of smeðe "free from roughness, not harsh, polished; soft; suave; agreeable," which is of unknown origin and has no known cognates. The usual form in early Middle English was smeeth, but

 record 

 c. 1200, recorden, "to repeat, reiterate, recite; rehearse, get by heart" (senses now obsolete), from Old French recorder "tell, relate, repeat, recite, report, make known" (12c.) and directly from Latin recordari "remember, call to mind, think over, be mindful of," from re-, her

 haft 

 Old English hæft "handle," especially of a cutting or thrusting instrument, related to hæft "fetter, bond; captive, slave," via a common notion of "a seizing, a thing seized," from Proto-Germanic *haftjam (source also of Old Saxon haft "captured;" Dutch hecht, Old High German hef

 Share file 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/file Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/file">Etymology of file by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of file. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/file Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of file," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/file. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of file." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/file. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of file." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/file (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near file 
 fike 
 filament 
 filbert 
 filch 
 filcher 
 file 
 filet 
 filial 
 filiation 
 filibuster 
 filicide 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix