URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/christmas
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Christmas - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Christmas - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Christmas 

 Christmas (n.) 

 "Church festival observed annually in memory of the birth of Christ," late Old English Cristes mæsse , from Christ (and retaining the original vowel sound) + mass (n.2).

 Written as one word from mid-14c. As a verb, "to celebrate Christmas," from 1590s. Father Christmas is attested in a carol attributed to Richard Smart, Rector of Plymtree (Devon) from 1435-77. Christmas-tree in the modern sense is attested by 1835 in American English, rendering German Weihnachtsbaum . Christmas cards were first designed in 1843, popular by 1860s; the phrase Christmas-card was in use by 1850. Christmas present is from 1769. Christmas Eve is Middle English Cristenmesse Even (c. 1300).

 As a serving style of dressing food with red and green chile sauce, by 1991.

 Entries linking to Christmas 

 Christ (n.) 

 "the Anointed," synonymous with and translating to Greek Hebrew mashiah ( see messiah ), a title given to Jesus of Nazareth; Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus , from Greek khristos "the anointed," noun use of verbal adjective of khriein "to rub, anoint" (from PIE root *ghrei- "to rub").

 In the primitive Church it was a title, and used with the definite article, but from an early period it was used without it and regarded as part of the proper name of Jesus. It was treated as a proper name in Old English, but not regularly capitalized until 17c. Pronunciation with long -i- is result of Irish missionary work in England, 7c.-8c. The ch- form, regular since c. 1500 in English, was rare before. Capitalization of the word begins 14c. but is not fixed until 17c. The Latin term drove out Old English Hæland "healer, savior," as the preferred descriptive term for Jesus.

 As an oath or strong exclamation (of surprise, dismay, etc.), attested by 1748. The 17c. mystical sect of the Familists edged it toward a verb with Christed "made one with Christ." Christ-child "Jesus as a baby" (1842) translates German Christkind .

 mass (n.2) 

 "eucharistic service," Middle English messe, masse , from Old English mæsse , from Vulgar Latin *messa "eucharistic service," literally "dismissal," from Late Latin missa "dismissal," fem. past participle of mittere "to let go, send" (see mission ).

 Probably so called from the concluding words of the service, Ite, missa est , "Go, (the prayer) has been sent," or "Go, it is the dismissal." The Latin word sometimes was glossed in Old English as sendnes "send-ness." Meaning "musical setting of certain parts of the Catholic (or Anglican) liturgy" is by 1590s.

 Christmassy 
 Christmas-tide 
 yule 
 *ghrei- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Noel 

 late 14c., nowel, nouel "Christmas, the Feast of the Nativity," from Old French noel "the Christmas season," variant of nael...The modern word in English, with the sense "a Christmas carol" (1811) probably is a separate borrowing from French....As a masc. proper name, it is from Old French, probably literally "of or born on Christmas."...

 Xmas 

 "Christmas," 1551, X'temmas, wherein the X is an abbreviation for Christ in Christmas, English letter X being identical in...abbreviate the word in English was Xp- or Xr- (corresponding to the "Chr-" in Greek Χριστος), and the form Xres mæsse for "Christmas...

 nativity 

 early 12c., Nativite, "feast-day celebrating the birth of Christ, Christmas," from Old French nativité "birth, origin, descent...; birthday; Christmas" (12c.), from Late Latin nativitatem (nominative nativitas) "birth," from Latin nativus "born, native...

 Natalie 

 fem. proper name, from French Natalie, from Church Latin Natalia, from Latin (dies) natalis "birthday," in Church Latin, "Christmas...Probably originally a name for one born on Christmas. A top-20 name for girls born in the U.S. from 2005 to 2012....

 yule 

 Old English geol, geola "Christmas Day, Christmastide," which is cognate with Old Norse jol (plural), the name of a heathen...to Christianity the word narrowed to mean "the 12-day feast of the Nativity" (which began Dec. 25), but was replaced by Christmas...Revived 19c. by writers to mean "the Christmas of 'Merrie England.' " First direct reference to the Yule log is 17c....

 wassail 

 Sense extended c. 1300 to "liquor in which healths were drunk," especially spiced ale used in Christmas Eve celebrations....Wassailing "custom of going caroling house to house at Christmas time" is recorded from 1742....

 New Year's Eve 

 New Year's was the main midwinter festival in Scotland from 17c., when Protestant authorities banned Christmas, and continued...so after England reverted to Christmas, hence the Scottish flavor ("Auld Lang Syne," etc.)....

 quarter day 

 mid-15c., "day that begins a quarter of the year," designated as days when rents were paid and contracts and leases began or expired, from quarter (n.1). They were, in England, Lady day (March 25), Midsummer day (June 24), Michaelmas day (Sept. 29), and Christmas day (Dec. 25); i

 January 

 late 13c., Ieneuer (early 12c. in Anglo-French), from Old North French Genever, Old French Jenvier (Modern French Janvier), from Latin Ianuarius (mensis) "(the month) of Janus" (q.v.), to whom the month was sacred as the beginning of the year according to later Roman reckoning (c

 lone 

 late 14c., "having no companion, solitary, apart from any other," shortening of alone (q.v.) by weakening of stress or else by misdivision of what is properly all one. Used attributively, while the full form is used in the predicate. Compare live (adj.), from alive; colloquial 'l

 Share Christmas 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Christmas Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Christmas">Etymology of Christmas by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Christmas. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Christmas Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Christmas," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Christmas. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Christmas." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Christmas. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Christmas." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Christmas (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Christmas 
 Christianity 
 christianize 
 Christina 
 Christless 
 Christ-like 
 Christmas 
 Christmassy 
 Christmas-tide 
 Christology 
 Christopher 
 Christy Minstrels 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix