URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bishop
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:39:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bishop - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bishop - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bishop 

 bishop (n.) 

 Old English bisceop "bishop, high priest (Jewish or pagan)," from Late Latin episcopus , from Greek episkopos "watcher, (spiritual) overseer," a title for various government officials, later taken over in a Church sense, from epi- "over" (see epi- ) + skopos "one that watches, one that looks after; a guardian, protector" (from PIE root *spek- "to observe"). Given a specific sense in the Church, but the word also was used in the New Testament as a descriptive title for elders, and continues as such in some non-hierarchical Christian sects.

 A curious example of word-change, as effected by the genius of different tongues, is furnished by the English 
 bishop and the French 
 évêque . Both are from the same root, furnishing, perhaps the only example of two words from a common stem so modifying themselves 
 in historical times as not to have a letter in common. (Of course many words from a far off Aryan stem are in the same condition.) The English strikes off the initial and terminal syllables, leaving only piscop, which the Saxon preference for the softer labial and hissing sounds modified into bishop. Évêque (formerly evesque) merely softens the 
 p into 
 v and drops the last syllable. [William S. Walsh, "Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities," Philadelphia, J.B. Lippincott, 1892] 

 Late Latin episcopus in Spanish became obispo , in Italian vescovo , in Welsh esgob . The Germanic forms include Old Saxon biscop , Old High German biscof . Further afield it became Lithuanian vyskupas , Albanian upeshk , Finnish piispa . A once-popular pun on it was bite-sheep (1550s; it works better in German, biss-schaf ). The chess piece (formerly archer , before that alfin ) was so called from 1560s. As an alcoholic punch, by 1746.

 Entries linking to bishop 

 archbishop (n.) 

 "a bishop of the highest rank," in the West from 9c. especially of metropolitan bishops, Old English ærcebiscop , from Late Latin archiepiscopus , from Greek arkhi- "chief" (see archon ) + episkopos "bishop," literally "overseer" (see bishop ). Replaced earlier Old English heah biscop . The spelling was conformed to Latin from 12c.

 bishopric (n.) 

 Old English bisceoprice "diocese, province of a bishop," from bishop + rice "realm, dominion, province," from Proto-Germanic *rikja "rule" (from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight line," thus "to lead, rule").

 episcopal 
 epi- 
 *spek- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 episcopal 

 mid-15c., "belonging to or characteristic of bishops," from Late Latin episcopalis, from Latin episcopus "an overseer" (see bishop). Reference to a church governed by bishops is 1752. With a capital E-, the ordinary designation of the Anglican church in the U.S. and Scotland, so 

 pope 

 "the Bishop of Rome as head of the Roman Catholic Church," c. 1200, from Old English papa (9c.), from Church Latin papa "...bishop, pope" (in classical Latin, "tutor"), from Greek papas "patriarch, bishop," originally "father" (see papa)....Applied to bishops of Asia Minor and taken as a title by the Bishop of Alexandria c. 250....In the Western Church, applied especially to the Bishop of Rome since the time of Leo the Great (440-461), the first great...

 metropolitan 

 mid-14c., "bishop having general superintendency over other bishops of his province," from Late Latin metropolitanus, from...have been colonized), parent state of a colony," also "capital city," and, in Ecclesiastical Greek, "see of a metropolitan bishop...In the early church, the bishop of a municipal capital of a province or eparchy, who had general superintendence over the...In modern Catholic use, an archbishop who has bishops under his authority; in the Greek church still the bishop of a municipal...

 see 

 c. 1300, "throne of a bishop, archbishop, or pope," also "throne of a monarch, a goddess, the Antichrist, etc.," from Old...Attested by early 14c. as "administrative center of a bishopric;" c. 1400 as "province under the jurisdiction of a bishop...It differs from diocese, however, in that diocese represents the territorial province for the care of which the bishop is...

 Berkeley 

 city in California, named c. 1866 for George Berkeley (1685-1753), Bishop of Cloyne, who denied the objective reality of...Whether they knew or not Goldsmith and Burke, Swift and the Bishop of Cloyne All hated Whiggery; but what is Whiggery...

 superintendent 

 1550s, originally an ecclesiastical word meaning "bishop" or "minister who supervises churches within a district" (ultimately...Famously used by 16c. radical Protestants in place of bishop, which to them was tainted by Papacy....

 Elmo 

 Erasmus, an Italian bishop said to have been martyred in 303 who was invoked in the Mediterranean by sailors during storms...

 esprit 

 1590s, "liveliness, wit, vivacity," from French esprit "spirit, mind," from Old French espirit "spirit, soul" (12c.), from Latin spiritus "spirit" (see spirit (n.)). For initial e-, see e-. Esprit de corps, recorded from 1780 in English, preserves the usual French sense. French a

 priest 

 Middle English prēst, "cleric ranking below a bishop and above a deacon, a parish priest," from Old English preost, which probably was shortened from the older Germanic form represented by Old Saxon and Old High German prestar, Old Frisian prestere, all from Vulgar Latin *prester

 sprite 

 c. 1300, sprit, formerly also spright, a doublet of spirit (n.) in any of its then-current senses, from Old French esprit "spirit," from Latin spiritus (spirit (n.) retains the Latin form). So in Middle English and after sprite could mean "breath; the principle of life; the Holy 

 Share bishop 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bishop Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bishop">Etymology of bishop by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bishop. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bishop Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bishop," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bishop. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bishop." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bishop. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bishop." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bishop (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bishop 
 bisect 
 bisection 
 bisector 
 bisexual 
 bisexuality 
 bishop 
 bishopric 
 Bismarck 
 bismillah 
 bismuth 
 bison 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix