URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/monster
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:28:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Monster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Monster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of monster 

 monster (n.) 

 early 14c., monstre , "malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect," from Old French monstre , mostre "monster, monstrosity" (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum "divine omen (especially one indicating misfortune), portent, sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity," figuratively "repulsive character, object of dread, awful deed, abomination," a derivative of monere "to remind, bring to (one's) recollection, tell (of); admonish, advise, warn, instruct, teach," from PIE *moneie- "to make think of, remind," suffixed (causative) form of root *men- (1) "to think."

 Abnormal or prodigious animals were regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to fabulous animals composed of parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning "animal of vast size" is from 1520s; sense of "person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness, person regarded with horror because of moral deformity" is from 1550s. As an adjective, "of extraordinary size," from 1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an aglæca , a word related to aglæc "calamity, terror, distress, oppression." Monster movie "movie featuring a monster as a leading element," is by 1958 ( monster film is from 1941).

 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to monster 

 demonstrable (adj.) 

 "capable of being proved or made evident beyond doubt," c. 1400, from Old French demonstrable and directly from Latin demonstrabilis , from demonstrare "to point out, indicate, demonstrate," figuratively, "to prove, establish," from de- "entirely" (see de- ) + monstrare "to point out, show," from monstrum "divine omen, wonder" (see monster ). Related: Demonstrably .

 demonstrate (v.) 

 1550s, "point out, indicate, exhibit," a sense now obsolete, from Latin demonstratus , past participle of demonstrare "point out, indicate, demonstrate," figuratively, "prove, establish," from de- "entirely" (see de- ) + monstrare "point out, show," from monstrum "divine omen, wonder" (see monster ), and compare demonstration .

 The meaning "point out or establish the truth of by argument or deduction" is from 1570s. The sense of "describe and explain scientifically by specimens or experiment" is from 1680s. The meaning "take part in a public demonstration in the name of some political or social cause" is by 1888. Related: Demonstrated ; demonstrating .

 Latin also had commonstrare "point out, reveal," praemonstrare "show beforehand, foretell."

 demonstration 
 monstration 
 muster 
 remonstrance 
 sea-monster 
 *men- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 demonstration 

 late 14c., demonstracioun, "proof that something is true," by reasoning or logical deduction or practical experiment, from Old French demonstration (14c.) and directly from Latin demonstrationem (nominative demonstratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of demonstrare "t

 muster 

 early 14c., moustren, "to display, reveal, to show or demonstrate" (senses now obsolete), also "to appear, be present," from Old French mostrer "appear, show, reveal," also in a military sense (10c., Modern French montrer), from Latin monstrare "to show," from monstrum "omen, sig

 remonstrance 

 late 15c., "an appeal, request," a sense now obsolete, from Old French remonstrance (15c., Modern French remontrance), from Medieval Latin remonstrantia, from present-participle stem of remonstrare "point out, show," from re-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see re-), + Latin m

 hippocampus 

 c. 1600, a kind of sea monster, part horse and part dolphin or fish, often pictured pulling Neptune's chariot, from Late...Latin hippocampus, from Greek hippokampos, from hippos "horse" (from PIE root *ekwo- "horse") + kampos "a sea monster," which...

 Scratch 

 in Old Scratch "the Devil," 1740, a variant of Middle English Scrat, scratte "monster, goblin" (mid-13c. in place names),...which is probably from Old Norse skratte "goblin, wizard," probably originally "monster" (compare Old High German scraz,...

 monstrosity 

 collateral form of monstruosus (source of French monstruosité), from monstrum "divine omen, portent, sign; abnormal shape; monster...Meaning "a monster" is attested from 1640s....

 Frankenstein 

 Commonly taken (mistakenly) as the proper name of the monster, not the creator, and thus franken- extended by 1980s as a...Frankenstein is the creator-victim; the creature-despot & fatal creation is Frankenstein's monster....

 ogre 

 "man-eating giant of fairy tales and popular legends," 1713, hogre (in a translation of a French version of the Arabian Nights), from French ogre, first used in Perrault's "Contes," 1697, and perhaps formed by him from a dialectal variant of Italian orco "demon, monster," from La

 gore 

 "thick, clotted blood," Old English gor "dirt, dung, filth, shit," a Germanic word (cognates: Middle Dutch goor "filth, mud;" Old Norse gor "cud;" Old High German gor "animal dung"), of uncertain origin. Sense of "clotted blood" (especially shed in battle) developed by 1560s (gor

 ergo 

 c. 1400, from Latin ergo "therefore, in consequence of," possibly contracted from *e rogo "from the direction of," from ex "out of" (see ex-) + noun from regere "to direct, to guide" (from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight

 Share monster 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/monster Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/monster">Etymology of monster by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of monster. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/monster Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of monster," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/monster. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of monster." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/monster. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of monster." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/monster (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near monster 
 mons 
 monseigneur 
 monsieur 
 monsignor 
 monsoon 
 monster 
 monstration 
 monstrosity 
 monstrous 
 montage 
 montagnard 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close