URL: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/shoot
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:58:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: shoot - Wiktionary, the free dictionary

shoot - Wiktionary, the free dictionary 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Community portal 
 Requested entries 
 Recent changes 
 Random entry 
 Help 
 Glossary 
 Contact us 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Beginning

 1 
 English 

 Toggle English subsection 

 1.1 
 Pronunciation 

 1.2 
 Etymology 1 

 1.2.1 
 Verb 

 1.2.1.1 
 Conjugation 

 1.2.1.2 
 Quotations 

 1.2.1.3 
 Derived terms 

 1.2.1.4 
 Descendants 

 1.2.1.5 
 Translations 

 1.2.2 
 Noun 

 1.2.2.1 
 Derived terms 

 1.2.2.2 
 Descendants 

 1.2.2.3 
 Translations 

 1.2.3 
 References 

 1.3 
 Etymology 2 

 1.3.1 
 Interjection 

 1.3.1.1 
 Synonyms 

 1.3.1.2 
 Translations 

 1.4 
 Anagrams 

 2 
 French 

 Toggle French subsection 

 2.1 
 Pronunciation 

 2.2 
 Noun 

 2.3 
 Further reading 

 3 
 Middle English 

 Toggle Middle English subsection 

 3.1 
 Noun 

 4 
 Portuguese 

 Toggle Portuguese subsection 

 4.1 
 Noun 

 4.1.1 
 Usage notes 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 shoot 

 54 languages 

 العربية 
 Azərbaycanca 
 Български 
 বাংলা 
 Brezhoneg 
 Català 
 Čeština 
 Cymraeg 
 Dansk 
 Ελληνικά 
 Esperanto 
 Español 
 Eesti 
 Euskara 
 فارسی 
 Suomi 
 Français 
 Galego 
 Hrvatski 
 Magyar 
 Հայերեն 
 Bahasa Indonesia 
 Ido 
 Íslenska 
 Italiano 
 日本語 
 Қазақша 
 ಕನ್ನಡ 
 한국어 
 Kurdî 
 Limburgs 
 ລາວ 
 Lietuvių 
 Malagasy 
 മലയാളം 
 မြန်မာဘာသာ 
 Nederlands 
 Oromoo 
 Polski 
 Português 
 Русский 
 Sängö 
 Simple English 
 Svenska 
 Kiswahili 
 தமிழ் 
 తెలుగు 
 ไทย 
 Türkçe 
 Українська 
 اردو 
 Tiếng Việt 
 Walon 
 中文 

 Entry 

 Discussion 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 

 Print/export

 Create a book 
 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wiktionary, the free dictionary

 See also: shóot 

 English
 [ edit ] 

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 enPR : sho͞ot :
 ( Received Pronunciation ) IPA ( key ) : /ʃuːt/ 

 ( Standard Southern British ) IPA ( key ) : /ʃʉwt/ 
 Audio ( Standard Southern British ) : ( file ) 

 ( General American ) IPA ( key ) : /ʃut/ 
 Audio ( US ) : ( file ) 

 ( Australia , New Zealand ) IPA ( key ) : /ʃʉːt/ 

 ( Scotland , Northern Ireland ) IPA ( key ) : /ʃʉt/ 

 ( Wales ) IPA ( key ) : /ʃɪʊt/ 

 Rhymes: -uːt 

 Homophone : chute 

 Etymology 1
 [ edit ] 

 Etymology tree

 Proto-Indo-European *(s)kewd- 

 Proto-Indo-European *-eti 

 Proto-Indo-European *(s)kéwdeti ? 

 Proto-Germanic *skuttōną bf. ? 

 Proto-Germanic *skeutaną 
 Proto-West Germanic *skeutan 
 Old English sċēotan 
 Middle English schoten 
 English shoot 

 Inherited from Middle English scheten , schoten , from Old English scēotan , from Proto-West Germanic *skeutan , from Proto-Germanic *skeutaną , from Proto-Indo-European *(s)kéwd-e-ti , thematic present of *(s)kewd- ( “ to shoot, throw ” ) .

 Cognates

 Cognate with West Frisian sjitte , Low German scheten , Dutch schieten , German schießen , Danish skyde , Norwegian Bokmål skyte , Norwegian Nynorsk skyta , Swedish skjuta ; and also, through Indo-European, with Russian кида́ть ( kidátʹ ) , Albanian hedh ( “ to throw, toss ” ) , Persian چست ( čost , “ quick, active ” ) , Lithuanian skudrùs .

 Verb
 [ edit ] 

 shoot ( third-person singular simple present shoots , present participle shooting , simple past shot , past participle shot or ( rare ) shotten ) 

 To launch ( forcefully project ) (a projectile or similar object).
 ( transitive ) To fire (a weapon that releases a bullet or other projectile ).
 to shoot a gun 

 ( transitive ) To fire or launch (a projectile).
 Synonym: ( of an arrow ) loose 
 c. 1596–1598 (date written), William Shakespeare , “ The Merchant of Venice ”, in Mr. William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies   [ … ] ( First Folio ), London: [ … ] Isaac Iaggard , and Ed [ ward ] Blount , published 1623 , →OCLC , [ Act I, scene i ] : If you please / To shoot an arrow that self way. 

 ( transitive ) To fire a projectile at (a person or target).
 The man, in a desperate bid for freedom, grabbed his gun and started shooting anyone he could. 

 The hunter shot the deer to harvest its meat. 

 1945 September and October, C. Hamilton Ellis, “Royal Trains—V”, in Railway Magazine , page 252 : The unfortunate Divisional Director, responsible for the Emperor's safety, shot himself. 

 2008 , BioWare , Mass Effect ( Science Fiction ), Redwood City: Electronic Arts, →ISBN , →OCLC , PC, scene: Noveria: Shepard: She's surrounded by geth and pointing a gun at us. Shoot her! 

 2013 April 4, Hannibal , season 1 , episode 1 , spoken by Will Graham ( Hugh Dancy ): I shoot Mr. Marlow twice, severing jugulars and cartoids with near surgical precision. He will die watching me take what is his away from him. This is my design. 

 ( intransitive ) To cause a weapon to discharge a projectile; to use a gun or similar weapon.
 They shot at a target. 

 He shoots better than he rides. 

 The man, in a desperate bid for freedom, grabbed his gun and started shooting . 

 ( intransitive ) To hunt game with a gun ; to go hunting for recreation .
 They're coming to shoot with us on Sunday. 

 1899 January – 1902 January, John Buchan , “ (please specify the page) ”, in The Watcher by the Threshold, and Other Tales , Edinburgh; London: William Blackwood and Sons , published 1902 , →OCLC : The place was called the House of More, and I had shot at it once or twice in recent years. 

 ( transitive ) To hunt on (a piece of land) with a gun; to kill game in or on.
 1969 , Game Conservancy (Great Britain), Annual Review (issues 1-8, page 16)
 Although the estate had been shot previously, there had been no effective keepering and little success with the pheasants released. 

 ( intransitive ) To function as a weapon that launches a projectile.
 The gun shoots well. 

 ( intransitive , gambling ) To throw dice ; to roll .
 1980 , John Scarne, Scarne on Dice , page 275 : Then, when it was his turn to shoot , he reached out with a completely empty hand and caught the dice the stickman threw to him. 

 ( transitive , slang ) To ejaculate .
 After a very short time, he shot his load over the carpet. 

 ( intransitive , colloquial , chiefly imperative ) To begin to speak .
 "Can I ask you a question?"   " Shoot. " 

 1951 , John Wyndham , The Day of the Triffids , Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, published 1954 , page 92 : "And now," I suggested, "I think it's about time we began to rough out a plan of campaign. Shall I throw around a few observations first?" [ … ] Josella blew out a feather of smoke and took a sip of her drink. Savouring the flavour, she said: "I wonder whether we shall ever taste fresh oranges again? Okay, shoot ." 

 ( transitive , figurative ) To dismiss , reject , or do away with .
 His idea was shot on sight. 

 To photograph or film:
 ( ambitransitive , analogous ) To photograph .
 He shot the couple in a variety of poses. 

 He shot seventeen stills. 

 We can't shoot until the lighting is better. (intransitive) 

 2006 , Michael Grecco , Lighting and the Dramatic Portrait , Amphoto Books, →ISBN , page 68 : I had the pleasure of shooting Arnold Newman while teaching across the hall from him at a summer photo workshop. 

 ( ambitransitive , analogous , film , television ) To film .
 The film was mostly shot in France. 

 2026 August 10, Nicholas Muhoro, “Jodi Huisentruit, 27, Vanished From Her Apartment Parking Lot in 1995. Police Found Signs of a Struggle”, in Skip Boring ‎ [1] , archived from the original on 11 August 2026 : On June 26, Jodi went to Vansice’s home to watch a homemade videotape he had shot at a surprise birthday party he helped organize for her earlier that month. 

 ( transitive ) To push or thrust (a bolt ) quickly; hence, to open (a lock ); to unlock .
 1886 October – 1887 January, H[enry] Rider Haggard , She: A History of Adventure , London: Longmans, Green, and Co. , published 1887 , →OCLC : There was no answer, so I took the big key, rubbed some salad oil into the wards, and after one or two bad shots, for my hands were shaking, managed to fit it, and shoot the lock. 

 To move or act quickly or suddenly.
 ( intransitive ) To move past very quickly and suddenly .
 After an initial lag, the experimental group's scores shot past the control group's scores in the fourth week. 

 As soon as the dog appeared, the cat shot underneath the couch. 

 1697 , Virgil , “ (please specify the book number) ”, in John Dryden , transl., The Works of Virgil: Containing His Pastorals, Georgics, and Æneis.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] Jacob Tonson ,   [ … ] , →OCLC : There shot a streaming lamp along the sky. 

 1884 December 10, Mark Twain [pseudonym; Samuel Langhorne Clemens], chapter VII, in The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn: (Tom Sawyer’s Comrade)   [ … ] , London: Chatto & Windus ,   [ … ] , →OCLC : It didn't take me long to get there. I shot past the head at a ripping rate, the current was so swift, and then I got into the dead water and landed on the side towards the Illinois shore. 

 1897 December (indicated as 1898 ), Winston Churchill , chapter VIII, in The Celebrity: An Episode , New York, N.Y.: The Macmillan Company ; London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd. , →OCLC : Now we plunged into a deep shade with the boughs lacing each other overhead, and crossed dainty, rustic bridges[...]: or anon we shot into a clearing, with a colored glimpse of the lake and its curving shore far below us. 

 ( transitive ) To go over or pass quickly through.
 shoot the rapids 

 1697 , Virgil , “ (please specify the book number) ”, in John Dryden , transl., The Works of Virgil: Containing His Pastorals, Georgics, and Æneis.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] Jacob Tonson ,   [ … ] , →OCLC : She [ … ] shoots the Stygian sound. 

 2005 , R. G. Crouch, The Coat: The Origin and Times of Doggett's Famous Wager , page 40 : It was approaching the time when watermen would not shoot the bridge even without a passenger aboard. 

 ( surfing ) To ride a wave .
 1966 , Bruce Brown , director, The Endless Summer : One of the fishermen was really stoked. He was trying to shoot the shore break in his canoe. 

 ( transitive ) To tip (something, especially coal ) down a chute .

 ( transitive ) To penetrate with pain as if with a bullet; to stab ; to cause a piercing sensation.
 a shooting pain in my leg 

 1712 (date written), [Joseph] Addison , Cato, a Tragedy.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] J [ acob ] Tonson ,   [ … ] , published 1713 , →OCLC , Act III, scene i, page 37 : Thy words shoot through my heart. 

 ( obsolete , intransitive ) To feel a quick, darting pain; to throb in pain.
 [ 1633 ] , George Herbert , edited by [ Nicholas Ferrar ], The Temple. Sacred Poems, and Private Ejaculations , Cambridge, Cambridgeshire: [ … ] Thomas Buck and Roger Daniel; and are to be sold by Francis Green,   [ … ] , →OCLC : These preachers make / His head to shoot and ache. 

 ( obsolete ) To change form suddenly; especially, to solidify .
 1627 (indicated as 1626 ) , Francis [Bacon] , “ (please specify the page, or |century=I to X) ”, in Sylua Syluarum: Or A Naturall Historie. In Ten Centuries.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] William Rawley   [ … ] ; [ p ] rinted by J [ ohn ] H [ aviland ] for William Lee   [ … ] , →OCLC : If the menstruum be overcharged, metals will shoot into crystals. 

 1802 , Thomas Jefferson , Notes on the State of Virginia , Query VII.
 The north-east [wind] is loaded with vapor, insomuch, that the salt-makers have found that their crystals would not shoot while that blows. 

 To send out or forth, especially with a rapid or sudden motion; to cast with the hand; to hurl; to discharge; to emit.
 c. 1608–1610 , Francis Beaumont , John Fletcher , “ The Coxcomb ”, in Comedies and Tragedies   [ … ] , London: [ … ] Humphrey Robinson ,   [ … ] , and for Humphrey Moseley   [ … ] , published 1647 , →OCLC , (please specify the act number in uppercase Roman numerals, and the scene number in lowercase Roman numerals) : an honest weaver as ever shot shuttle 

 1849–1861 , Thomas Babington Macaulay , chapter III, in The History of England from the Accession of James the Second , volume (please specify |volume=I to V) , London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans , →OCLC : a pit into which the dead carts had nightly shot corpses by scores 

 ( informal , ditransitive ) To send (to someone).
 I'll shoot you an email with all the details 

 ( informal , intransitive ) To leave ; to depart .
 Is that the time already? I've got to shoot . 

 ( sports ) To act or achieve.
 ( wrestling ) To lunge .

 ( professional wrestling ) To deviate from kayfabe , either intentionally or accidentally; to actually connect with unchoreographed fighting blows and maneuvers, or speak one's mind (instead of an agreed script).

 To make (the stated score).
 In my round of golf yesterday I shot a 76. 

 ( transitive , intransitive , colloquial ) To inject a drug (such as heroin ) intravenously .
 Synonym: fix 

 To develop, move forward.
 To germinate ; to bud; to sprout .
 1627 (indicated as 1626 ) , Francis [Bacon] , “ (please specify the page, or |century=I to X) ”, in Sylua Syluarum: Or A Naturall Historie. In Ten Centuries.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] William Rawley   [ … ] ; [ p ] rinted by J [ ohn ] H [ aviland ] for William Lee   [ … ] , →OCLC : Onions, as they hang, will shoot forth. 

 1697 , Virgil , “ (please specify the book number) ”, in John Dryden , transl., The Works of Virgil: Containing His Pastorals, Georgics, and Æneis.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] Jacob Tonson ,   [ … ] , →OCLC : But the wild olive shoots , and shades the ungrateful plain. 

 To grow; to advance.
 to shoot up rapidly 

 1596 , Edmund Spenser , “Book V”, in The Faerie Queene.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] [ John Wolfe ] for William Ponsonbie , →OCLC : Well shot in years he seemed. 

 a. 1749 (date written), James Thomson , “Spring”, in The Seasons , London: [ … ] A [ ndrew ] Millar , and sold by Thomas Cadell ,   [ … ] , published 1768 , →OCLC : Delightful task! to rear the tender thought, / To teach the young idea how to shoot . 

 ( nautical ) To move ahead by force of momentum, as a sailing vessel when the helm is put hard alee .

 ( transitive ) To travel or ride on (breaking waves) rowards the shore.
 1886 October – 1887 January, H[enry] Rider Haggard , She: A History of Adventure , London: Longmans, Green, and Co. , published 1887 , →OCLC : `Take the tiller, Mahomed!' I roared in Arabic. `We must try and shoot them.' At the same moment I seized an oar, and got it out, motioning to Job to do likewise. 

 To push or thrust forward; to project; to protrude; often with out .
 A plant shoots out a bud. 

 1611 , The Holy Bible,   [ … ] ( King James Version ), London: [ … ] Robert Barker ,   [ … ] , →OCLC , Psalms 22:7 : They shoot out the lip, they shake the head. 

 1697 , Virgil , “Pastoral 3”, in John Dryden , transl., The Works of Virgil: Containing His Pastorals, Georgics, and Æneis.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] Jacob Tonson ,   [ … ] , →OCLC : Beware the secret snake that shoots a sting. 

 ( intransitive ) To protrude ; to jut ; to project; to extend.
 The land shoots into a promontory. 

 2019 June 1, Oliver Wainwright , “Super-tall, super-skinny, super-expensive: the ‘pencil towers’ of New York’s super-rich”, in Katharine Viner , editor, The Guardian ‎ [2] , London: Guardian News & Media , →ISSN , →OCLC , archived from the original on 5 October 2020 : There is 432 Park Avenue, a surreal square tube of white concrete that appears to shoot twice as high as anything around it, its endless Cartesian grid of windows framing worlds of solid marble bathtubs and climate-controlled wine cellars within. 

 1836 March – 1837 October , Charles Dickens , “ Chapter 49 ”, in The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club , London: Chapman and Hall ,   [ … ] , published 1837 , →OCLC : There shot up against the dark sky, tall, gaunt, straggling houses. 

 ( transitive , carpentry ) To plane straight; to fit by planing.
 1677 , Joseph Moxon , Mechanick Exercises: Or, The Doctrine of Handy-works : two Pieces of Wood are Shot (that is Plained) or else they are Pared [...] with a Pairing-chissel 

 ( transitive ) To variegate as if by sprinkling or intermingling; to color in spots or patches. (See shot silk on Wikipedia) 
 1842 , Alfred Tennyson , “The Dying Swan”, in Poems.   [ … ] , volume I, London: Edward Moxon ,   [ … ] , →OCLC , page 54 : The tangled water-courses slept, / Shot over with purple, and green, and yellow. 

 ( card games ) To shoot the moon .

 ( transitive , aviation ) To carry out, or attempt to carry out (an approach to an airport runway ).
 He tried to shoot the visual approach to runway 12, but the visibility was too low. 

 ( transitive , surveying ) To measure the distance and direction to (a point).

 To carry out a seismic survey with geophones in an attempt to detect oil .
 1986 , United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Moratoria: Hearing , page 438 : Once the area is ready to " shoot ," the seismic crew places geophones and cables along the line of the profile to be recorded. 

 ( transitive ) To drink (a shot of an alcoholic beverage ).
 2024 April 5, Chappell Roan , Justin Tranter , Dan Nigro , “ Good Luck, Babe! ”‎ [3] performed by Chappell Roan: You can kiss a hundred boys in bars
 Shoot another shot, try to stop the feeling 

 Conjugation
 [ edit ] 

 Conjugation of shoot 

 infinitive 

 ( to ) shoot 

 present tense 

 past tense 

 1st-person singular shoot 
 shot , shooted † 

 2nd-person singular 
 shoot , shootest † 
 shot , shooted † , shootedst † , shotst † , shottest † 

 3rd-person singular 
 shoots , shooteth † 
 shot , shooted † 

 plural 
 shoot 

 subjunctive 
 shoot 
 shot , shooted † 

 imperative 
 shoot 

 — 

 participles 
 shooting 

 shot , shooted † , shotten † 

 † Archaic or obsolete .

 Quotations
 [ edit ] 

 For quotations using this term, see Citations:shoot . 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 Terms derived from shoot (verb)
 angle-shoot 
 atshoot 
 backshoot 
 bullet-shooting crossbow 
 crapshoot 
 don't shoot the messenger 
 foreshoot 
 gut-shoot 
 I hope I may be shot 
 I'll be shot 
 I've been shot 
 I wish I may be shot 
 just shoot me 
 like shooting fish in a barrel 
 look-down, shoot-down 
 misshoot 
 outshoot 
 overshoot 
 photo shoot 
 point-and-shoot 
 re-shoot 
 reshoot 
 run-and-shoot 
 shoot a bird 
 shootable 
 shoot and protect 
 shoot an elephant with a BB gun 
 shoot a rope 
 shoot around 
 shootaround 
 shoot back 
 shoot blanks 
 shoot daggers 
 shoot down 
 shootee 
 shoot-'em-up 
 shooter 
 shootery 
 shootfighter 
 shootfighting 
 shoot first and ask questions later 
 shoot for the moon 
 shoot for the stars 
 shoot from the hip 
 shoot from the lip 
 shoot holes 
 shoothouse 
 shootist 
 shoot it out 
 shoot me 
 shoot off 
 shootoff 
 shoot off at the mouth 
 shoot off one's mouth 
 shoot one in the sink 
 shoot one's bolt 
 shoot one's cuffs 
 shoot oneself in the foot 
 shoot one's load 
 shoot one's mouth off 
 shoot one's shot 
 shoot one's wad 
 shoot out 
 shoot someone straight 
 shoot the boots 
 shoot the breeze 
 shoot the bull 
 shoot the cat 
 shoot-the-chute 
 shoot the five 
 shoot the gold 
 shoot the lens 
 shoot the lights out 
 shoot the messenger 
 shoot the moon 
 shoot the shit 
 shoot through 
 shoot through like a Bondi tram 
 shoot trouble 
 shoot up 
 shoot-up 
 shooty 
 shot-on-video 
 shot out 
 shot through with 
 shot with a shovel 
 slingshoot 
 snap shoot 
 so shoot me 
 straight-shooting 
 troubleshoot 
 undershoot 
 unshoot 
 upshoot 
 when the looting starts, the shooting starts 
 who shot John 

 Descendants
 [ edit ] 

 → Asturian: xu , ⇒ xutar 

 → Catalan: xut 

 → Greek: σουτ ( sout ) 

 → Hijazi Arabic: شوت ( šūt ) 

 → Japanese: シュート ( shūto ) 

 → Korean: 슛 ( syut ) 

 → North Levantine Arabic: شوت ( šūt ) 

 → Persian: شوت ( šut ) 

 → Portuguese: chuto , chute ( Brazil ) , chutar , shootar ( pre-standardization spelling ) 

 → Romanian: șut 

 → Spanish: chutar 

 → Vietnamese: sút 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 to fire a shot

 Afrikaans: skiet   (af) 

 Aklanon: pana' 

 Albanian: gjuaj   (sq) , qit   (sq) , shti 

 Arabic: صَوَّبَ ( ṣawwaba ) , أَطْلَقَ النَّار ( ʔaṭlaqa n-nār ) 
 Hijazi Arabic: طَلَق ( ṭalag ) 

 Armenian: կրակել   (hy) ( krakel ) 

 Assamese: গুলীওৱা ( guliüa ) 

 Azerbaijani: vurmaq   (az) , atmaq   (az) 

 Bashkir: атыу ( atıw ) 

 Basque: tiro egin 

 Belarusian: страля́ць   impf ( straljácʹ ) , стрэ́ліць   pf ( strélicʹ ) 

 Bengali: গুলি চালানো ( guli calanō ) 

 Bulgarian: стреля́м   (bg)   impf ( streljám ) , изстре́лвам   (bg)   impf ( izstrélvam ) 

 Burmese: ပစ်   (my) ( pac ) 

 Catalan: disparar   (ca) , tirar   (ca) 

 Chinese:
 Cantonese: 射 ( se 6 ) , 射擊  / 射击 ( se 6 gik 1 ) 
 Mandarin: 射   (zh) ( shè ) , 射擊  / 射击   (zh) ( shèjī ) 

 Chukchi: миԓгэрыткук ( miḷgėrytkuk ) 

 Czech: střílet   (cs)   impf , střelit   pf 

 Danish: skyde   (da) 

 Dutch: schieten   (nl) 

 Esperanto: pafi   (eo) 

 Estonian: tulistama , laskma 

 Faroese: skjóta 

 Finnish: ampua   (fi) , laukaista   (fi) 

 French: tirer   (fr) 

 Frisian:
 West Frisian: sjitte 

 Galician: disparar   (gl) , tirar   (gl) 

 Georgian: სროლა ( srola ) 

 German: schießen   (de) 

 Greek: ρίχνω   (el) ( ríchno ) 

 Hebrew: יָרָה   (he) ( yará ) 

 Hindi: गोली चलाना ( golī calānā ) 

 Hungarian: lő   (hu) , kilő   (hu) 

 Icelandic: skjóta   (is) 

 Indonesian: tembak   (id) , menembak   (id) 

 Ingrian: ampua , paukuttaa 

 Irish: scaoil 

 Italian: sparare   (it) 

 Japanese: 撃つ   (ja) ( うつ, utsu ) 

 Karachay-Balkar: атаргъа ( atarğa ) 

 Kazakh: ату   (kk) ( atuw ) 

 Khmer: បាញ់   (km) ( bañ ) 

 Korean: 쏘다   (ko) ( ssoda ) 

 Kyrgyz: атуу   (ky) ( atuu ) 

 Lao: ຍິງ ( nying ) 

 Latgalian: saut , saudeit 

 Latvian: šaut 

 Lithuanian: šaudyti , šauti   (lt) 

 Low German: scheten 

 Luxembourgish: schéissen 

 Macedonian: стрела   impf ( strela ) , пука   impf ( puka ) 

 Malay: tembak   (ms) , panah   (ms) 
 Brunei Malay: timbak 

 Māori: pupuhi 

 Middle English: scheten 

 Mongolian:
 Cyrillic: буу буудах ( buu buudax ) , сумаар буудах ( sumaar buudax ) 

 Navajo: adiiłdǫǫh 

 Norman: tither 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: skyte   (no) 
 Nynorsk: skyta 

 Occitan: tirar   (oc) 

 Old East Slavic: стрѣляти   impf ( strěljati ) 

 Old English: sċēotan 

 Persian: شلیک کردن   (fa) ( šellik kardan ) , تیراندازی کردن ( tirândâzi kardan ) 

 Polish: strzelać   (pl)   impf , wystrzelić   (pl)   pf 

 Portuguese: atirar   (pt) , disparar   (pt) 

 Romagnol: abàtar 

 Romanian: trage   (ro) , împușca   (ro) 

 Russian: стреля́ть   (ru)   impf ( streljátʹ ) , вы́стрелить   (ru)   pf ( výstrelitʹ ) 

 Serbo-Croatian:
 Cyrillic: стрељати   impf , пу̏цати   impf 
 Latin: streljati   (sh)   impf , pȕcati   (sh)   impf 

 Slovak: strieľať   impf , streliť   pf 

 Slovene: streljati   (sl)   impf 

 Spanish: disparar   (es) , tirar   (es) , chejear ( El Salvador ) 

 Swahili: kupiga risasi 

 Swedish: skjuta   (sv) 

 Tagalog: bumaril ( actor trigger I ) , mamaril ( actor trigger III ) , barilin ( object trigger I ) , barilin ( object trigger I ) , magpakawala ( indirect actor trigger ) 

 Tajik: тир андохтан ( tir andoxtan ) , тир задан ( tir zadan ) 

 Tamil: சுடு   (ta) ( cuṭu ) 

 Tatar: атарга   (tt) ( atarğa ) 

 Tày: bẳn , bén , thíu 

 Telugu: కాల్చు   (te) ( kālcu ) 

 Tetum: hana 

 Thai: ยิง   (th) ( ying ) 

 Tocharian B: kärsk- 

 Turkish: ateş etmek   (tr) , vurmak   (tr) , çekmek   (tr) , etmek   (tr) 

 Turkmen: atmak   (tk) , tüpe–lemek 

 Tuvan: адар ( adar ) , боолаар ( boolaar ) 

 Ukrainian: стріля́ти   impf ( striljáty ) , вистрі́лювати   impf ( vystríljuvaty ) , вистре́лювати   impf ( vystréljuvaty ) , ви́стрелити   pf ( výstrelyty ) , ви́стрілити   pf ( výstrilyty ) 

 Urdu: گولی چلانا ( golī calānā ) 

 Uyghur: ئاتماق ( atmaq ) 

 Uzbek: chiqmoq   (uz) , otmoq   (uz) 

 Venetan: zbarar , trar   (vec) 

 Vietnamese: bắn   (vi) 

 Welsh: saethu   (cy) 

 Yakut: ыт ( ït ) 

 Yiddish: שיסן ( shisn ) 

 to fire multiple shots

 Arabic: صَوَّبَ ( ṣawwaba ) 

 Armenian: կրակել   (hy) ( krakel ) 

 Catalan: disparar   (ca) 

 Chinese:
 Cantonese: 射 ( se 6 ) 
 Mandarin: 射   (zh) ( shè ) 

 Czech: střílet   (cs)   impf 

 Dutch: schieten   (nl) 

 Esperanto: pafi   (eo) 

 Finnish: ampua   (fi) 

 French: tirer   (fr) 

 German: schießen   (de) 

 Hebrew: ירה   (he) ( yaráh ) 

 Hungarian: tüzel   (hu) , lövöldöz   (hu) 

 Indonesian: tembak   (id) , menembak   (id) 

 Italian: sparare   (it) 

 Japanese: 撃つ   (ja) ( うつ, utsu ) 

 Korean: 쏘다   (ko) ( ssoda ) 

 Māori: puhipuhi 

 Norman: tither 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: skyte   (no) 
 Nynorsk: skyta 

 Polish: strzelać   (pl)   impf 

 Portuguese: atirar   (pt) , disparar   (pt) 

 Romanian: trage   (ro) 

 Russian: стреля́ть   (ru)   impf ( streljátʹ ) , вы́стрелить   (ru)   pf ( výstrelitʹ ) 

 Slovak: strieľať   impf 

 Spanish: disparar   (es) , tirar   (es) 

 Swahili: kupiga risasi 

 Swedish: skjuta   (sv) 

 Tamil: சுடு   (ta) ( cuṭu ) 

 Telugu: కాల్చు   (te) ( kālcu ) 

 Ukrainian: стріля́ти   impf ( striljáty ) , вистрі́лювати   impf ( vystríljuvaty ) , вистре́лювати   impf ( vystréljuvaty ) , ви́стрелити   pf ( výstrelyty ) , ви́стрілити   pf ( výstrilyty ) 

 Yakut: ытыалаа ( ïtïalaa ) 

 to hit with a shot

 Albanian: qëlloj   (sq) 

 Arabic: صَوَّبَ ( ṣawwaba ) 

 Armenian: կրակել   (hy) ( krakel ) 

 Basque: please add this translation if you can 

 Bulgarian: застре́лвам   (bg)   impf ( zastrélvam ) 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 射   (zh) ( shè ) , 槍斃  / 枪毙   (zh) ( qiāngbì ) ( to execute by firing squad ) 

 Czech: střelit   impf , zastřelit   (cs)   pf 

 Dutch: schieten   (nl) 

 Esperanto: pafi   (eo) 

 Estonian: tabama 

 Finnish: ( + partitive object when injuring or genitive object when killing ) ampua   (fi) 

 French: tirer   (fr) 

 Georgian: please add this translation if you can 

 German: ( not killing ) anschießen   (de) , ( killing ) erschießen   (de) 

 Greek: πυροβολώ   (el) ( pyrovoló ) 

 Hebrew: ירה   (he) ( yaráh ) 

 Hindi: गोली मारना ( golī mārnā ) 

 Hungarian: ( not killing ) rálő   (hu) , meglő   (hu) , ( killing ) lelő   (hu) , agyonlő   (hu) 

 Indonesian: tembak   (id) , menembak   (id) 

 Italian: tirare   (it) 

 Japanese: 撃つ   (ja) ( うつ, utsu ) 

 Korean: 쏘다   (ko) ( ssoda ) 

 Malay: please add this translation if you can 

 Middle English: scheten 

 Mongolian:
 Cyrillic: буудах   (mn) ( buudax ) 

 Norman: tither 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: skyte   (no) 
 Nynorsk: skyta 

 Persian: زدن   (fa) ( zadan ) 

 Polish: postrzelić   (pl) 

 Portuguese: balear   (pt) 

 Romanian: împușca   (ro) 

 Russian: застрели́ть   (ru)   pf ( zastrelítʹ ) , расстреля́ть   (ru)   pf ( rasstreljátʹ ) ( as in execution ) 

 Slovak: streliť   impf , vystreliť   pf 

 Spanish: tirar   (es) , abalear   (es) 

 Swahili: kupiga risasi 

 Swedish: skjuta   (sv) 

 Tagalog: tirahin ( object trigger III ) , tamaan ( object trigger I ) 

 Tamil: சுடு   (ta) ( cuṭu ) 

 Thai: please add this translation if you can 

 Turkish: please add this translation if you can 

 Tuvan: адып өлүрер ( adıp ölürer ) , боолап өлүрер ( boolap ölürer ) 

 Venetan: trar   (vec) 

 Vietnamese: bắn trúng 

 to use a bow and arrows for shooting

 Aromanian: sãdzitedzu 

 Bashkir: атыу ( atıw ) 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 射擊  / 射击   (zh) ( shèjī ) 

 Estonian: ambuma 

 Hungarian: nyilaz   (hu) 

 Italian: saettare   (it) 

 Middle English: scheten 

 Russian: стрелять   (ru)   impf ( streljatʹ ) 

 Tamil: எய்   (ta) ( ey ) 

 to sprout - of a plant

 Azerbaijani: cücərmək 

 Bashkir: шытыу ( şıtıw ) 

 Bulgarian: пускам филизи ( puskam filizi ) 

 Catalan: brotar   (ca) 

 Estonian: idanema , võrsuma 

 Finnish: itää   (fi) 

 Galician: brotar   (gl) 

 Hindi: अंकुरण   (hi)   m ( aṅkuraṇ ) 

 Hungarian: kihajt   (hu) , kirügyez , bimbót / rügyet hajt 

 Italian: germogliare   (it) 

 Māori: pōkihi , mātātupu , pihi , tinaku , toroihi , koeata , koiata 

 Middle English: scheten 

 Occitan: brotar   (oc) 

 Russian: пускать побеги   impf ( puskatʹ pobegi ) 

 Spanish: brotar   (es) 

 Tamil: முளை   (ta) ( muḷai ) 

 Tày: buốt 

 Turkish:
 Ottoman Turkish: بوداقلانمق ( budaklanmak ) 

 Venetan: butar   (vec) 

 take a picture

 Bashkir: төшөрөү ( töşöröw ) 

 Belarusian: фатаграфава́ць   impf ( fatahrafavácʹ ) , сфатаграфава́ць   pf ( sfatahrafavácʹ ) , здыма́ць   impf ( zdymácʹ ) , зняць   pf ( znjacʹ ) 

 Bulgarian: сни́мам   (bg)   impf ( snímam ) , фотографи́рам   (bg)   impf or pf ( fotografíram ) 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 拍攝  / 拍摄   (zh) ( pāishè ) 

 Estonian: pildistama 

 Finnish: kuvata   (fi) 

 Polish: strzelać   (pl)   impf , strzelić   (pl)   pf 

 Portuguese: fotografar   (pt) 

 Russian: фотографи́ровать   (ru)   impf ( fotografírovatʹ ) , сфотографи́ровать   (ru)   pf ( sfotografírovatʹ ) , снима́ть   (ru)   impf ( snimátʹ ) , снять   (ru)   pf ( snjatʹ ) 

 Swedish: fota   (sv) , fotografera   (sv) , plåta   (sv) 

 Tamil: எடு   (ta) ( eṭu ) , படம்பிடி ( paṭampiṭi ) 

 Ukrainian: фотографува́ти   impf ( fotohrafuváty ) , сфотографува́ти   pf ( sfotohrafuváty ) , зніма́ти   impf ( znimáty ) , зня́ти   pf ( znjáty ) 

 Venetan: fotografar , far na foto 

 The translations below need to be checked and inserted above into the appropriate translation tables. See instructions at Wiktionary:Entry layout § Translations . 

 Translations to be checked

 Georgian: (please verify ) სროლა ( srola ) , (please verify ) დახვრეტა ( daxvreṭa ) , (please verify ) გადაღება ( gadaɣeba ) , (please verify ) ჩაქროლება ( čakroleba ) 

 Māori: pōkihi 

 Tibetan: མེ་མདའ་བརྒྱབ ( me mda' brgyab ) 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 shoot ( plural shoots ) 

 The emerging stem and embryonic leaves of a new plant .
 1664 , J[ohn] E[velyn] , Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-trees and the Propagation of Timber in His Majesties Dominions.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] Jo [ hn ] Martyn , and Ja [ mes ] Allestry, printers to the Royal Society ,   [ … ] , →OCLC : Prune off yet also superfluous branches, and shoots of this second spring. 

 2024 April 3, Philip Haigh, “Comment: A new, better version of HS2”, in RAIL , number 1006 , page 3: From the bonfire of last autumn's HS2 decision, there are green shoots pushing through the ashes. 

 A photography session.
 2015 July 9, Dave Barrack, Grrl Power (webcomic), Grrl Power #334 – Make down : "Hmm." "Problem?" "Arianna warned me this might be a challenging shoot . I think she was worried about you being belligerent, but the real issue is turning out to be your specularity. It looks like I'm taking pictures of a flashbang." 

 2021 June 30, Tim Dunn, “How we made... Secrets of the London Underground”, in RAIL , number 934 , page 50 : While you see some of our exploration on camera, I also spent many happy hours between shoots with Chris Nix, digging out dozens of wonderful plans, maps and drawings of projects that I never knew existed, and some that never did exist. 

 A hunt or shooting competition .

 ( professional wrestling , slang ) An event that is unscripted or legitimate .

 The act of shooting; the discharge of a missile ; a shot . [ 1 ] 
 1627 (indicated as 1626 ) , Francis [Bacon] , “ (please specify the page, or |century=I to X) ”, in Sylua Syluarum: Or A Naturall Historie. In Ten Centuries.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] William Rawley   [ … ] ; [ p ] rinted by J [ ohn ] H [ aviland ] for William Lee   [ … ] , →OCLC : The Turkish bow giveth a very forcible shoot . 

 1612 , Michael Drayton , Poly-Olbion : One underneath his horse to get a shoot doth stalk. 

 A rush of water; a rapid .

 ( weaving ) A weft thread shot through the shed by the shuttle ; a pick . [ 1 ] 

 A shoat ; a young pig . [ 1 ] 

 ( mining ) A vein of ore running in the same general direction as the lode . [ 1 ] 
 1853 , Thomas McElrath, William Jewett Tenney, William Phipps Blake, The Mining Magazine and Journal of Geology, Mineralogy, Metallurgy : where to find a shoot of ore opposite one they may have taken away on a parallel lode 

 1901 , Frank Lee Hess, pubs.usgs.gov report. Rare Metals. TIN, TUNGSTEN, AND TANTALUM IN SOUTH DAKOTA.
 In the western dike is a shoot about 4 feet in diameter carrying a considerable sprinkling of cassiterite , ore which in quantity would undoubtedly be worth mining. The shoot contains a large amount of muscovite mica with quartz and very little or no feldspar ... 

 An inclined plane, either artificial or natural, down which timber, coal, ore, etc., are caused to slide; a chute . [ 1 ] 
 1891 , New South Wales. Supreme Court, The New South Wales Law Reports , volume 12 , page 238 : That there was no evidence before the jury that at the time of the accident the timber shoot was worked by the defendant company. 

 ( card games ) The act of taking all point cards in one hand.

 A seismic survey carried out with geophones in an attempt to detect oil .
 1980 , The Williston Basin, 1980 , page 159 : Once the last line of cable has been retrieved, there is little evidence that a shoot has been conducted. 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 ( hunt or shooting competition ) : turkey shoot 

 airshoot 
 angle-shoot 
 bamboo shoot 
 Coopers Shoot 
 duck shoot 
 foreshoot 
 green shoots 
 inshoot 
 intershoot 
 longshoot 
 McLeods Shoot 
 microshoot 
 midshoot 
 misshoot 
 offshoot 
 oreshoot 
 overshoot 
 reshoot 
 shoot bug 
 shoot fly 
 shootless 
 shootlet 
 shootlike 
 shootling 
 shootward 
 shoot wrestling 
 Skinners Shoot 
 slop shoot 
 slopshoot 
 sugarcane grassy shoot disease 
 the whole bang shoot 
 trap shoot 
 upshoot 
 yellow shoot disease 

 Descendants
 [ edit ] 

 → Catalan: xut 

 → Portuguese: chuto 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 emerging stem and embryonic leaves of a new plant

 Bashkir: үҫенте ( üśente ) 

 Belarusian: парастак   m ( parastak ) 

 Bulgarian: издънка   (bg)   f ( izdănka ) , филиз   (bg)   m ( filiz ) 

 Czech: výhonek   (cs)   m 

 Danish: skud   (da)   n 

 Dutch: scheut   (nl)   f , spruit   (nl)   f 

 Esperanto: ŝoso 

 Estonian: oras   (et) , tärge , võrse , alge   (et) , võrsik 

 Finnish: verso   (fi) , taimi   (fi) 

 French: pousse   (fr)   f 

 Galician: brote   (gl)   m , rebento   (gl)   m , bertón   m , xeno   m , gameito   m 

 Georgian: ყლორტი ( q̇lorṭi ) 

 German: Ableger   (de)   m 

 Greek:
 Ancient Greek: βλαστός   m ( blastós ) 

 Hebrew: נֵצֶר   (he)   m ( nétzer ) 

 Hungarian: hajtás   (hu) 

 Ingrian: oras , itu 

 Irish: beangán   m , buinneán   (ga)   m 

 Italian: getto   (it)   m , germoglio   (it) , virgulto   (it)   m , pollone   (it)   m 

 Kazakh: өскін ( öskin ) , өркен ( örken ) 

 Latin: germen   n , pampinus   m or f , turio   m 

 Māori: kotete ( new stem ) , kotete , mātātupu , pihi ( refers specifically to the first shoot ) , nihoniho 

 Middle English: spryng 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: skudd   n 
 Nynorsk: skot   n , skott   n 

 Persian: نهال   (fa) ( nahâl ) 

 Polish: pęd   (pl)   m 

 Portuguese: rebento   (pt)   m , broto   (pt)   m 

 Romanian: vlăstar   (ro)   n , lăstar   (ro)   n 

 Russian: побе́г   (ru)   m ( pobég ) 

 Scottish Gaelic: bachlag   f , ògan   m 

 Spanish: retoño   (es)   m , vástago   (es)   m , pimpollo   (es)   m , vástiga   f 

 Tagalog: suloy , talbos ( vegetable ) 

 Tamil: முளை   (ta) ( muḷai ) , தளிர்   (ta) ( taḷir ) 

 Thai: หน่อ   (th) ( nɔ̀ɔ ) 

 Tocharian B: kaume 

 Turkish: budak   (tr) 
 Ottoman Turkish: بوداق ( budak ) 

 photography session

 Bulgarian: снимки   (bg)   f   pl ( snimki ) 

 Estonian: pildistamine 

 Finnish: kuvaukset   (fi)   pl 

 French: prise de photos   f , séance photo   f 

 Hungarian: felvétel   (hu) , fényképezés   (hu) 

 Italian: ripresa   (it)   f 

 Japanese: 撮影   (ja) ( satsuei ) 

 Polish: sesja   (pl)   f 

 Russian: съёмка   (ru)   f ( sʺjómka ) 

 Spanish: sesión fotográfica   f 

 Tamil: படப்பிடிப்பு   (ta) ( paṭappiṭippu ) 

 References
 [ edit ] 

 ↑ 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 “ shoot ”, in Webster’s Revised Unabridged Dictionary , Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam , 1913 , →OCLC . 

 Etymology 2
 [ edit ] 

 Minced oath for shit .

 Interjection
 [ edit ] 

 shoot 

 A mild expletive, expressing disbelief or dismay 
 Didn't you have a concert tonight? — Shoot ! I forgot! I have to go and get ready… 

 1951 July 16, J[erome] D[avid] Salinger , The Catcher in the Rye , Boston, Mass.: Little, Brown and Company , →OCLC , page 96 : She practically stopped dancing, and started looking over everybody’s heads to see if she could see him. “Oh, shoot !” she said. I'd just about broken her heart—I really had. 

 Synonyms
 [ edit ] 

 ( mild expletive ) : darn , dash , fiddlesticks , shucks , sugar 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 expressing disbelief

 Finnish: perhana   (fi) 

 French: mercredi   (fr) , mince   (fr) , zut   (fr) 

 German: Scheibe   (de) 

 Hungarian: bakker   (hu) , basszus   (hu) , basszuskulcs   (hu) 

 Italian: incredibile   (it) , inaudito   (it) 

 Portuguese: porcaria   (pt)   f , droga   (pt)   f 

 Russian: чёрт!   (ru) ( čort! ) , блин!   (ru) ( blin! ) 

 Tamil: ஐயோ   (ta) ( aiyō ) , அடடே   (ta) ( aṭaṭē ) 

 expressing disdain

 Dutch: stik   (nl) 

 Finnish: hemmetti , helkkari   (fi) 

 French: mercredi   (fr) , mince   (fr) , zut   (fr) 

 Hungarian: szamárság   (hu) , marhaság   (hu) 

 Italian: dannazione   (it) , accidenti   (it) , maledizione   (it) 

 Japanese: やばい   (ja) 

 Polish: kurcze!   (pl) , kurde!   (pl) 

 Russian: блин!   (ru) ( blin! ) 

 Spanish: miércoles   (es) , rayos   (es) , mecachis   (es) , caray   (es) , chuta   (es) , caramba   (es) , dios   (es) 

 Tamil: ச்சீ ( ccī ) , ஐயே   (ta) ( aiyē ) 

 The translations below need to be checked and inserted above into the appropriate translation tables. See instructions at Wiktionary:Entry layout § Translations . 

 Translations to be checked

 German: (please verify ) Mist   (de) ! (1), (please verify ) verdammt   (de) ! (1), (please verify ) Los   (de) ! (2), (please verify ) leg los   (de) ! (2)

 Anagrams
 [ edit ] 

 toosh , Hoots , Htoos , hoots , Sotho , O-shot , sooth 

 French
 [ edit ] 

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 Audio ( France ( Lyon ) ) : ( file ) 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 shoot   m ( plural shoots ) 

 shot ( in sports ) 

 shoot 'em up 

 shot ( of drugs ) 

 photoshoot 

 Further reading
 [ edit ] 

 “ shoot ”, in Trésor de la langue française informatisé [ Digitized Treasury of the French Language ], 2012 

 Middle English
 [ edit ] 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 shoot 

 ( Late Middle English ) alternative form of schot 

 Portuguese
 [ edit ] 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 shoot   m ( invariable ) 

 pre-reform spelling (used until 1943 in Brazil and 1911 in Portugal) of chute 
 1902 June 25, “Foot-ball: victoria dos brasileiros contra os inglezes”, Sport , in Correio Paulistano , volume 28 , number 13.952 , São Paulo, page 2 , column 5: Nem assim foi mais feliz, pois dentro em pouco, com um shoot estupendo, o sr. Ibanez Salles marcou para os brasileiros um terceiro goal , que foi tambem o ultimo. (please add an English translation of this quotation) 

 Usage notes
 [ edit ] 

 This spelling coexisted with chute .

 Retrieved from " https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=shoot&oldid=92501789 "

 Categories : English 1-syllable words 
 English terms with IPA pronunciation 
 English terms with audio pronunciation 
 English 2-syllable words 
 Rhymes:English/uːt 
 Rhymes:English/uːt/1 syllable 
 English terms with homophones 
 English terms inherited from Proto-West Germanic 
 English terms derived from Proto-Indo-European 
 English terms derived from Middle English 
 English terms derived from Proto-Germanic 
 English terms inherited from Middle English 
 English terms derived from Old English 
 English terms derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *(s)kewd- 
 English terms derived from Proto-West Germanic 
 English terms inherited from Proto-Indo-European 
 English terms inherited from Proto-Germanic 
 English terms inherited from Old English 
 English lemmas 
 English verbs 
 English transitive verbs 
 English terms with usage examples 
 English terms with quotations 
 English intransitive verbs 
 en:Gambling 
 English slang 
 English colloquialisms 
 en:Film genres 
 en:Television 
 en:Surfing 
 English terms with obsolete senses 
 English informal terms 
 English ditransitive verbs 
 en:Sports 
 en:Wrestling 
 en:Professional wrestling 
 en:Nautical 
 en:Carpentry 
 en:Card games 
 en:Aviation 
 en:Surveying 
 English nouns 
 English countable nouns 
 en:Weaving 
 en:Mining 
 English interjections 
 English strong verbs 
 English euphemisms 
 English irregular verbs 
 en:Pain 
 en:Photography 
 en:Talking 
 en:Plant anatomy 
 French terms with audio pronunciation 
 French lemmas 
 French nouns 
 French countable nouns 
 French masculine nouns 
 English minced oaths 
 Middle English variant lemmas 
 Late Middle English 
 Portuguese lemmas 
 Portuguese nouns 
 Portuguese terms spelled with SH 
 Portuguese countable nouns 
 Portuguese indeclinable nouns 
 Portuguese masculine nouns 
 Portuguese forms superseded in 1943 
 Portuguese forms superseded in 1911 
 Portuguese terms with quotations 

 Hidden categories: Pages with etymon 
 English entries with etymon 
 Pages with etymology trees 
 English entries with etymology trees 
 Pages using etymon with no ID 
 English entries referencing pages with etymology sections missing etymons 
 Pages with entries 
 Pages with 4 entries 
 Quotation templates to be cleaned 
 Entries with translation boxes 
 Terms with Afrikaans translations 
 Terms with Aklanon translations 
 Terms with Albanian translations 
 Terms with Arabic translations 
 Terms with Hijazi Arabic translations 
 Terms with Armenian translations 
 Terms with Assamese translations 
 Terms with Azerbaijani translations 
 Terms with Bashkir translations 
 Terms with Basque translations 
 Terms with Belarusian translations 
 Terms with Bengali translations 
 Terms with Bulgarian translations 
 Terms with Burmese translations 
 Terms with Catalan translations 
 Terms with Cantonese translations 
 Cantonese terms with redundant transliterations 
 Terms with Mandarin translations 
 Mandarin terms with redundant transliterations 
 Terms with Chukchi translations 
 Terms with Czech translations 
 Terms with Danish translations 
 Terms with Dutch translations 
 Terms with Esperanto translations 
 Terms with Estonian translations 
 Terms with Faroese translations 
 Terms with Finnish translations 
 Terms with French translations 
 Terms with West Frisian translations 
 Terms with Galician translations 
 Terms with Georgian translations 
 Terms with German translations 
 Terms with Greek translations 
 Terms with Hebrew translations 
 Terms with Hindi translations 
 Terms with Hungarian translations 
 Terms with Icelandic translations 
 Terms with Indonesian translations 
 Terms with Ingrian translations 
 Terms with Irish translations 
 Terms with Italian translations 
 Terms with Japanese translations 
 Terms with Karachay-Balkar translations 
 Terms with Kazakh translations 
 Terms with Khmer translations 
 Terms with Korean translations 
 Terms with Kyrgyz translations 
 Terms with Lao translations 
 Terms with Latgalian translations 
 Terms with Latvian translations 
 Terms with Lithuanian translations 
 Terms with Low German translations 
 Terms with Luxembourgish translations 
 Terms with Macedonian translations 
 Terms with Malay translations 
 Terms with Brunei Malay translations 
 Terms with Māori translations 
 Terms with Middle English translations 
 Terms with Mongolian translations 
 Terms with Navajo translations 
 Terms with Norman translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Bokmål translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Nynorsk translations 
 Terms with Occitan translations 
 Terms with Old East Slavic translations 
 Terms with Old English translations 
 Terms with Persian translations 
 Terms with Polish translations 
 Terms with Portuguese translations 
 Terms with Romagnol translations 
 Terms with Romanian translations 
 Terms with Russian translations 
 Terms with Serbo-Croatian translations 
 Terms with Slovak translations 
 Terms with Slovene translations 
 Terms with Spanish translations 
 Terms with Swahili translations 
 Terms with Swedish translations 
 Terms with Tagalog translations 
 Terms with Tajik translations 
 Terms with Tamil translations 
 Terms with Tatar translations 
 Terms with Tày translations 
 Terms with Telugu translations 
 Terms with Tetum translations 
 Terms with Thai translations 
 Terms with Tocharian B translations 
 Terms with Turkish translations 
 Terms with Turkmen translations 
 Terms with Tuvan translations 
 Terms with Ukrainian translations 
 Terms with Urdu translations 
 Terms with Uyghur translations 
 Terms with Uzbek translations 
 Terms with Venetan translations 
 Terms with Vietnamese translations 
 Terms with Welsh translations 
 Terms with Yakut translations 
 Terms with Yiddish translations 
 Requests for translations into Basque 
 Requests for translations into Georgian 
 Requests for translations into Malay 
 Requests for translations into Thai 
 Requests for translations into Turkish 
 Terms with Aromanian translations 
 Terms with Ottoman Turkish translations 
 Requests for review of Georgian translations 
 Terms with Tibetan translations 
 Terms with Ancient Greek translations 
 Terms with Latin translations 
 Terms with Scottish Gaelic translations 
 Russian links with redundant target parameters 
 Requests for review of German translations 
 Requests for translations of Portuguese quotations 

 This page was last edited on 6 September 2026, at 11:39.

 Definitions and other text are available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 

 Privacy policy 

 About Wiktionary 

 Disclaimers 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 shoot 

 54 languages 

 Add topic