URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/baptize
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T14:56:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Baptize - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Baptize - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of baptize 

 baptize (v.) 

 "to administer the rite of baptism to," c. 1300, from Old French batisier "be baptized; baptize; give a name to" (11c.), from Latin baptizare , from Greek baptizein "immerse, dip in water," also figuratively, "be over one's head" (in debt, etc.), "to be soaked (in wine);" in Christian use, "baptize." This is from baptein "to dip, steep, dye, color," which is perhaps from PIE root *gwabh- (1) "to dip, sink." Christian baptism originally was a full immersion. Related: Baptized ; baptizing .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to baptize 

 baptise (v.) 

 chiefly British English spelling of baptize ; for spelling, see -ize . Related: Baptised ; baptising .

 baptism (n.) 

 "initiatory sacrament of the Christian faith, consisting in immersion in or application of water by an authorized administrator," c. 1300, bapteme , from Old French batesme, bapteme "baptism" (11c., Modern French baptême ), from Latin baptismus , from Greek baptismos , noun of action from baptizein (see baptize ). The -s- was restored in late 14c.

 The signification, qualifications, and methods of administration have been much debated. The figurative sense of "any ceremonial ablution as a sign of purification, dedication, etc." is from late 14c. Old English used fulluht in this sense (John the Baptist was Iohannes se Fulluhtere ).

 Phrase baptism of fire "a soldier's first experience of battle" (1857) translates French baptême de feu ; the phrase originally was ecclesiastical Greek baptisma pyros and meant "the grace of the Holy Spirit as imparted through baptism;" later it was used of martyrdom, especially by burning.

 baptist 
 unbaptized 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 christen 

 c. 1200, "to baptize into the Christian church," from Old English cristnian "to baptize," literally "to make Christian," from cristen "Christian" (see Christian). Especially to baptize and name as an infant, hence "give a name to at baptism" (mid-15c.) and the general sense of "g

 dip 

 Old English dyppan "to plunge or immerse temporarily in water, to baptize by immersion," from Proto-Germanic *daupejanan...(source also of Old Norse deypa "to dip," Danish døbe "to baptize," Old Frisian depa, Dutch dopen, German taufen, Gothic...daupjan "to baptize"), related to Old English diepan "immerse, dip," and probably a causative of Proto-Germanic *deup- "deep...

 Sabian 

 a Gnostic sect akin to the later Mandæans (if the word derives, as some linguists think it does, from Arabic ch'bae "to baptize...

 Anabaptist 

 Modern branches (notably Mennonites and Amish) baptize only once (adults) and do not actively seek converts....

 name 

 "word by which a person or thing is denoted," Old English nama, noma "name, reputation," from Proto-Germanic *naman- (source also of Old Saxon namo, Old Frisian nama, Old High German namo, German Name, Middle Dutch name, Dutch naam, Old Norse nafn, Gothic namo "name"), from PIE r

 mane 

 "growth of long hair on the back of the neck and shoulders," characteristic of the horse, lion, and some other animals, Old English manu "mane of a horse," from Proto-Germanic *mano (source also of Old Norse mön, Old Frisian mana, Middle Dutch mane, Dutch manen, Old High German m

 amen 

 Old English, from Late Latin amen, from Ecclesiastical Greek amen, from Hebrew amen "truth," used adverbially as an expression of agreement (as in Deuteronomy xxvii.26, I Kings i.36), from Semitic root a-m-n "to be trustworthy, confirm, support." Compare similar use of Modern Eng

 mean 

 "intend, have in mind;" Middle English mēnen, from Old English mænan "intend (to do something), plan; indicate (a certain object) or convey (a certain sense) when using a word," from Proto-West Germanic *menjojanan (source also of Old Frisian mena "to signify," Old Saxon menian "

 call 

 mid-13c., "cry out; call for, summon, invoke; ask for, demand, order; give a name to, apply by way of designation," from Old Norse kalla "cry loudly, summon in a loud voice; name, call by name," from Proto-Germanic *kall- (source also of Middle Dutch kallen "speak, say, tell," Du

 addict 

 1530s (implied in addicted) "to devote or give up (oneself) to a habit or occupation," from Latin addictus, past participle of addicere "to deliver, award, yield; make over, sell," properly "give one's assent to," but figuratively "to devote, consecrate; sacrifice, sell out, betr

 Share baptize 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/baptize Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/baptize">Etymology of baptize by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of baptize. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/baptize Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of baptize," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/baptize. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of baptize." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/baptize. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of baptize." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/baptize (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near baptize 
 baptise 
 baptism 
 baptismal 
 baptist 
 baptistry 
 baptize 
 Baqubah 
 bar 
 Bar Mitzvah 
 Barabbas 
 barb 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix