URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/absinthe
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:14:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Absinthe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Absinthe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of absinthe 

 absinthe (n.) 

 also absinth (though properly that means "wormwood"), "bitter, pale-green alcoholic liqueur distilled from wine mixed with wormwood" ( Artemisia Absinthium ), 1842, from French absinthe , "essence of wormwood" (short for extrait d'absinthe ) from Latin absinthum "wormwood," from Greek apsinthion , which is perhaps from Persian (compare Persian aspand , of the same meaning). The wormwood plant itself is figurative of "bitter" sorrow; it was known as absinth in English from c. 1500; Old English used the word in the Latin form. The drink itself attained popularity from its heavy use by French soldiers in Algiers. Related: Absinthal ; absinthic ; absinthism .

 also from 1842 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wormwood 

 c. 1400, folk etymology of Old English wermod "wormwood, absinthe," related to vermouth, but the ultimate etymology is unknown...

 cordial 

 c. 1400, "of or pertaining to the heart" (a sense now obsolete or rare, replaced by cardiac), from Medieval Latin cordialis "of or for the heart," from Latin cor (genitive cordis) "heart," from PIE root *kerd- "heart." Meaning "heartfelt, proceeding from the heart as the supposed

 common 

 c. 1300, "belonging to all, owned or used jointly, general, of a public nature or character," from Old French comun "common, general, free, open, public" (9c., Modern French commun), from Latin communis "in common, public, shared by all or many; general, not specific; familiar, n

 old 

 Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon, Kentish) "antique, of ancient origin, belonging to antiquity, primeval; long in existence or use; near the end of the normal span of life; elder, mature, experienced," from Proto-Germanic *althaz "grown up, adult" (source also of Old F

 man 

 "a featherless plantigrade biped mammal of the genus Homo" [Century Dictionary], Old English man, mann "human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero;" also "servant, vassal, adult male considered as under the control of another person," from Proto-Germanic *mann- (source

 love 

 Old English lufu "feeling of love; romantic sexual attraction; affection; friendliness; the love of God; Love as an abstraction or personification," from Proto-Germanic *lubo (source also of Old High German liubi "joy," German Liebe "love;" Old Norse, Old Frisian, Dutch lof; Germ

 denomination 

 late 14c., denominacioun, "a naming, act of giving a name to," from Old French denominacion "nominating, naming," from Latin denominationem (nominative denominatio) "a calling by anything other than the proper name, metonymy," noun of action from past-participle stem of denominar

 martyr 

 "one who bears testimony to faith," especially "one who willingly suffers death rather than surrender his or her religious faith," specifically "one of the Christians who in former times were put to death because they would not renounce their beliefs," late Old English martyr, fr

 lip-service 

 "something proffered but not performed, service with the lips only; insincere profession of good will," 1640s, from lip (n.) + service (n.1). Earlier in same sense was lip-labour (1530s). This was a general pattern in 16c.-17c., for example lip-wisdom (1580s), the wisdom of those

 theater 

 late 14c., "open air place in ancient times for viewing spectacles and plays," from Old French theatre (12c., Modern French théâtre, improperly accented) and directly from Latin theatrum "play-house, theater; stage; spectators in a theater" (source also of Spanish, Italian teatro

 Share absinthe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/absinthe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/absinthe">Etymology of absinthe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of absinthe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/absinthe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of absinthe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/absinthe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of absinthe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/absinthe. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of absinthe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/absinthe (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near absinthe 
 absence 
 absent 
 absentee 
 absenteeism 
 absent-minded 
 absinthe 
 absit omen 
 absolute 
 absolute zero 
 absolutely 
 absoluteness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix