URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/geranium
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:58:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Geranium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Geranium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of geranium 

 geranium (n.) 

 1540s, from Latin geranium , from Greek geranion , the plant name, diminutive of geranos "crane" (cognate with Latin grus ; see crane (n.)). So called from shape resemblance of seed pods to cranes' bills; the native name in English also was cranebill . As a color name from 1842.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to geranium 

 crane (n.) 

 large grallatorial bird with very long legs, beak, and neck, Old English cran , common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon krano , Old High German krano , German Kranich , and, with unexplained change of consonant, Old Norse trani , Danish trane ), from PIE *gere-no- , suffixed form of root *gere- (2) "to cry hoarsely," also the name of the crane (cognates: Greek geranos , Latin grus , Welsh garan , Lithuanian garnys "heron, stork"). Thus the name is perhaps an echo of its cry in ancient ears.

 Misapplied to herons and storks. The gray European crane was "formerly abundant in marshy places in Great Britain, and prized as food" [OED], but was extinct there through much of 20c.

 Use for "machine with a long arm for moving weights" is attested from late 13c. (a sense also in equivalent words in German, French, and Greek). The constellation was one of the 11 added to Ptolemy's list in the 1610s by Flemish cartographer Petrus Plancius after Europeans began to explore the Southern Hemisphere.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 remorse 

 "intense and painful self-condemnation and penitence due to consciousness of guilt; the pain of a guilty conscience," late 14c., from Old French remors (Modern French remords) and directly from Medieval Latin remorsum "a biting back or in return," noun use of neuter past particip

 indulgence 

 mid-14c., in the Church sense, "a freeing from temporal punishment for sin, remission from punishment for sin that remains due after absolution," from Old French indulgence or directly from Latin indulgentia "complaisance, a yielding; fondness, tenderness, affection; remission," 

 Egypt 

 Old English Egipte "the Egyptians," from French Egypte, from Greek Aigyptos "the river Nile, Egypt," from Amarna Hikuptah, corresponding to Egyptian Ha(t)-ka-ptah "temple of the soul of Ptah," the creative god associated with Memphis, the ancient city of Egypt. Strictly one of th

 melancholy 

 c. 1300, melancolie, malencolie, "mental disorder characterized by sullenness, gloom, irritability, and propensity to causeless and violent anger," from Old French melancolie "black bile; ill disposition, anger, annoyance" (13c.), from Late Latin melancholia, from Greek melankhol

 catharsis 

 1770, "a bodily purging" (especially of the bowels), from Latinized form of Greek katharsis "purging, cleansing," from stem of kathairein "to purify, purge," from katharos "pure, clear of dirt, clean, spotless; open, free; clear of shame or guilt; purified" (with most of the exte

 rapport 

 1660s, "reference, relation, relationship," from French rapport "bearing, yield, produce; harmony, agreement, intercourse," back-formation from rapporter "bring back; refer to," from re- "again" (see re-) + apporter "to bring," from Latin apportare "to bring," from ad "to" (see a

 let 

 Old English lætan (Northumbrian leta) "to allow; to leave behind, depart from; leave undone; bequeath," also "to rent, put to rent or hire" (class VII strong verb; past tense let, leort, past participle gelæten), from Proto-Germanic *letan (source also of Old Saxon latan, Old Fri

 Beelzebub 

 Old English Belzebub, Philistine god worshipped at Ekron (II Kings i.2), from Latin, used in Vulgate for New Testament Greek beelzeboub, from Hebrew ba'al-z'bub "lord of the flies," from ba'al "lord" (see Baal) + z'bhubh "fly." The deity is said to have been worshipped as having 

 clue 

 "anything that guides or directs in an intricate case," 1590s, a special use of a revised spelling of clew "a ball of thread or yarn" (q.v.). The word, which is native Germanic, in Middle English was clewe, also cleue; some words borrowed from Old French in -ue, -eu also were spe

 Share geranium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/geranium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/geranium">Etymology of geranium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of geranium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/geranium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of geranium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/geranium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of geranium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/geranium. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of geranium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/geranium (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near geranium 
 geothermal 
 geotropism 
 *ger- 
 Gerald 
 Geraldine 
 geranium 
 Gerard 
 geratology 
 gerbera 
 gerbil 
 *gere- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix