URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chateau
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:30:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chateau - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chateau - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chateau 

 chateau (n.) 

 "large stately residence in the country, manor-house," c. 1739, from French château , from Old French chastel (12c.), from Latin castellum "castle" (see castle (n.)).
 also from c. 1739 

 Entries linking to chateau 

 castle (n.) 

 late Old English castel "village" (this sense from a biblical usage in Vulgar Latin); later "large building or series of connected buildings fortified for defense, fortress, stronghold" (late Old English), in this sense from Old North French castel (Old French chastel , 12c.; Modern French château ), from Latin castellum "a castle, fort, citadel, stronghold; fortified village," diminutive of castrum "fort," from Proto-Italic *kastro- "part, share;" cognate with Old Irish cather , Welsh caer "town" (probably related to castrare via notion of "cut off," from PIE root *kes- "to cut"). In early bibles, castle was used to translate Greek kome "village."

 Latin castrum in its plural castra was used for "military encampment, military post" and thus it came into Old English as ceaster and formed the -caster and -chester in place names. Spanish alcazar "castle" is from Arabic al-qasr , from Latin castrum .

 Castles in Spain "visionary project, vague imagination of possible wealth" translates 14c. French chastel en Espaigne (the imaginary castles sometimes stood in Brie, Asia, or Albania) and probably reflects the hopes of landless knights to establish themselves abroad. The statement that an (English) man's home is his castle is from 16c.

 THAT the house of every man is to him as his castle and fortress, as well for his defence against injuries and violence, as for his repose .... [Edward Coke, "Semaynes Case," 1604] 

 *kes- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to cut."

 It might form all or part of: caret ; cashier (v.) "dismiss;" cassation ; caste ; castellan ; castellated ; Castile ; castle ; castigate ; castrate ; castration ; chaste ; chastity ; chateau ; chatelaine ; Chester ; forecastle ; incest ; quash (v.) "make void, annul."

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit sastra- "knife, dagger;" Greek keazein "to split;" Latin carere "to be cut off from," cassus "empty, void;" Old Church Slavonic kosa "scythe."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 silhouette 

 But other theories refer it to Silhouette's brief tenure in office or a story that he decorated his chateau with such portraits...

 slang 

 1756, "special vocabulary of tramps or thieves" or any set of persons of low character, later "jargon of a particular profession" (1801). The sense of "very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty" is by 1818. Anatoly Liberman writes here an extensive account of 

 felon 

 c. 1300, "one who deceives or commits treason; one who is wicked or evil; evil-doer," used of Lucifer and Herod, from Old French felon "evil-doer, scoundrel, traitor, rebel, oath-breaker, the Devil" (9c.), from Medieval Latin fellonem (nominative fello) "evil-doer," which is of u

 father 

 Middle English fader, from Old English fæder "he who begets a child, nearest male ancestor;" also "any lineal male ancestor; the Supreme Being," and by late Old English, "one who exercises parental care over another," from Proto-Germanic *fader (source also of Old Saxon fadar, Ol

 folly 

 early 13c., "mental weakness; foolish behavior or character; unwise conduct" (in Middle English including wickedness, lewdness, madness), from Old French folie "folly, madness, stupidity" (12c.), from fol (see fool (n.)). From c. 1300 as "an example of foolishness;" sense of "cos

 dusk 

 "partial darkness, state between light and darkness, twilight," 1620s, from an earlier adjective dusk, from Middle English dosc (c. 1200) "obscure, not bright; tending to darkness, shadowy," having more to do with color than light, which is of uncertain origin, not found in Old E

 taboo 

 also tabu, 1777 (in Cook's "A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean"), "consecrated, inviolable, forbidden, unclean or cursed; prohibited to a certain class," explained in some English sources as being from Tongan (Polynesian language of the island of Tonga) ta-bu "sacred," from ta "mark" 

 virtual 

 late 14c., "influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent natural qualities," from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus "excellence, potency, efficacy," literally "manliness, manhood" (see virtue). The meaning "being something in essen

 fairy 

 c. 1300, fairie, "the country or home of supernatural or legendary creatures; fairyland," also "something incredible or fictitious," from Old French faerie "land of fairies, meeting of fairies; enchantment, magic, witchcraft, sorcery" (12c.), from fae "fay," from Latin fata "the 

 ring 

 [circular band] Old English hring "circlet of metal, especially one of a precious metal for wearing on the finger ornamentally, also a part of a mail coat; anything circular," from Proto-Germanic *hringaz "something curved, circle" (source also of Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hr

 Share chateau 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chateau Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chateau">Etymology of chateau by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chateau. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chateau Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chateau," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chateau. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chateau." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chateau. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chateau." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chateau (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chateau 
 chastise 
 chastisement 
 chastity 
 chasuble 
 chat 
 chateau 
 Chateaubriand 
 chatelaine 
 chatoyant 
 Chattahoochee 
 Chattanooga 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close