URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/malaria
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:16:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Malaria - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Malaria - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of malaria 

 malaria (n.) 

 1740, "unwholesome air, air contaminated with the poison producing intermittent and remittent fever," from Italian mal'aria, from mala aria , literally "bad air," from mala "bad" (fem. of malo , from Latin malus ; see mal- ) + aria "air" (see air (n.1)). Probably first used by Italian physician Francisco Torti (1658-1741). By 1866 it had come to be used of the disease itself (earlier malaria fever , by 1814). The disease, now known to be mosquito-borne, once was thought to be caused by foul air in marshy districts. Replaced native ague .
 also from 1740 

 Entries linking to malaria 

 ague (n.) 

 c. 1300, "acute fever," also (late 14c.) "malarial fever (involving episodes of chills and shivering)" from Old French ague "acute fever," from Medieval Latin (febris) acuta "sharp (fever)," from fem. of acutus "sharp" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce").

 air (n.1) 

 c. 1300, "invisible gases that surround the earth," from Old French air "atmosphere, breeze, weather" (12c.), from Latin aer "air, lower atmosphere, sky," from Greek aēr (genitive aeros ) "mist, haze, clouds," later "atmosphere" (perhaps related to aenai "to blow, breathe"), which is of unknown origin. It is possibly from a PIE *awer- and thus related to aeirein "to raise" and arteria "windpipe, artery" (see aorta ) on notion of "lifting, suspended, that which rises," but this has phonetic difficulties.

 In Homer mostly "thick air, mist;" later "air" as one of the four elements. Words for "air" in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air replaced native lyft , luft (see loft (n.)). In old chemistry, air (with a qualifying adjective) was used of any gas.

 To be in the air "in general awareness" is from 1875; up in the air "uncertain, doubtful" is from 1752. To build castles in the air "entertain visionary schemes that have no practical foundation" is from 1590s (also towers in the air ; in 17c. English had airmonger "one preoccupied with visionary projects"). Broadcasting sense (as in on the air , airplay ) is by 1927. To give (someone) the air "dismiss" is from 1900. Air pollution is attested by 1870. Air guitar is by 1983. Air traffic controller is from 1956.

 malarial 
 mal- 
 *mel- 
 *wer- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 aria 

 "melody for a single voice," 1775, from Italian aria, literally "air" (see air (n.1)). Historically considered, the aria marks a single moment in the course of a dramatic action. The text often consists of but a few words, many times repeated (as we find in Handel's oratorios, e

 fever 

 earlier also feaver, late Old English fefor, fefer "fever, temperature of the body higher than normal," from Latin febris "fever," related to fovere "to warm, heat," which is probably from PIE root *dhegh- "burn" (source also of Gothic dags, Old English dæg "day," originally "the

 algorithm 

 1690s, "Arabic system of computation," from French algorithme, refashioned (under mistaken connection with Greek arithmos "number") from Old French algorisme "the Arabic numeral system" (13c.), from Medieval Latin algorismus, a mangled transliteration of Arabic al-Khwarizmi "nati

 incarceration 

 "fact of being imprisoned," 1530s, from Medieval Latin incarcerationem (nominative incarceratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of incarcerare "to imprison," from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + carcer "prison, an enclosed space," from Proto-Italic *kar-kr(o)-, whi

 count 

 late 14c., "to enumerate, assign numerals to successively and in order; repeat the numerals in order," also "to reckon among, include," from Old French conter "to count, add up," also "tell a story," from Latin computare "to count, sum up, reckon together," from com "with, togeth

 remember 

 mid-14c., remembren, "keep or bear (something or someone) in mind, retain in the memory, preserve unforgotten," from Old French remembrer "remember, recall, bring to mind" (11c.), from Latin rememorari "recall to mind, remember," from re- "again" (see re-) + memorari "be mindful 

 orange 

 late 14c., in reference to the fruit of the orange tree (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), an alteration of Arabic naranj, from P

 dismay 

 c. 1300, dismaien, "become or be alarmed, upset, or frightened; to confound, break down the courage of by danger or difficulty or fear of calamity, fill with despairing apprehension;" perhaps formed in Anglo-French or Middle English from dis-, here probably intensive (see dis-), 

 Egypt 

 Old English Egipte "the Egyptians," from French Egypte, from Greek Aigyptos "the river Nile, Egypt," from Amarna Hikuptah, corresponding to Egyptian Ha(t)-ka-ptah "temple of the soul of Ptah," the creative god associated with Memphis, the ancient city of Egypt. Strictly one of th

 Share malaria 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/malaria Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/malaria">Etymology of malaria by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of malaria. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/malaria Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of malaria," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/malaria. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of malaria." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/malaria. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of malaria." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/malaria (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near malaria 
 malamute 
 malapert 
 malaprop 
 malapropism 
 malapropos 
 malaria 
 malarial 
 malarkey 
 malassimilation 
 Malawi 
 malaxation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix