URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiara
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:37:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tiara - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tiara - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tiara 

 tiara (n.) 

 1550s, "turban-like head-dress of the Persian kings" (also worn by men of rank), from Latin tiara , from Greek tiara , a word of Oriental origin. It is attested earlier in Englished form tiar (1510s). As a richly jeweled headband in Western wear, 1650s ( tiar ; 1718 as tiara ). Related: Tiaraed .
 also from 1550s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hat 

 Old English hæt "hat, head covering" (variously glossing Latin pileus, galerus, mitra, tiara), from Proto-Germanic *hattuz...

 contrite 

 "broken in spirit by a sense of guilt, conscience-stricken and resolved to not sin again," c. 1300, from Old French contrit (12c.) and directly from Latin contritus, literally "worn out, ground to pieces," in Late Latin "penitent," past participle of conterere "to grind," from as

 address 

 early 14c., "to guide, aim, or direct," from Old French adrecier "go straight toward; straighten, set right; point, direct" (13c.), from Vulgar Latin *addirectiare "make straight" (source also of Spanish aderezar, Italian addirizzare), from ad "to" (see ad-) + *directiare "make s

 boggle 

 1590s, "to start with fright (as a startled horse does), shy, take alarm," from Middle English bugge "specter" (among other things, supposed to scare horses at night); see bug (n.); also compare bogey (n.1), boggart. The meaning " hesitate, stop as if afraid to proceed in fear of

 halcyon 

 "calm, quiet, peaceful," 1540s, in halcyon dayes (translating Latin alcyonei dies, Greek alkyonides hemerai), 14 days of calm weather at the winter solstice, when a mythical bird (also identified with the kingfisher) was said to breed in a nest floating on calm seas. The name of 

 concept 

 "a general notion, the immediate object of a thought," 1550s, from Medieval Latin conceptum "draft, abstract," in classical Latin "(a thing) conceived," from concep-, past-participle stem of concipere "to take in and hold; become pregnant," from con-, here perhaps an intensive pr

 clean 

 Old English clæne "free from dirt or filth, unmixed with foreign or extraneous matter; morally pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open," of beasts, "not forbidden by ceremonial law to eat," from West Germanic *klainja- "clear, pure" (source also of Old Saxon kleni "dainty, deli

 moral 

 mid-14c., "associated with or characterized by right behavior," also "associated with or concerning conduct or moral principles" (good or bad), from Old French moral (14c.) and directly from Latin moralis "proper behavior of a person in society," literally "pertaining to manners,

 recreation 

 late 14c., recreacioun, "refreshment or curing of a person, refreshment by eating," from Old French recreacion (13c.), from Latin recreationem (nominative recreatio) "recovery from illness," noun of action from past participle stem of recreare "to refresh, restore, make anew, rev

 dignity 

 c. 1200, "state of being worthy," from Old French dignite "dignity, privilege, honor," from Latin dignitatem (nominative dignitas) "worthiness," from dignus "worth (n.), worthy, proper, fitting," from PIE *dek-no-, suffixed form of root *dek- "to take, accept." From c. 1300 as "a

 Share tiara 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiara Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiara">Etymology of tiara by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tiara. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiara Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tiara," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiara. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tiara." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiara. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tiara." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiara (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tiara 
 thyroxine 
 thyrsus 
 thyself 
 ti 
 Tia Maria 
 tiara 
 Tib 
 Tiber 
 Tiberius 
 Tibert 
 Tibet 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix