URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Parthian
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:43:45Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Parthian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Parthian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Parthian 

 Parthian (n.) 

 1520s, native or inhabitant of Parthia (ancient kingdom northeast of Persia in western Asia), from Old Persian Parthava- "Parthian," dialectal variant of the stem Parsa- , source of Persia . Partienes (plural) "Parthians" is attested from c. 1300.

 As an adjective, "of or pertaining to the Parthians," by 1580s. The phrase Parthian shot is a figurative reference to their horsemen, who were expert at racing forward, turning, and shooting arrows backward at the moment of retreat. The exact phrase is attested by 1832; the image itself was in use long before (for example Parthian fight , 1630s).

 Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight ["Cymbeline," Act I, Scene VII]
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to Parthian 

 Persia 

 c. 1200, Perse , "land of the Persians," from Latin Persia "Persia," from Greek Persis , from Old Persian Parsa (cognate with Persian Fars , Hebrew Paras , Arabic Faris ).

 Pahlavi (n.) 

 1773, Iranian language spoken in Persia 3c.-10c., the language of the sacred books of the Zoroastrians, from Persian Pahlavi , from Old Persian Parthava "Parthia" (see Parthian ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 parchment 

 The form of the word was possibly influenced in Vulgar Latin by Latin parthica (pellis) "Parthian (leather)."...

 Asian 

 late 14c., "inhabitant of Asia (Minor)," from Latin Asianus (adjective and noun, "belonging to the province of Asia;" "an inhabitant of Asia"), from Greek Asianos "Asiatic," from Asia (see Asia). It ousted Asiatic as the preferred term mid-20c. The term "Asiatic" has come to be 

 fight 

 Old English feohtan "to combat, contend with weapons, strive; attack; gain by fighting, win" (intransitive; class III strong verb; past tense feaht, past participle fohten), from Proto-Germanic *fe(u)hta (source also of Old High German fehtan, German fechten, Middle Dutch and Dut

 Albuquerque 

 city in New Mexico, founded 1706 and named for Spanish administrator and viceroy of Mexico Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, Duque de Alburquerque (1617-1676); the name subsequently was altered by association with Portuguese hero Alfonso d'Albuquerque (1453-1515), the "Portuguese 

 Gothic 

 "of the Goths," the ancient Germanic people, "pertaining to the Goths or their language," 1610s, from Late Latin Gothicus, from Gothi, Greek Gothoi (see Goth). Old English had Gotisc. As a noun, "the language of the Goths," from 1757. Gothic was used by 17c. scholars to mean "Ger

 icon 

 also ikon, 1570s, "image, figure, picture," also "statue," from Late Latin icon, from Greek eikon "likeness, image, portrait; image in a mirror; a semblance, phantom image;" in philosophy, "an image in the mind," related to eikenai "be like, look like," which is of uncertain orig

 election 

 c. 1300, eleccioun, "act of choosing" someone to occupy a position, elevation to office" (whether by one person or a body of electors); also "the holding of a vote by a body of electors by established procedure; the time and place of such a vote," from Anglo-French eleccioun, Old

 loop 

 late 14c., "a fold or doubling of cloth, rope, leather, cord, etc.," of uncertain origin. OED favors a Celtic origin (compare Gaelic lub "bend," Irish lubiam), which in English was perhaps influenced by or blended with Old Norse hlaup "a leap, run" (see leap (v.)). As a feature o

 mood 

 "emotional condition, state of mind as regards passion or feeling," c. 1300, from Old English mod "heart, frame of mind, spirit; courage, arrogance, pride; power, violence" (also used to translate Latin animus, mens), from Proto-Germanic *mōda- (source also of Old Saxon mod "mind

 diaphragm 

 late 14c., diafragma, in anatomy, "muscular membrane which separates the thorax from the abdominal cavity in mammals," from Late Latin diaphragma, from Greek diaphragma "partition, barrier, muscle which divides the thorax from the abdomen," from diaphrassein "to barricade," from 

 Share Parthian 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Parthian Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Parthian">Etymology of Parthian by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Parthian. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Parthian Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Parthian," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Parthian. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Parthian." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Parthian. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Parthian." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Parthian (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Parthian 
 partaker 
 parterre 
 parthenic 
 parthenogenesis 
 Parthenon 
 Parthian 
 parti- 
 partial 
 partiality 
 partially 
 partialness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix