URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ghoul
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T14:59:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ghoul - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ghoul - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ghoul 

 ghoul (n.) 

 1786, goul , in the English translation of William Beckford's Orientalist novel "Vathek" (which was written in French), from Arabic ghul , an evil spirit that robs graves and feeds on corpses, from ghala "he seized."
 also from 1786 

 Entries linking to ghoul 

 Algol 

 variable star (Beta Persei) in the constellation Perseus, late 14c., literally "the Demon," from Arabic al-ghul "the demon" (see ghoul ). It corresponds, in modern representations of the constellation, to the gorgon's head Perseus holds, but probably it was so called because it visibly varies in brightness every three days, which sets it apart from other bright stars.

 The computer language (1959) is a contraction of algo(rithmic) l(anguage) ; see algorithm .

 ghoulish (adj.) 

 1840, from ghoul + -ish . Related: Ghoulishly ; ghoulishness .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 body 

 Middle English bodi, from Old English bodig "trunk of a man or beast; the whole physical structure of a human or animal; material frame, material existence of a human; main or principal part of anything," related to Old High German botah, but otherwise of unknown origin. Not else

 perpendicular 

 late 15c., perpendiculer, of a line, "lying at right angles to the horizon" (in astronomy, navigation, etc.), from an earlier adverb (late 14c.), "at right angles to the horizon," from Old French perpendiculer, from Late Latin perpendicularis "vertical, as a plumb line," from Lat

 family 

 early 15c., "servants of a household," from Latin familia "family servants, domestics collectively, the servants in a household," thus also "members of a household, the estate, property; the household, including relatives and servants," abstract noun formed from famulus "servant,

 conform 

 mid-14c., confourmen, "be obedient (to God), comply," from Old French conformer "conform (to), agree (to), make or be similar, be agreeable" (13c.) and directly from Latin conformare "to fashion, to form, to shape; educate; modify," from assimilated form of com "together" (see co

 ethnic 

 late 15c. (earlier ethnical, early 15c.) "pagan, heathen," from Late Latin ethnicus, from Greek ethnikos "of or for a nation, national," by some writers (Polybius, etc.) "adopted to the genius or customs of a people, peculiar to a people," and among the grammarians "suited to the

 conviction 

 mid-15c., "the proving or finding of guilt of an offense charged," from Late Latin convictionem (nominative convictio) "proof, refutation," noun of action from past-participle stem of convincere "to overcome decisively," from com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + v

 thalamus 

 plural thalami, 1753, "the receptacle of a flower," Modern Latin, from Latin thalamus "inner chamber, sleeping room" (hence, figuratively, "marriage, wedlock"), from Greek thalamos "inner chamber, bedroom," related to thalame "den, lair," tholos "vault, vaulted building." Used in

 cousin 

 early 13c., "a collateral blood relative more remote than a brother or sister" (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French cosin "nephew; kinsman; cousin" (12c., Modern French cousin), from Latin consobrinus "cousin," originally "mother's sister's son," from assimilated form of com 

 compromise 

 early 15c., "a joint promise to abide by an arbiter's decision," from Old French compromis (13c.), from Late Latin compromissus, past participle of compromittere "to make a mutual promise" (to abide by the arbiter's decision), from com "with, together" (see com-) + promittere "to

 rose 

 a fragrant shrub noted for its beauty and its thorns, cultivated from remote antiquity, Old English rose, from Latin rosa (source of Italian and Spanish rosa, French rose; also source of Dutch roos, German Rose, Swedish ros, Serbo-Croatian ruža, Polish róża, Russian roza, Lithuan

 Share ghoul 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ghoul Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ghoul">Etymology of ghoul by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ghoul. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ghoul Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ghoul," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ghoul. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ghoul." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ghoul. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ghoul." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ghoul (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ghoul 
 Ghibelline 
 *ghieh- 
 ghost 
 *ghos-ti- 
 ghostly 
 ghoul 
 ghoulish 
 *ghredh- 
 *ghrei- 
 *ghwer- 
 giant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix