URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/diphtheria
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:04:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Diphtheria - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Diphtheria - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of diphtheria 

 diphtheria (n.) 

 infectious disease, formerly frequently fatal, 1857, from French diphthérie , coined 1855 by physician Pierre Bretonneau (1778-1862) from Greek diphthera "prepared hide, leather," which is of unknown origin; the disease so called for the tough membrane that forms in the throat.

 Bretonneau's earlier name for it was diphthérite (1821), which had been Englished as diphtheritis (1826). Related: Diphtheritic .
 also from 1857 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 contagion 

 late 14c., "a communicable disease; a harmful or corrupting influence," from Old French contagion and directly from Latin contagionem (nominative contagio) "a touching, contact," often in a bad sense, "a contact with something physically or morally unclean, contagion," from conti

 testimony 

 c. 1400, "proof or demonstration of some fact, evidence, piece of evidence;" early 15c., "legal testimony, sworn statement of a witness," from Old North French testimonie (Old French testimoine 11c.), from Latin testimonium "evidence, proof, witness, attestation," from testis "a 

 zodiac 

 late 14c., from Old French zodiaque, from Latin zodiacus "zodiac," from Greek zodiakos (kyklos) "zodiac (circle)," literally "circle of little animals," from zodiaion, diminutive of zoion "animal" (from PIE root *gwei- "to live"). Libra is not an animal, but it was not a zodiac c

 university 

 c. 1300, "institution of higher learning," also "body of persons constituting a university," from Anglo-French université, Old French universite "universality; academic community" (13c.), from Medieval Latin universitatem (nominative universitas), "the whole, aggregate," in Late 

 Philistine 

 one of the Old Testament people of coastal Palestine who made war on the Israelites, early 14c., from Old French Philistin, from Late Latin Philistinus, from Late Greek Philistinoi (plural), from Hebrew P'lishtim, "people of P'lesheth" ("Philistia"); compare Akkadian Palastu, Egy

 adventure 

 c. 1200, aventure, auenture "that which happens by chance, fortune, luck," from Old French aventure (11c.) "chance, accident, occurrence, event, happening," from Latin adventura (res) "(a thing) about to happen," from fem. of adventurus, future participle of advenire "to come to,

 scissors 

 "pair of shears of medium or small size," late 14c., sisoures, also cisours, sesours, cisurs, etc., from Old French cisoires (plural) "shears," from Vulgar Latin *cisoria (plural) "cutting instrument," from *cisus (in compounds such as Latin excisus, past participle of excidere "

 schedule 

 late 14c., sedule, cedule "ticket, label, slip of paper with writing on it" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French cedule (Modern French cédule), from Late Latin schedula "strip of paper" (in Medieval Latin also "a note, schedule"), diminutive of Latin scheda, scida "one of the 

 attrition 

 early 15c., attricioun, "a breaking;" 1540s, "abrasion, scraping, the rubbing of one thing against another," from Latin attritionem (nominative attritio), literally "a rubbing against," noun of action from past-participle stem of atterere "to wear, rub away," figuratively "to des

 holiday 

 1500s, earlier haliday (c. 1200), from Old English haligdæg "holy day, consecrated day, religious anniversary; Sabbath," from halig "holy" (see holy) + dæg "day" (see day); in 14c. meaning both "religious festival" and "day of exemption from labor and recreation," but pronunciati

 Share diphtheria 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/diphtheria Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/diphtheria">Etymology of diphtheria by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of diphtheria. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/diphtheria Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of diphtheria," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diphtheria. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of diphtheria." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diphtheria. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of diphtheria." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/diphtheria (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near diphtheria 
 Dionysus 
 diorama 
 Dioscuri 
 dioxin 
 dip 
 diphtheria 
 diphthong 
 diplo- 
 diplodocus 
 diploid 
 diploma 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix