URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/murder
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:27:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Murder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Murder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of murder 

 murder (n.) 

 "unlawful killing of another human being by a person of sound mind with premeditated malice," c. 1300, murdre , earlier morþer , from Old English morðor (plural morþras ) "secret killing of a person, unlawful killing," also "mortal sin, crime; punishment, torment, misery," from Proto-Germanic *murthran (source also of Goth maurþr , and, from a variant form of the same root, Old Saxon morth , Old Frisian morth , Old Norse morð , Middle Dutch moort , Dutch moord , German Mord "murder"), from suffixed form of PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm" (also "to die" and forming words referring to death and to beings subject to death).

 The spelling with -d- probably reflects influence of Anglo-French murdre , from Old French mordre , from Medieval Latin murdrum , which is from the Germanic word. A parallel form murther persisted into 19c.

 In Old Norse, custom distinguished morð "secret slaughter" from vig "slaying." The former involved concealment, or slaying a man by night or when asleep, and was a heinous crime. The latter was not a disgrace, if the killer acknowledged his deed, but he was subject to vengeance or demand for compensation.

 Mordre wol out that se we day by day. [Chaucer, "Nun's Priest's Tale," c. 1386]

 Weakened sense of "very unpleasant situation" is from 1878. Inverted slang sense of "something excellent or terrific" is by 1940. As the name of a parlor or children's game, by 1933.
 also from c. 1300 

 murder (v.) 

 c. 1200 mortheren , "to kill, slay; kill criminally, kill with premeditated malice," from Old English myrðrian , from Proto-Germanic *murthjan (source also of Old High German murdran , German mördren , Gothic maurþjan , from Proto-Germanic *murthra- (see murder (n.)). But OED doubts the Old English verb survived into Middle English and thinks the modern word perhaps from the noun. Forms with -d- begin mid-14c. Meaning "spoil by bad execution" is from 1640s. Related: Murdered ; murdering .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to murder 

 burden (n.1) 

 "a load, that which is borne or carried," Old English byrðen "a load, weight, charge, duty;" also "a child;" from Proto-Germanic *burthinjo- "that which is borne" (source also of Old Norse byrðr , Old Saxon burthinnia , German bürde , Gothic baurþei ), from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear children."

 The shift from -th- to -d- began early 12c. (compare murder (n.), rudder , afford ). Archaic burthen is occasionally retained for the specific sense of "capacity of a ship." Beast of burden is from 1740. Burden of proof (Latin onus probandi ) "obligation on one party in an action to establish an alleged fact by proof" is recorded from 1590s.

 manslaughter (n.) 

 early 14c., " act, crime, or sin of killing another human being," in battle or not, from man (n.) + slaughter (n.). It gradually displaced manslaught , the earlier word, from Old English manslæht (Anglian), manslieht (West Saxon), from slæht , slieht "act of killing" (see slay (v.)). Middle English also had man-quelling "murder, homicide" (late 14c.), and slaughter-man (late 14c.), "an executioner; a butcher."

 Etymologically it is comparable to Latin homicide , but in legal use usually it is distinguished from murder and restricted to "simple homicide, unlawful killing of another without malice either express or implied."

 Manslaughter differs from murder in not proceeding from malice prepense or deliberate, which is essential to constitute murder. It differs from excusable homicide, being done in consequence of some unlawful act, whereas excusable homicide happens in consequence of misadventure. Manslaughter has been distinguished as 
 voluntary , where the killing was intentional in a sudden heat or passion without previous malice; and 
 involuntary , where it was not intentional, but the slayer was at the time engaged in an unlawful act less than a felony, or doing a lawful act in an unlawful manner. [Century Dictionary]

 murderer 
 murderous 
 rudder 
 spider 
 thither 
 *mer- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share murder 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/murder Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/murder">Etymology of murder by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of murder. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/murder Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of murder," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/murder. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of murder." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/murder. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of murder." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/murder (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near murder 
 munition 
 Munsell 
 Munster 
 Muppet 
 mural 
 murder 
 murderer 
 murderous 
 murex 
 muricide 
 Muriel 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix