URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/margarine
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:52:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Margarine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Margarine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of margarine 

 margarine (n.) 

 butter substitute, 1873, from French margarine (see margarin ). Invented 1869 by French scientist Hippolyte Mège-Mouries and made in part from edible fats and oils.

 The "enterprising merchant" of Paris, who sells Margarine as a substitute for Butter, and does not sell his customers by selling it as Butter, and at Butter's value, has very likely found honesty to be the best policy. That policy might perhaps be adopted with advantage by an enterprising British Cheesemonger. ["Punch," Feb. 21, 1874]
 also from 1873 

 Entries linking to margarine 

 margarin (n.) 

 1836, from French margarine , a chemical term given to a fatty substance obtained from animal and vegetable oil, coined by French chemist Michel Eugène Chevreul (1786-1889) in 1813 from (acide) margarique "margaric (acid);" literally "pearly," from Greek margaritēs "pearl" (see Margaret ). So called for the luster of the crystals. Now discarded in this sense as a chemical term, but preserved in margarine .

 oleomargarine (n.) 

 1873, "butter substitute made from beef fat," from French oléomargarine (1854), from oléine, a widely distributed natural fat (from Latin oleum "oil" + -ine, after glycerine ), + margarine . It was regarded as a chemical compound of olein and margarine.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stick 

 "piece of wood, generally rather long and slender," Middle English stikke, from Old English sticca "twig or slender branch from a tree or shrub," also "rod, peg, spoon," from Proto-Germanic *stikkon- "pierce, prick" (source also of Old Norse stik, Middle Dutch stecke, stec, Old H

 gamer 

 mid-15c., "an athlete" (mid-13c. as a surname, Johannes le Gamer), agent noun from game (v.). Meaning "one devoted to playing video or computer games" is attested by 1981 (by 1975 in reference to players of Dungeons & Dragons). Gamester is attested from 1580s but also sometim

 oil 

 late 12c., "olive oil," from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile "oil" (12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum "oil, olive oil" (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from Greek elaion "olive tree," from elaia (see olive). Nearly all the European 

 paste 

 c. 1300 (mid-12c. as a surname), "dough for the making of bread or pastry," from Old French paste "dough, pastry" (13c., Modern French pâte), from Late Latin pasta "dough, pastry cake, paste" (see pasta). Meaning "glue mixture, dough used as a plaster seal" is attested from c. 14

 spate 

 mid-15c., "a sudden flood, natural outpouring of water," especially one caused by heavy rains or a snowmelt, originally Scottish and northern English, a word of unknown origin. Perhaps from Old French espoit "flood," from Dutch spuiten "to flow, spout" and related to spout (v.). 

 spread 

 late 12c., spreden, "stretch out, lay out (clothes, hide, etc.); diffuse, disseminate (beams of light, grace);" also, of groups of persons, "advance over a wide area" (intransitive); probably from Old English *sprædan "to spread, stretch forth, extend" (especially in tosprædan "t

 pandemonium 

 1667, Pandæmonium, in "Paradise Lost" the name of the palace built in the middle of Hell, "the high capital of Satan and all his peers," and the abode of all the demons; coined by John Milton (1608-1674) from Greek pan- "all" (see pan-) + Late Latin daemonium "evil spirit," from 

 forgive 

 Old English forgiefan "give, grant, allow; remit (a debt), pardon (an offense)," also "give up" and "give in marriage" (past tense forgeaf, past participle forgifen); from for-, here probably "completely," + giefan "to give" (from PIE root *ghabh- "to give or receive"). The sense

 deed 

 "that which is done, acted, or performed, whether good or bad, great or small," Old English dæd "a doing, act, action; transaction, event," from Proto-Germanic *dethi- (source also of Old Saxon dad, Old Norse dað, Old Frisian dede, Middle Dutch daet, Dutch daad, Old High German t

 horizon 

 late 14c., orisoun, from Old French orizon (14c., Modern French horizon), earlier orizonte (13c.), from Latin horizontem (nominative horizon), from Greek horizon (kyklos) "bounding (circle)," from horizein "bound, limit, divide, separate," from horos "boundary, landmark, marking 

 Share margarine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/margarine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/margarine">Etymology of margarine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of margarine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/margarine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of margarine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/margarine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of margarine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/margarine. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of margarine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/margarine (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near margarine 
 mare 
 Mareotic 
 Margaret 
 margaric 
 margarin 
 margarine 
 Margarita 
 margarite 
 marge 
 Margery 
 margin 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close