URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/archaeology
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:18:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Archaeology - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Archaeology - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of archaeology 

 archaeology (n.) 

 c. 1600, "ancient history," from French archéologie (16c.) or directly from Greek arkhaiologia "the study of ancient things;" see archaeo- + -ology . The meaning "scientific study of ancient peoples and past civilizations" is recorded by 1825.
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to archaeology 

 archaeological (adj.) 

 "pertaining to archaeology," 1766, in the antiquarian sense, from archaeology + -ical . Earlier was archaeologic (1731). Related: Archaeologically .

 archaeologist (n.) 

 1824; see archaeology + -ist . Other early forms were archaeologian (1820), archaeologue (1839, from French archéologue ). Greek arkhaiologos meant "antiquary."

 archeological 
 archeology 
 archaeo- 
 -ology 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Celtic 

 also Keltic, 1650s, in archaeology and history, "pertaining to the (ancient) Celts," from French Celtique or Latin Celticus...

 fibula 

 In reference to brooches, the modern English word mostly is used in archaeology....

 kitchen 

 Kitchen midden (1863) in archaeology translates Danish kjøkken mødding....

 barrow 

 Obsolete by c. 1400 except in place-names and southwest England dialect; it was revived by modern archaeology....

 age 

 In geology, in reference to great periods in the history of the earth, by 1855; in archaeology, from 1865 (Stone Age, etc...

 barn 

 Arnold, "An Archaeology of the Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms," 1988, p.36] Another word for "barn" in Old English was beretun...

 pupil 

 [student], late 14c., "orphan child, ward, person under the care of a guardian," from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from Latin pupillus (fem. pupilla) "orphan child, ward, minor," diminutive of pupus "boy" (fem. pupa "girl"), probably related to puer "child" (and thus pr

 kangaroo 

 "large marsupial mammal of Australia," 1770, used by Capt. Cook and botanist Joseph Banks (who first reported the species to Europeans), supposedly representing a native word from northeast Queensland, Australia, but often said to be unknown now in any native language. However, a

 Druid 

 "one of the order of priests among the ancient Celts of Gaul, Britain, and Ireland," 1560s, from French druide (16c.), from Latin druis, fem. druias (plural druidae), from Gaulish Druides, from Celtic compound *dru-wid- "strong seer," from Old Celtic *derwos "true" (from PIE root

 deserve 

 mid-13c., "to merit, be worthy of for qualities or actions," from Old French deservir (Modern French desservir) "deserve, be worthy of, earn, merit" and directly from Latin deservire "serve well, serve zealously," from de- "completely" (see de-) + servire "to serve" (see serve (v

 Share archaeology 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/archaeology Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/archaeology">Etymology of archaeology by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of archaeology. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/archaeology Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of archaeology," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/archaeology. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of archaeology." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/archaeology. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of archaeology." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/archaeology (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near archaeology 
 archaebacteria 
 archaeo- 
 archaeoastronomy 
 archaeological 
 archaeologist 
 archaeology 
 archaeopteryx 
 archaic 
 archaism 
 archaistic 
 archangel 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix