URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Calvary
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:15:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Calvary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Calvary - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Calvary 

 Calvary 

 name of the mount of the Crucifixion, late 14c., from Latin calvaria "skull," rendering Greek Kraniou topos , translating Aramaic gulgulta "place of the skull" (see Golgotha ). Old English used Heafodpannan stow as a loan-translation. Latin Calvaria is related to calvus "bald" (see Calvin ).
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to Calvary 

 Calvin 

 surname, especially in reference to John Calvin (1509-1564), French Protestant leader and theologian, born Jean Caulvin . The surname is related to French Chauvin (compare chauvinism ), from Latin Calvinus , a Roman cognomen, literally "bald," from calvus "bald," from PIE *kle-wo- "bald."

 Golgotha 

 hill near Jerusalem where Christ was crucified, via Latin and Greek, from Aramaic (Semitic) gulgulta , literally "(place of the) skull," cognate with Hebrew gulgoleth "skull." The hill so called for its shape (see Calvary ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Veronica 

 the Roman Martyrology) traditionally was a pious woman who wiped the face of Christ when he fell carrying the cross to Calvary...

 affliction 

 c. 1300, affliccioun, "misery, sorrow, pain, distress" (originally especially "self-inflicted pain, self-mortification, religious asceticism"), from Old French afliction "act of humility, humiliation, mortification, punishment" (11c.) and directly from Latin afflictionem (nominat

 stow 

 c. 1300, stouen, "to put, place (somewhere), put in a (suitable or convenient) place or position," verbal use of Old English noun stow "a place, spot, site, locality" (common in place names), from Proto-Germanic *stowo- (source also of Old Frisian sto "place," Middle Low German, 

 persevere 

 "to persist in what one has undertaken, to pursue steadily a design or course," late 14c., perseveren, from Old French perseverer "continue, persevere, endure" and directly from Latin perseverare "continue steadfastly, persist," from persevereus "very strict, earnest," from per "

 vampire 

 spectral being in a human body who maintains semblance of life by leaving the grave at night to suck the warm blood of the living as they sleep, 1732, vampyre, from French vampire (18c.) or German Vampir (1732, like the English word first in an account of Hungarian vampires), fro

 inspiration 

 c. 1300, "immediate influence of God or a god," especially that under which the holy books were written, from Old French inspiracion "inhaling, breathing in; inspiration" (13c.), from Late Latin inspirationem (nominative inspiratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of La

 Prussia 

 region in northeastern Germany, late 14c., Prusse (late 13c. as a surname), from Medieval Latin Borussi, Prusi, Latinized forms of the native name of the Lithuanian people who lived in the bend of the Baltic before being conquered 12c. and exterminated by (mostly) German crusader

 sepulchre 

 also sepulcher, c. 1200, sepulcre, "tomb, burial place," especially the cave where Jesus was buried outside Jerusalem (Holy Sepulcher or Saint Sepulcher), from Old French sepulcre, sepulchre, "tomb; the Holy Sepulchre" (11c.), from Latin sepulcrum (also, erroneously, sepulchrum) 

 dream 

 "sequence of sensations or images passing through the mind of a sleeping person," mid-13c., probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish drøm, Swedish dröm, Old Saxon drom "merriment, noise," Old Frisian dram "dream," Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German Traum "dream." Thes

 vocation 

 early 15c., "spiritual calling," from Old French vocacion "call, consecration; calling, profession" (13c.) or directly from Latin vocationem (nominative vocatio), literally "a calling, a being called" from vocatus "called," past participle of vocare "to call," which is related to

 Share Calvary 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Calvary Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Calvary">Etymology of Calvary by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Calvary. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Calvary Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Calvary," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Calvary. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Calvary." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Calvary. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Calvary." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Calvary (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Calvary 
 calumniate 
 calumniation 
 calumniator 
 calumnious 
 calumny 
 Calvary 
 calve 
 Calvin 
 Calvinism 
 Calypso 
 calypto- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix