URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cygnet
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:37:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cygnet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cygnet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cygnet 

 cygnet (n.) 

 "a young swan," c. 1400, also signet before 17c., from Anglo-French cignet (mid-14c.), Anglo-Latin cygnettus , diminutives of Old French cigne , cisne "swan" (12c., Modern French cygne ), from Latin cygnus , from Greek kyknos , which has been the subject of "abundant discussion" (Beekes) and is perhaps from PIE *(s)keuk- "to be white" (compare Sanskrit socati "to lighten, glow," sukra- "light, clear, white"). Spanish, Portuguese cisne , Italian cecero are from Medieval Latin cecinus, cicinus , a corruption of the classical Latin word.
 also from c. 1400 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 swan 

 large, web-footed swimming bird, stately and graceful in the water, noted for its long neck and white down; Old English swan "swan," from Proto-Germanic *swanaz "singer" (source also of Old Saxon swan, Old Norse svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, 

 quarantine 

 1660s, "period a ship suspected of carrying contagious disease is kept in isolation," from Italian quaranta giorni, literally "space of forty days," from quaranta "forty," from Latin quadraginta "forty" (related to quattuor "four," from PIE root *kwetwer- "four"). The name is fro

 reason 

 c. 1200, resoun, "the intellectual faculty that adopts actions to ends," also "statement in an argument, statement of explanation or justification," from Anglo-French resoun, Old French raison "course; matter; subject; language, speech; thought, opinion," from Latin rationem (nom

 Peter 

 masc. proper name, 12c., from Old English Petrus (genitive Pet(e)res, dative Pet(e)re), from Latin Petrus, from Greek Petros, literally "stone, rock" (see petrous), a translation of Syriac kefa "stone" (Latinized as Cephas), the nickname Jesus gave to apostle Simon Bar-Jona (Matt

 sophomore 

 1680s, "student in the second year of university study," literally "arguer," altered from sophumer (1650s), from sophume, an archaic variant form of sophism, ultimately from Greek sophistēs "a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever in matters of daily life." The

 milk 

 "opaque white fluid secreted by mammary glands of female mammals, suited to the nourishment of their young," Middle English milk, from Old English meoluc (West Saxon), milc (Anglian), from Proto-Germanic *meluk- "milk" (source also of Old Norse mjolk, Old Frisian melok, Old Saxon

 avail 

 c. 1300, availen, "to help (someone), assist; benefit, be profitable to; be for the advantage of; have force or efficacy, serve for a purpose," apparently an Anglo-French compound of Old French a- "to" (see ad-) + vaill-, present stem of valoir "be worth," from Latin valere "be s

 commission 

 mid-14c., "authority entrusted to someone, delegated authority or power," from Old French commission and directly from Latin commissionem (nominative commissio) "act of committing," in Medieval Latin "delegation of business," noun of action from past participle stem of committere

 mystery 

 early 14c., misterie, in a theological sense, "religious truth via divine revelation, hidden spiritual significance, mystical truth," from Anglo-French *misterie, Old French mistere "secret, mystery, hidden meaning" (Modern French mystère) and directly from Latin mysterium "secre

 guinea 

 former British coin, 1660s, from Guinea, because the coins were first minted for British trade with Guinea (but soon in domestic use) and with gold from Africa. The original guinea was in use from 1663 to 1813....region along the west coast of Africa, presumably from an African w

 Share cygnet 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cygnet Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cygnet">Etymology of cygnet by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cygnet. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cygnet Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cygnet," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cygnet. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cygnet." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cygnet. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cygnet." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cygnet (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cygnet 
 cyclopedia 
 Cyclops 
 cyclorama 
 cyclosporiasis 
 cyclotron 
 cygnet 
 cylinder 
 cylindrical 
 cymbal 
 Cymric 
 cynanthropy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix