URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/shellac
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:41:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Shellac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Shellac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of shellac 

 shellac (n.) 

 also shell lac , "lac melted and formed into thin plates," 1713, from shell (n.) + lac ; so called for its form. It translates French laque en écailles "lac in thin plates." Commercially, lac came as stick lac (still on the twigs, insects and all), seed-lac (resin without the twigs and insects, partly processed), and fully processed plates of shell lac .
 also from 1713 

 shellac (v.) 

 1876, "coat or varnish with shellac," from shellac (n.). The slang sense of "beat soundly" is by 1930 (implied in shellacked ), perhaps from the notion of shellac as a "finish." Slang shellacked "drunk" is listed in "Dialect Notes" in 1922 (compare plastered under plaster (v.)). Related: Shellacking .
 also from 1876 

 Entries linking to shellac 

 lac (n.) 

 red resinous substance (an incrustation deposited by females of an insect on twigs of certain trees in southern Asia), 1550s, perhaps immediately from French lacce , displacing or absorbing earlier English lacca (early 15c. in medical texts as a substance in making pills), from Medieval Latin lacca . All these are from Persian lak , from Hindi lakh (Prakrit lakkha ), from Sanskrit laksha "red dye," which is of uncertain origin.

 According to Klein and Century Dictionary, it means literally "one hundred thousand" and is a reference to the insects that gather in great numbers on the trees and create the resin. But other sources say lakh is perhaps an alteration of Sanskrit rakh , from an IE root word for "color, dye" [Watkins]. Still another guess is that Sanskrit laksha is related to English lax, lox "salmon," and the substance perhaps was so called from being somewhat the color of salmon [Barnhart].

 Also see shellac (n.). Related: Lacic ; lacinic .

 plaster (v.) 

 early 14c., "to cover or overlay (walls) with plaster;" late 14c., "to coat with a medicative plaster," from plaster (n.) and partly from Old French plastrier "to cover with plaster" (Modern French plâtrer ), from plastre . Figurative use, "to load to excess" (with praise, etc.), is from c. 1600. Meaning "to bomb (a target) heavily" is first recorded 1915. Sports sense of "to defeat decisively" is from 1919. as an adjective, plastered is from late 14c. as "coated with plaster." The slang meaning "very drunk" is attested by 1912.

 shell 
 picnic 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sale 

 Middle English sale, from late Old English sala "a sale, act of selling," which according to OED probably is from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse sala "sale," but in either case from Proto-Germanic *salo (source also of Old High German sala, Swedish salu, Danish salg), fr

 seal 

 "design stamped on wax," especially an impressed figure attached to a document as evidence of authenticity, c. 1200, sel, sele, from Old French seel, seal "seal on a letter" (Modern French sceau), from Vulgar Latin *sigellum (source of Italian suggello, Spanish sello; also Old Fr

 varnish 

 mid-14c., from Old French vernis "varnish" (12c.), from Medieval Latin vernix "odorous resin," of uncertain origin, perhaps from Late Greek verenike, from Greek Berenike, name of an ancient city in Libya (modern Bengasi) credited with the first use of varnishes. The town is named

 lest 

 c. 1200, "that not," especially "for fear that" [OED calls it a negative particle of intention], from a contraction of the Old English phrase þy læs þe "the less that," from þy, instrumental case of demonstrative article þæt "that" + læs (see less) + conjunction þe (see the). The

 flatter 

 c. 1200, flateren, flaterien, "seek to please or gratify (someone) by undue praise, praise insincerely, beguile with pleasing words," from Old French flater "to deceive; caress, fondle; prostrate, throw, fling (to the ground)" (13c.), probably from a Germanic source, perhaps from

 sincere 

 1530s, "pure, unmixed, unadulterated;" also "free from pretense or falsehood," from French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus, of things, "whole, clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed," figuratively "sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful" (unadulterated by deceit), a word of un

 ghetto 

 1610s, "part of a city in which Jews are compelled to live," especially in Italy, from Italian ghetto "part of a city to which Jews are restricted," of unknown origin. The various theories trace it to: Yiddish get "deed of separation;" a special use of Venetian getto "foundry" (t

 staple 

 late 13c., stapel, "bent piece of metal with pointed ends," from Old English stapol, stapel "post, pillar, trunk of a tree, steps to a house," from Proto-Germanic *stapulaz "pillar" (source also of Old Norse stopull "tower," Old Saxon stapal "candle, small tub," Old Frisian stapu

 top-notch 

 also top notch, "best quality, most stylish," 1840, something of a vogue phrase about 1841, from top (adj.) + notch (n.). Figurative of the "highest point" of something, but the exact mechanical image is uncertain and never seems to be mentioned. At the time it was the name of a 

 community 

 late 14c., "a number of people associated together by the fact of residence in the same locality," also "the common people" (not the rulers or the clergy), from Old French comunité "community, commonness, everybody" (Modern French communauté), from Latin communitatem (nominative 

 Share shellac 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/shellac Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/shellac">Etymology of shellac by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of shellac. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/shellac Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of shellac," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shellac. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of shellac." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shellac. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of shellac." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/shellac (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near shellac 
 Sheila 
 shekel 
 sheldrake 
 shelf 
 shell 
 shellac 
 shellbark 
 shelled 
 shellfish 
 shelly 
 shelta 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix