URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/carafe
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:28:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Carafe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Carafe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of carafe 

 carafe (n.) 

 "glass water-bottle or decanter," 1786, from French carafe (17c.), from Italian caraffa (or Spanish garrafa ), probably from Arabic gharraf "drinking cup," or Persian qarabah "a large flagon."
 also from 1786 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bottle 

 "narrow-necked hollow vessel for holding and carrying liquids," mid-14c., originally of leather, from Old French boteille (12c., Modern French bouteille), from Vulgar Latin *butticula (source also of Spanish botella, Italian bottiglia), diminutive of Late Latin buttis "a cask," w

 perpendicular 

 late 15c., perpendiculer, of a line, "lying at right angles to the horizon" (in astronomy, navigation, etc.), from an earlier adverb (late 14c.), "at right angles to the horizon," from Old French perpendiculer, from Late Latin perpendicularis "vertical, as a plumb line," from Lat

 knockoff 

 also knock-off, "cheap imitation," 1966, from the verbal phrase knock off "do hastily" (1817), in reference to the casual way the things are made. The verbal phrase knock off is attested from 1640s as "desist, stop" (work, study, etc.), hence knockoff (n.) "act of leaving work" (

 persuasion 

 late 14c., persuasioun, "action of inducing (someone) to believe (something) by appeals to reason (not by authority, force, or fear); an argument to persuade, inducement," from Old French persuasion (14c.) and directly from Latin persuasionem (nominative persuasio) "a convincing,

 neat 

 1540s, "clean, free from dirt," from Anglo-French neit, French net "clear, pure" (12c.), from Latin nitidus "well-favored, elegant, trim," literally "gleaming," from nitere "to shine," from PIE root *nei- "to shine" (source also of Middle Irish niam "gleam, splendor," niamda "shi

 apparition 

 early 15c., "supernatural appearance or manifestation," from Anglo-French aparicion, Old French aparicion, aparoison (15c.), used in reference to the Epiphany (the revealing of the Christ child to the Wise Men), from Late Latin apparitionem (nominative apparitio) "an appearance,"

 consistency 

 1590s, "firmness of matter," from Medieval Latin consistentia   literally "a standing together," or directly from Latin consistentem (nominative consistens), present participle of consistere "to stand firm, take a standing position, stop, halt," from assimilated form of

 Jehovah 

 1530, Tyndale's transliteration of Hebrew Tetragrammaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai "my lord" (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation the lord would have been inc

 overcome 

 Old English ofercuman "to reach, overtake, move or pass over," also "to conquer, prevail over, defeat in combat" (the Devil, evil spirits, sin, temptation, etc.), from ofer (see over) + cuman "to come" (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High 

 saute 

 "a dish cooked by being fried in a pan over high heat," 1813, from French sauté, literally "jumped, bounced" (in reference to tossing continually while cooking), past participle of sauter "to jump," from Latin saltare "to hop, dance," frequentative of salire "to leap" (see salien

 Share carafe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/carafe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/carafe">Etymology of carafe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of carafe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/carafe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of carafe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/carafe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of carafe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/carafe. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of carafe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/carafe (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near carafe 
 capybara 
 car 
 carabineer 
 carabinieri 
 Caracas 
 carafe 
 caramba 
 caramel 
 caramelize 
 carapace 
 carat 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix