URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/order
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:17:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Order - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Order - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of order 

 order (n.) 

 c. 1200, "body of persons living under a religious discipline," from Old French ordre "position, estate; rule, regulation; religious order" (11c.), from earlier ordene , from Latin ordinem (nominative ordo ) "row, line, rank; series, pattern, arrangement, routine," originally "a row of threads in a loom," from Proto-Italic *ordn- "row, order" (source also of ordiri "to begin to weave;" compare primordial ), which is of uncertain origin. Watkins suggests it is a variant of PIE root *ar- "to fit together," and De Vaan finds this "semantically attractive."

 The original English word reflects a medieval notion: "a system of parts subject to certain uniform, established ranks or proportions," and was used of everything from architecture to angels. Old English expressed many of the same ideas with endebyrdnes . From the notion of "formal disposition or array, methodical or harmonious arrangement" comes the meaning "fit or consistent collocation of parts" (late 14c.).

 Meaning "a rank in the (secular) community" is first recorded c. 1300. Sense of "a regular sequence or succession" is from late 14c. The meaning "command, directive" is first recorded 1540s, from the notion of "that which keep things in order." Military and honorary orders grew out of the fraternities of Crusader knights.

 The business and commerce sense of "a written direction to pay money or deliver property" is attested by 1837; as "a request for food or drink in a restaurant" from 1836. In natural history, as a classification of living things next below class and next above family, it is recorded from 1760. Meaning "condition of a community which is under the rule of law" is from late 15c.

 In order "in proper sequence or arrangement" is from c. 1400; out of order "not in proper sequence or orderly arrangement" is from 1540s; since 20c. principally mechanical, but not originally so ("and so home, and there find my wife mightily out of order, and reproaching of Mrs. Pierce and Knipp as wenches, and I know not what," - Pepys, diary, Aug. 6, 1666).

 Phrase in order to "for the purpose of" (1650s) preserves etymological notion of "sequence." In short order "without delay" is from 1834, American English; order of battle "arrangement and disposition of an army or fleet for the purposes of engagement" is from 1769. The scientific/mathematical order of magnitude is attested from 1723.
 also from c. 1200 

 order (v.) 

 c. 1200, ordren , "give order to, to arrange in a row or rank," from order (n.). Sense of "set or keep in order" is from c. 1500. Meaning "to give commands for or to, instruct authoritatively" is from 1540s; that of "command to be made, done, or issued" is from 1763. Related: Ordered ; ordering .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to order 

 primordial (adj.) 

 late 14c., "being or pertaining to the source or beginning," from Late Latin primordialis "first of all, original," from Latin primordium "a beginning, the beginning, origin, commencement," from primus "first" (see prime (adj.)) + stem of ordiri "to begin" (see order (n.)). The sense of "first in order, earliest, existing from the beginning" is from 1785. Related: Primordially . Primordial soup as the name for the conditions believed to have been present on Earth circa 4.0 billion years ago, and from which life began, in J.B.S. Haldane's theory, is by 1934.

 adorn (v.) 

 late 14c., aournen , later adornen , "to decorate, embellish," also "be an ornament to," from Old French aorner "to order, arrange, dispose, equip; adorn," from Latin adornare "equip, provide, furnish;" also "decorate, embellish," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + ornare "prepare, furnish, adorn, fit out," from stem of ordo "row, rank, series, arrangement" (see order (n.)). The -d- was reinserted by French scribes 14c. and spread to English from late 15c. Related: Adorned ; adorning .

 backorder 
 coordinate 
 coordination 
 disorder 
 extraordinary 
 inordinate 
 mail-order 
 money-order 
 ordain 
 orderly 
 ordinal 
 ordinance 
 ordinary 
 ordinate 
 ordination 
 ornament 
 ornate 
 pre-order 
 See All Related Words (28) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 coordinate 

 1640s, "of the same order, belonging to the same rank or degree," from Medieval Latin coordinatus, past participle of coordinare "to set in order, arrange," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see com-) + ordinatio "arrangement," from ordo "row, rank, series, arrangeme

 coordination 

 also co-ordination, c. 1600, "orderly combination," from French coordination (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin coordinationem (nominative coordinatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin coordinare "to set in order, arrange," from co- "with, together" (see com

 disorder 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "destroy or derange the order of, throw into confusion," from dis- "not" (see dis-) + order (v.). Replaced earlier disordeine (mid-14c.), from Old French desordainer, from Medieval Latin disordinare "throw into disorder," from Latin dis- + ordinare "to order, 

 dispose 

 late 14c., disposen, "set in order, place in a particular order; give direction or tendency to; incline the mind or heart..."arrange, order, control, regulate" (influenced in form by poser "to place"), from Latin disponere "put in order, arrange...

 array 

 mid-14c., "marshal (troops), arrange (an army for battle);" late 14c., "put (things) in order, arrange; get (something) ready..., prepare; equip, fit out, put clothing on; adorn, decorate," from Old French areyer, earlier areer "to put in order," from...Vulgar Latin *ar-redare "put in order" (source also of Italian arredare), from Latin ad "to" (see ad-) + *redum, from Frankish...*ræd- "ready" or some cognate Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *raidjan "to place in order" (source also of Gothic garadis...

 disposition 

 late 14c., disposicioun, "ordering, management, a setting in order, arrangement," also "tendency of mind, aptitude, inclination..."arrangement, order; mood, state of mind" and directly from Latin dispositionem (nominative dispositio) "arrangement, management...," noun of action from past-participle stem of disponere "to put in order, arrange" (see dispose)....

 mandate 

 c. 1500, "a command, a judicial or legal order," from French mandat (15c.) and directly from Latin mandatum "commission,...command, order," noun use of neuter past participle of mandare "to order, commit to one's charge," literally "to give into...

 arrange 

 late 14c., arengen, "draw up a line of battle," from Old French arengier "put in a row, put in battle order" (12c., Modern French arranger), from a- "to" (see ad-) + rangier "set in a row" (Modern French ranger), from rang "rank," from Frankish *hring or a similar Germanic source

 collate 

 1610s, "to bring together and compare, examine critically as to agreement," from Latin collatus, irregular past participle of conferre "to bring together," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see com-) + lātus "borne, carried" (see oblate (n.)), serving as past partici

 fiat 

 1630s, "authoritative sanction," from Latin fiat "let it be done" (used in the opening of Medieval Latin proclamations and commands), third person singular present subjunctive of fieri "be done, become, come into existence" (from PIE root *bheue- "to be, exist, grow"), used as pa

 Share order 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/order Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/order">Etymology of order by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of order. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/order Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of order," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/order. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of order." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/order. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of order." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/order (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near order 
 orchestration 
 orchid 
 orchidectomy 
 ordain 
 ordeal 
 order 
 orderly 
 ordinal 
 ordinance 
 ordinary 
 ordinate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix