URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/diadem
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:33:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Diadem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Diadem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of diadem 

 diadem (n.) 

 c. 1300, diademe , "aureole of a martyr or confessor;" mid-14c., "a crown, anything worn on the head as a mark of royalty," from Old French diademe and directly from Latin diadema "cloth band worn around the head as a sign of royalty," from Greek diad ē ma "the headband worn by Persian kings and adopted by Alexander the Great and his successors," from diadein "to bind across," from dia "across" or "through" (see dia- ) + dein "to bind," which is related to desmos "band," from PIE root *dē- "to bind." Related: Diademed .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to diadem 

 dia- 

 before vowels, di- , word-forming element meaning "through, in different directions, between," also often merely intensive, "thoroughly, entirely," from Greek dia "through; throughout," probably cognate with bi- and related to duo "two" (from PIE root *dwo- "two") with a base sense of "twice."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 crown 

 early 12c., coroune, croune, "royal crown, ornament for the head as a symbol of sovereignty," from Anglo-French coroune, Old French corone (13c., Modern French couronne) and directly from Latin corona "crown," originally "wreath, garland," related to Greek korōnē "anything curved

 Taj Mahal 

 Persian taj is literally "crown, diadem, ornamental headdress," but here denoting an object of distinguished excellence....

 necessary 

 late 14c., necessarie, "needed, required; essential, indispensable; such as must be, that cannot be otherwise; not voluntary or governed by chance or free will," from Old French necessaire "necessary, urgent, compelling" (13c.), and directly from Latin necessarius "unavoidable, i

 negotiation 

 early 15c., negotiacioun, "a dealing with people, trafficking," from Old French negociacion "business, trade," and directly from Latin negotiationem (nominative negotiatio) "business, traffic," noun of action from past participle stem of negotiari "carry on business, do business,

 heaven 

 Old English heofon "home of God," earlier "the visible sky, firmament," probably from Proto-Germanic *hibin-, a dissimilation of *himin- (source also of Low German heben, Old Norse himinn, Gothic himins, Old Frisian himul, Dutch hemel, German Himmel "heaven, sky"), which is of un

 scourge 

 c. 1200, "a whip used for inflicting pain or punishment, a lash used for torture," from Anglo-French scorge, escorge, back-formation from Old French scurge, eschurge "a whip, scourge, thong," from escorgier "to whip," which is from Vulgar Latin *excorrigiare. This is a compound o

 conspiracy 

 mid-14c., "a plotting of evil, unlawful design; a combination of persons for an evil purpose," from Anglo-French conspiracie, Old French conspiracie "conspiracy, plot," from Latin conspirationem (nominative conspiratio) "agreement, union, unanimity," noun of action from past-part

 salon 

 1690s, "large room or apartment in a palace or great house," from French salon "reception room" (17c.), from Italian salone "large hall," from sala "hall," from a Germanic source (compare Old English sele, Middle English salle, Old Norse salr "hall," Old High German sal "hall, ho

 crumb 

 Middle English crome, crumme, from Old English cruma "fragment of bread or other food, a morsel, small fragment," from a West Germanic root of obscure origin (compare Middle Dutch crume, Dutch kruim, German Krume); perhaps from a PIE word for "small particle of bread" and cognate

 costume 

 1715, "style of dress," but also more broadly "custom or usage with respect to place and time, as represented in art or literature; distinctive action, appearance, arms, furniture, etc.," from French costume (17c.), from Italian costume "fashion, habit," from Latin consuetudinem 

 Share diadem 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/diadem Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/diadem">Etymology of diadem by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of diadem. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/diadem Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of diadem," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diadem. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of diadem." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diadem. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of diadem." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/diadem (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near diadem 
 diabolic 
 diabolical 
 diabolism 
 diachronic 
 diacritic 
 diadem 
 diagnose 
 diagnoses 
 diagnosis 
 diagnostic 
 diagonal 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix