URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/automobile
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:45:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Automobile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Automobile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of automobile 

 automobile (adj.) 

 "self-moving, self-movable," 1883, in reference to electric traction cars, from French automobile (adj.), 1861, a hybrid from Greek autos "self" (see auto- ) + French mobile "moving," from Latin mobilis "movable" (see mobile (adj.)).
 also from 1883 

 automobile (n.) 

 "self-propelled motor vehicle," 1895, from French automobile , short for véhicule automobile (see automobile (adj.)). The modern Greek calls it autokineto "moved of itself." The French word had competition in the early years from locomobile ; in English other early forms were motorcar and autocar (q.v.). An electrical car was an electromobile (1899).
 also from 1895 

 Entries linking to automobile 

 autocar (n.) 

 "car which contains in itself a motor and a source of power," 1895, from auto- + car .

 Which is it to be? We observe that the London 
 Times has lent the weight of its authority to the word "autocar," which it now prints without the significant inverted commas but with a hyphen, "auto-car." We believe that the vocable originated with a journal called the 
 Hardwareman , which succeeded in obtaining the powerful support of the 
 Engineer for its offspring. As for ourselves, being linguistic purists, we do not care for hybrid constructions—"auto" is Greek, while "car" is Latin and Celtic. At the same time, such clumsy phrases as "horseless carriages," "mechanical road carriages," and "self-propelled vehicles" are not meeting with general favour. Why not therefore adopt the philogically sound "motor-car," which could be run into a single word, "motorcar"? [The Electrical Engineer, Dec. 20, 1895]

 Compare automobile .

 mobile (adj.) 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "capable of movement, capable of being moved, not fixed or stationary," from Old French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis "movable, easy to move; loose, not firm," figuratively, "pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle," contraction of *movibilis , from movere "to move" (from PIE root *meue- "to push away"). Sociology sense of "able to move into different social levels" is by 1927. Mobile home "large trailer permanently parked and used as a residence" is recorded by 1936. Mobile phone is by 1983.

 A long-distance number tapped into an Illinois Bell car telephone glowed red on a display. Satisfied that the digits were correct, I pushed the SEND button on the phone. Familiar beeps and boops emerged from the handset. Then, before a half block of this Chicago suburb had slipped by, I was in contact with my New York office. ["Take-along Telephones," Popular Science, October 1983] 

 motorcar 
 auto 
 hippomobile 
 snowmobile 
 auto- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 car 

 c. 1300, "wheeled vehicle," from Anglo-French carre, Old North French carre, from Vulgar Latin *carra, related to Latin carrum, carrus (plural carra), originally "two-wheeled Celtic war chariot," from Gaulish karros, a Celtic word (compare Old Irish and Welsh carr "cart, wagon," 

 machine 

 1540s, "structure of any kind," from Middle French machine "device, contrivance," from Latin machina "machine, engine, military machine; device, trick; instrument" (source also of Spanish maquina, Italian macchina), from Greek makhana, Doric variant of Attic mēkhanē "device, tool

 limousine 

 1902, "enclosed automobile with open driver's seat," from French limousine, from Limousin, region in central France (see...The automobile meaning is from a perceived similarity of the car's profile to a type of hood worn by the inhabitants of that...

 garage 

 Influenced no doubt by the success of the recent Club run, and by the fact that more than 100 of its members are automobile...owners, the N.Y.A.C. has decided to build a "garage," the French term for an automobile stable, at Travers Island, that...

 chassis 

 "base frame of an automobile," 1903, American English; earlier "sliding frame or carriage-base for a large gun" (1869), "...

 component 

 Meaning "mechanical part of a bicycle, automobile, etc." is from 1896....

 distracted 

 Distracted driving is attested by 1999 in automobile safety technology....

 wing 

 late 12c., wenge, "forelimb fitted for flight of a bird or bat," also the part of some insects resembling a wing in form or function, from Old Norse vængr "wing of a bird, aisle, etc." (cognate with Danish and Swedish vinge "wing"), of unknown origin, perhaps from a Proto-Germani

 electric 

 1640s, first used in English by physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), apparently coined as Modern Latin electricus (literally "resembling amber") by English physicist William Gilbert (1540-1603) in treatise "De Magnete" (1600), from Latin electrum "amber," from Greek ēlektron 

 travel 

 late 14c., "to journey," from travailen (1300) "to make a journey," originally "to toil, labor" (see travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced 

 Share automobile 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/automobile Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/automobile">Etymology of automobile by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of automobile. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/automobile Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of automobile," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/automobile. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of automobile." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/automobile. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of automobile." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/automobile (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near automobile 
 automation 
 automatism 
 automatization 
 automatize 
 automaton 
 automobile 
 automotive 
 autonomic 
 autonomous 
 autonomy 
 autopathy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close