URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/benzoin
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:01:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Benzoin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Benzoin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of benzoin 

 benzoin (n.) 

 balsamic resin obtained from a tree ( Styrax benzoin ) of Indonesia, 1560s (earlier as bengewine , 1550s), from French benjoin (16c.), which comes via Spanish, Portuguese, or Italian from Arabic luban jawi "incense of Java" (actually Sumatra, but the Arabs confused the two), with lu probably mistaken in Romance languages for a definite article. The English form with -z- is perhaps from influence of Italian benzoi (Venetian, 1461).
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to benzoin 

 benzene (n.) 

 clear, colorless liquid used as a solvent, 1835, benzine , altered from German Benzin , coined in 1833 by German chemist Eilhardt Mitscherlich (1794-1863) from Benz(oesäure) "benzoic acid" + -in , indicating "derived from" (see -ine (2)). Mitscherlich obtained it from a distillation of benzoic acid, obtained from benzoin . The form benzene (with hydrocarbon suffix -ene ) was proposed in 1835 and began to be used from 1838 in English, but in mid-19c. it also commonly was called benzol , with ending from alcohol .

 benzoic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or obtained from benzoin, 1790, from benzoin + -ic .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Benjamin 

 masc. proper name, in Old Testament, Jacob's youngest son (Genesis xxxv.18), from Hebrew Binyamin, literally "son of the south," though interpreted in Genesis as "son of the right hand," from ben "son of" + yamin "right hand," also "south" (in an East-oriented culture). Compare A

 gum 

 c. 1300, "resin from dried sap of plants," from Old French gome "(medicinal) gum, resin," from Late Latin gumma, from Latin gummi, from Greek kommi "gum," from Egyptian kemai. As the name of a hardened, sweetened gelatine mixture as a candy, 1827. As a shortened form of chewing g

 mushroom 

 a word applied at first to almost any of the larger fungi but later to the agaricoid fungi and especially the edible varieties, mid-15c., muscheron, musseroun (attested 1327 as a surname, John Mussheron), from Anglo-French musherun, Old French meisseron (11c., Modern French mouss

 scepter 

 "staff of office peculiar to royalty or independent sovereignty," c. 1300, ceptre, from Old French ceptre, sceptre (12c.) and directly from Latin sceptrum "royal staff," from Greek skēptron "staff to lean on," in a Persian and Asian context, "royal scepter," in transferred use, "

 serious 

 early 15c., "arranged in sequence, continuous" (a sense now obsolete); mid-15c., of persons, "expressing earnest purpose or thought, resolute," from Old French serios "grave, earnest" (14c., Modern French sérieux) and directly from Late Latin seriosus, from Latin serius "weighty,

 firmament 

 mid-13c., "expanse of space above the earth where the heavenly bodies move," hence "the arch or vault of the heavens, the visible sky" (c. 1300), from Old French firmament or directly from Latin firmamentum "firmament," literally "a support, a strengthening," from firmus "strong,

 alcohol 

 1540s (early 15c. as alcofol), "fine powder produced by sublimation," from Medieval Latin alcohol "powdered ore of antimony," from Arabic al-kuhul "kohl," the fine metallic powder used to darken the eyelids, from kahala "to stain, paint." The al- is the Arabic definite article, "

 dust 

 "fine, dry particles of earth or other matter so light that they can be raised and carried by the wind," Old English dust, from Proto-Germanic *dunstaz (source also of Old High German tunst "storm, breath," German Dunst "mist, vapor," Danish dyst "milldust," Dutch duist), from PI

 sovereign 

 late 13c., soverain, "superior, ruler, master, one who is superior to or has power over another," from Old French soverain "sovereign, lord, ruler," noun use of adjective meaning "highest, supreme, chief" (see sovereign (adj.)). Specifically by c. 1300 as "a king or queen, one wh

 Share benzoin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/benzoin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/benzoin">Etymology of benzoin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of benzoin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/benzoin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of benzoin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/benzoin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of benzoin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/benzoin. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of benzoin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/benzoin (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near benzoin 
 benzene 
 benzine 
 benzo- 
 benzodiazepine 
 benzoic 
 benzoin 
 Beowulf 
 bepester 
 bepuzzle 
 bequeath 
 bequest 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix