URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stucco
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:20:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stucco - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stucco - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stucco 

 stucco (n.) 

 1590s, in reference to a fine plaster used as a wall coating, from Italian stucco , which probably is from a Germanic source (compare Old Saxon stukki , Old English stycce "a piece," Old High German stukki "crust, piece, fragment," German Stück "a piece, patch"); see stock (n.1)).

 From 18c. in reference to a coarser plaster used mainly for rough work and exteriors. The verb, "apply stucco to, cover with stucco" is attested from 1726.

 Related: Stuccoed ; stuccoing . Stuccador for "worker in stucco" is by 1952; Sir Walter Scott did with stuccoer (1818).
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to stucco 

 stock (n.1) 

 Middle English stok , from Old English stocc "stump, wooden post, stake; trunk of a living tree; log," also "pillory" (usually plural, stocks ), from Proto-Germanic *stauk- "tree trunk" (source also of Old Norse stokkr "block of wood, trunk of a tree," Old Saxon, Old Frisian stok , Middle Dutch stoc "tree trunk, stump," Dutch stok "stick, cane," Old High German stoc "tree trunk, stick," German Stock "stick, cane;" also Dutch stuk , German Stück "piece").

 This is said to be from an extended form of PIE root *(s)teu- (1) "to push, stick, knock, beat" (see steep (adj.)), but Boutkan considers that instead it is "probably" from an extended form of the root *sta- "to stand, make or be firm."

 In old use often paired alliteratively with stone (n.). With specific technical senses based on the idea of "principal supporting part" of a tool or weapon (to which others were affixed), such as "block from which a bell is hung," "gun carriage" (both late 15c.).

 The sense of "part of a rifle held against the shoulder" is from 1540s. Stock, lock, and barrel "the whole of a thing" is recorded from 1817.

 The meaning "line of descent, ancestry" is from late 12c.; that of "original progenitor of a family" is late 14c.; figurative uses of the "trunk of a living tree" sense (compare the notion in family tree and the family sense of stem (n.)). 

 In comparisons, the meaning "person as dull and senseless as a block or log" is from c. 1300; hence "a dull recipient of action or notice" (1510s), as in laughing-stock and compare butt (n.3).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 decorate 

 1520s, "deck with something becoming or ornamental, adorn, beautify," from Latin decoratus, past participle of decorare "to decorate, adorn, embellish, beautify," from decus (genitive decoris) "an ornament; grace, dignity, honor," from PIE root *dek- "to take, accept." Earlier wa

 render 

 late 14c., rendren, rendre, "repeat, say again, recite; translate," from Old French rendre "give back, present, yield" (10c.) and Medieval Latin rendere, from Vulgar Latin *rendere, a variant of Latin reddere "give back, return, restore," from red- "back" (see re-) + combining fo

 adorn 

 late 14c., aournen, later adornen, "to decorate, embellish," also "be an ornament to," from Old French aorner "to order, arrange, dispose, equip; adorn," from Latin adornare "equip, provide, furnish;" also "decorate, embellish," from ad "to" (see ad-) + ornare "prepare, furnish, 

 ornament 

 c. 1200, ournement, "an accessory; something that serves primarily for use but also may serve as adornment; ornamental apparel, jewels," from Old French ornement "ornament, decoration," and directly from Latin ornamentum "apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration

 psalter 

 "the Book of Psalms," Middle English sauter, psauter, from Old English saltere, psaltere, Old French sautier, psaltier, and directly from Church Latin psalterium "the songs of David," in secular Latin, "stringed instrument played by twanging," from Greek psaltērion "stringed inst

 plaster 

 late Old English plaster "a medicinal solid compounded for external application," from medical Latin plastrum, shortened by loss of the original prefix from Latin emplastrum "a plaster" (in the medical as well as the building sense), from Greek emplastron "salve, plaster" (used b

 coat 

 early 14c., "principal outer garment, tunic, kirtle," typically made of cloth and usually with sleeves, worn alone or under a mantle, from Old French cote "coat, robe, tunic, overgarment," from Frankish *kotta "coarse cloth" or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon kot "w

 grace 

 late 12c., "God's unmerited favor, love, or help," from Old French grace "pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks; elegance, virtue" (12c., Modern French grâce), from Latin gratia "favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will, gratitude" (source of Italian grazia, Spanis

 surface 

 1610s, "the bounding or limiting parts of a body," from French surface "an outermost boundary, outside part" (16c.), from Old French sur- "above" (see sur-) + face (see face (n.)). The French words is patterned on Latin superficies "surface, upper side, top" (see superficial). Th

 skate 

 "type of flat, cartilaginous fish, a kind of ray," mid-14c., scate, in reference to the common European skate, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skata "skate," Danish skade, Faeroese skøta, a word of unknown origin. All skates are rays, but all rays are not called ska

 Share stucco 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stucco Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stucco">Etymology of stucco by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stucco. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stucco Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stucco," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stucco. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stucco." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stucco. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stucco." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stucco (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stucco 
 stub 
 stubble 
 stubbly 
 stubborn 
 stubby 
 stucco 
 stuck 
 stuck-up 
 stud 
 student 
 studied 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix