URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sodium
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sodium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sodium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sodium 

 sodium (n.) 

 metallic alkaline element, 1807, coined by English chemist Humphry Davy from soda + -ium . So called because the element was isolated from caustic soda (sodium hydroxide). The chemical symbol Na is from natrium , the name for the element that had been proposed by Berzelius and coined from natron , a name of a type of soda.
 also from 1807 

 Entries linking to sodium 

 natron (n.) 

 "native carbonate of sodium," 1680s, from French natron (1660s), which is said to be directly from Arabic natrun , itself from Greek nitron , itself possibly of Eastern origin (see nitre ). Medieval Latin and Paracelsus (16c.) had a form anatron , from Arabic with the article assimilated ( an-natron ). It is the source of the chemical symbol Na for sodium and the word-forming element natro- , used in the names of minerals to indicate the presence of sodium.

 soda (n.) 

 late 15c., sode , "sodium carbonate, an alkaline substance extracted from certain ashes" (now made artificially), from Italian sida (or Medieval Latin soda ), in reference to a kind of saltwort from which soda was obtained, a word of uncertain origin.

 Perhaps it is from a Catalan sosa , attested from late 13c., also a word of uncertain origin. An Arabic name for a variety of saltwort has been proposed as the source, but this word has not been attested and that theory is no longer considered valid. Another theory, considered far-fetched in some quarters, traces it to Medieval Latin sodanum "a headache remedy," ultimately from Arabic suda "splitting headache."

 Soda is found naturally in alkaline lakes, in deposits where such lakes have dried, and in ash produced by burning various seaside plants. It was a major trading commodity in the medieval Mediterranean, but since commercial manufacture of it commenced in France late 18c., natural sources have been abandoned. Washing soda (sodium carbonate) is commonly distinguished from baking soda (sodium bicarbonate). A soda-cracker (1863) has baking soda as an ingredient, as does soda bread (1850).

 The meaning "carbonated water" is first recorded 1834, a shortening of soda water (1802) "water into which carbonic acid has been forced under pressure." "It rarely contains soda in any form; but the name originally applied when sodium carbonate was contained in it has been retained" [Century Dictionary, 1902]. Since 19c. they are typically flavored and sweetened with syrups.

 The first record of soda pop is by 1863, and the most frequent modern use of the word is as a shortening of this or other terms for "flavored, sweetened soda water." Compare pop (n.1). Soda fountain is from 1824 for a metal structure that can dispense carbonated water; soda jerk for the operator of one is attested by 1915, so called for the action involved in drawing it ( soda-jerker is from 1883; soda-fountain boy is from 1876). Colloquial pronunciation "sody" is represented in print from 1900 (U.S. Midwestern).

 aluminum 
 buna 
 Na 
 -ium 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 aluminum 

 1812, coined by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy, from alumina, alumine, the name given by French chemists late 18c. to aluminum oxide, from Latin alumen "alum" (see alum). Davy originally called it alumium (1808), then amended this to aluminum, which remains the U.S. word. Briti

 nitre 

 c. 1400, "native sodium carbonate" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French nitre (13c.), from Latin nitrum, from Greek nitron...

 nitrogen 

 element, 1794, from French nitrogène, coined 1790 by French chemist Jean Antoine Chaptal (1756-1832), from Greek nitron "sodium...

 Coumadin 

 by 1953, name for human anti-coagulant use of the rat poison warfarin sodium, abstracted from the chemical name, 3-(α-acetonylbenzyl...

 salt 

 Old English sealt "salt, sodium chloride, abundant substance essential to life, used as a condiment and meat preservative...

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 an 

 indefinite article before words beginning with vowels, 12c., from Old English an (with a long vowel) "one; lone," also used as a prefix meaning "single, lone" (as in anboren "only-begotten," anhorn "unicorn," anspræce "speaking as one"). See one for the divergence of that word fr

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 menopause 

 "the final cessation of the monthly courses of women," 1852 (from 1845 as a French word in English), from French ménopause, from medical Latin menopausis, from Greek mēn (genitive mēnos) "month" (from PIE *mehnes- "moon, month," from root *me- (2) "to measure," via the notion of 

 Share sodium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sodium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sodium">Etymology of sodium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sodium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sodium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sodium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sodium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sodium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sodium. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sodium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sodium (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sodium 
 sod 
 soda 
 sodality 
 sodbuster 
 sodden 
 sodium 
 Sodom 
 sodomise 
 sodomite 
 sodomize 
 sodomy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix