URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadre
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:40:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cadre - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cadre - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cadre 

 cadre (n.) 

 "permanently organized framework of a military unit" (the officers, etc., as opposed to the rank-and-file), 1851; earlier "framework, scheme" (1830); from French cadre , literally "a frame of a picture" (16c.), so, "a detachment forming the skeleton of a regiment," from Italian quadro , from Latin quadrum "a square," which related to quattuor "four" (from PIE root *kwetwer- "four"). The communist sense of "group or cell of workers trained to promote the interests of the Party" is from 1930.
 also from 1851 

 Entries linking to cadre 

 *kwetwer- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "four."

 It might form all or part of: cadre ; cahier ; carillon ; carrefour ; catty-cornered ; diatessaron ; escadrille ; farthing ; firkin ; fortnight ; forty ; four ; fourteen ; fourth ; quadrant ; quadraphonic ; quadratic ; quadri- ; quadrilateral ; quadriliteral ; quadrille ; quadriplegia ; quadrivium ; quadroon ; quadru- ; quadruped ; quadruple ; quadruplicate ; quarantine ; quarrel (n.2) "square-headed bolt for a crossbow;" quarry (n.2) "open place where rocks are excavated;" quart ; quarter ; quarterback ; quartermaster ; quarters ; quartet ; quarto ; quaternary ; quatrain ; quattrocento ; quire (n.1) "set of four folded pages for a book;" squad ; square ; tessellated ; tetra- ; tetracycline ; tetrad ; tetragrammaton ; tetrameter ; tetrarch ; trapezium .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit catvarah , Avestan čathwaro , Persian čatvar , Greek tessares , Latin quattuor , Oscan petora , Old Church Slavonic četyre , Lithuanian keturi , Old Irish cethir , Welsh pedwar .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cell 

 early 12c., "small monastery, subordinate monastery" (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later "small room for a monk or a nun in a monastic establishment; a hermit's dwelling" (c. 1300), from Latin cella "small room, store room, hut," related to Latin celare "to hide, conceal" 

 military 

 mid-15c., militari, "pertaining to or befitting soldiers; used, done, or brought about by soldiers," from Old French militaire (14c.) and directly from Latin militaris "of soldiers or war, of military service, warlike," from miles (genitive militis) "soldier," a word of unknown o

 nucleus 

 1704, "kernel of a nut;" 1708, "head of a comet;" from Latin nucleus "kernel," from nucula "little nut," diminutive of nux (genitive nucis) "nut," from PIE *kneu- "nut" (source also of Middle Irish cnu, Welsh cneuen, Middle Breton knoen "nut," Old Norse hnot, Old English hnutu "n

 core 

 early 14c., "heart or inmost part of anything" (especially an apple, pear, etc.), of uncertain origin, probably from Old French cor, coeur "core of fruit, heart of lettuce," literally "heart," from Latin cor "heart," from PIE root *kerd- "heart." Meaning "a central portion cut an

 jukebox 

 also juke-box, "machine that automatically plays selected recorded music when a coin is inserted," 1939, earlier jook organ (1937), from jook joint "roadhouse, brothel" (1935), African-American vernacular, from juke, joog "wicked, disorderly," a word in Gullah (the creolized Engl

 diversity 

 mid-14c., diversite, "variety, diverseness;" late 14c., "quality of being diverse, fact of difference between two or more things or kinds; variety; separateness; that in which two or more things differ," mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversete "difference, diversity,

 thank 

 Old English þancian, þoncian "to give thanks, thank, to recompense, to reward," from Proto-Germanic *thankōjanan (source also of Old Saxon thancon, Old Norse þakka, Danish takke, Old Frisian thankia, Old High German danchon, Middle Dutch, Dutch, German danken "to thank"), from *t

 chief 

 c. 1300, "highest in rank or power; most important or prominent; supreme, best, placed above the rest," from Old French chief "chief, principal, first" (10c., Modern French chef), from Vulgar Latin *capum (source also of Spanish and Portuguese cabo, Italian capo, Provençal cap), 

 appreciate 

 1650s, "to esteem or value highly," from Late Latin appretiatus, past participle of appretiare "to set a price to," from ad "to" (see ad-) + pretium "price" (see price (n.)). The meaning "to rise in value" (intransitive) is by 1787; the sense of "be fully conscious of" is by 1833

 rock 

 [stone, mass of mineral matter], Middle English rokke, roche "stone as a substance; large rocky formation, rocky height or outcrop, crag," from Old English rocc (as in stanrocc "stone rock or obelisk") and directly from Old North French roque, variant of Old French roche, which i

 Share cadre 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadre Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadre">Etymology of cadre by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cadre. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadre Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cadre," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadre. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cadre." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadre. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cadre." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadre (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cadre 
 cadge 
 Cadillac 
 Cadiz 
 Cadmean victory 
 cadmium 
 cadre 
 caduceus 
 caducous 
 cady 
 caecum 
 Caenozoic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix