URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhythm
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rhythm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rhythm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rhythm 

 rhythm (n.) 

  16c. spelling variant or attempted classical correction of Middle English rime "measure, meter, rhythm," also "agreement in end-sounds of words or metrical lines, rhyme; a rhyming poem" (12c.), from Old French rime "verse," from Latin rhythmus "movement in time," from Greek rhythmos "measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry; arrangement, order; form, shape, wise, manner; soul, disposition," related to rhein "to flow" (from PIE root *sreu- "to flow"). Compare rhyme .

 The word rhyme has no connection with the word rhythm, nor is rhyme necessary to accentual verse. Nevertheless, rhyme was usually present. On the other hand, in classical Greek metrical poetry, rhymes, if not accidental, were never an essential element of metrical verse structure. [Henry Osborn Taylor, "The Classical Heritage of the Middle Ages," 1911]

 The spelling fluctuated 16c.-17c., rithme and ri'me also being used. From 1550s as "metrical movement, movement in time characterized by equality of measures and alteration of stress and relaxation." By 1776 as "regular succession of beats or accents in music."

 The rhythm method in reference to birth control is attested from 1936. Rhythm and blues , U.S. music style, is from 1949 (first in Billboard magazine).
 also from 16c. 

 Entries linking to rhythm 

 rhyme (n.) 

 "agreement in terminal sounds of words or metrical lines," a 16c. attempt to restore a classical spelling to Middle English ryme, rime (c. 1200) "measure, meter, rhythm," later "rhymed verse" (mid-13c.), from Old French rime (fem.), which is related to Old Provençal rim (masc.), earlier *ritme , from Latin rithmus , from Greek rhythmos "measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry; arrangement, order; form, shape, wise, manner; soul, disposition." This is related to rhein "to flow" (which is reconstructed in Watkins to be from PIE root *sreu- "to flow").

 Compare rhythm , also see rhyme (v.). The intermediate form rhime was frequent until late 18c.

 In Medieval Latin, rithmus was used for accentual, as opposed to quantitative, verse, and accentual verse usually was rhymed, hence the sense shift. In precise prosody it means the quality of agreement in end-sounds such that the last stressed vowel, and any sounds after it, are the same, and preceding sounds differ. 

 Verse was invented as an aid to memory. Later it was preserved to increase pleasure by the spectacle of difficulty overcome. That it should still survive in dramatic art is a vestige of barbarism. [Stendhal "de l'Amour," 1822]

 The sense of "a piece of poetry in which consonance of end-sounds is observed" is from 1610s. It is attested from 1650s as "word that rhymes with another."

 The phrase rhyme or reason "good sense" (chiefly used in the negative) is from late 15c. (see reason (n.)). Rhyme scheme "ordered pattern of end-rhymes in metrical composition" is attested from 1931.

 arrhythmia (n.) 

 in medicine, "irregularity of pulse" ( arrhythmia cordis ), 1888, from Greek noun of action from arrhythmos "irregular, unrhythmical," from a- "not" (see a- (3)) + rhythmos "measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry" (see rhythm ). A nativized form arrhythmy , in reference to metrics, is attested from 1844.

 arrhythmic 
 biorhythm 
 eurythmic 
 rhythmic 
 *sreu- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 eurythmic 

 also eurhythmic, "harmonious," 1831, from Greek eurythmia "rhythmical order," from eurythmos "rhythmical, well-proportioned," from eu "well, good" (see eu-) + rhythmos "measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry" (see rhythm). Related: Eurythmics (also eurhythmics), 

 rhythmic 

 c. 1600, "pertaining to rhythm in art," from French rhythmique or directly from Latin rhythmicus, from Greek rhythmikos, from rhythmos "measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry" (see rhythm). By 1630s of language, verse, music, etc., "marked by regularly recurring 

 cycle 

 late 14c., cicle, "perpetual circulating period of time, on the completion of which certain phenomena return in the same order," especially and originally in reference to astronomical phenomena, from Old French cicle and directly from Late Latin cyclus, from Greek kyklos "circle,

 Jazz Age 

 We are living in a jazz age of super-accentuated rhythm in all things; in a rhythm that (to "jazz" a word) is super-normal..., a rhythm which is the back-flare from the rhythm of a super war....

 rock 

 1948 (in song title "We're gonna rock"), from rock (v.1) in an earlier blues slang sense of "cause to move with musical rhythm...In reference to music, by 1938 as "to have a rocking rhythm;" by 1977 as "exhibit the characteristics of rock music."...

 ride 

 A ride cymbal (1956) is used by jazz drummers for keeping up continuous rhythm, as opposed to a crash cymbal (ride as "rhythm...

 arise 

 by rise except in reference to circumstances; formerly the choice between the two often was made merely for the sake of rhythm...

 downbeat 

 also down-beat, 1876, "the first note of a measure of music" (as indicated by the downward stroke of a conductor's baton or hand). It is attested by 1952 as an adjective in the figurative sense of "pessimistic," but that is probably via associations of the word down (adv.), becau

 abet 

 late 14c., "urge on, incite" (implied in abetting), from Old French abeter "to bait, to harass with dogs," literally "to cause to bite," from a- "to" (see ad-) + beter "to bait." This verb is probably from Frankish or some other Germanic source (perhaps Low Franconian betan "inci

 beat 

 Old English beatan "inflict blows on, strike repeatedly, thrash" (class VII strong verb; past tense beot, past participle beaten), from Proto-Germanic *bautan (source also of Old Norse bauta, Old High German bozan "to beat"), from PIE root *bhau- "to strike." Past tense form beat

 Share rhythm 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhythm Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhythm">Etymology of rhythm by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rhythm. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhythm Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rhythm," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhythm. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rhythm." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhythm. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rhythm." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhythm (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rhythm 
 Rhone 
 rhotacism 
 rhubarb 
 rhyme 
 rhyme royal 
 rhythm 
 rhythmic 
 ria 
 rialto 
 riata 
 rib 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix