URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/scimitar
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Scimitar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Scimitar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of scimitar 

 scimitar (n.) 

 "short, curved, single-edged sword," a characteristic weapon of the Turks and Persians, 1540s, cimiterie , from French cimeterre (15c.) or Italian scimitarra , words of uncertain origin. Turkish would be the expected source of them, but no such word has been found there. Perhaps it is from Persian shimshir (pronounced "shamsher," compare Greek sampsera "a barbarian sword," from Persian), but the OED finds this "unsatisfactory as to form."

 The modern spelling is from influence of the Italian form of the word. Century Dictionary (1895) has simitar as preferred spelling, and notes, "This word, owing to its Oriental origin and associations, to ignorance of its original form, and to the imitation now of the F. now of the It. spelling, has appeared in a great variety of forms."
 also from 1540s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 saber 

 type of heavy, single-edged sword, usually slightly curved, 1670s, from French sabre "heavy, curved sword" (17c.), alteration of sable (1630s), from German Sabel, Säbel, which probably is ultimately from Hungarian szablya "saber," literally "tool to cut with," from szabni "to cut

 salad 

 late 14c., salade, "raw herbs cut up and variously dressed," from Old French salade (14c.) and Medieval Latin salata, both from Vulgar Latin *salata, literally "salted," short for herba salata "salted vegetables" (vegetables seasoned with brine, a popular Roman dish), from fem. p

 consent 

 c. 1300, "agree, give assent; yield when one has the right, power, or will to oppose," from Old French consentir "agree; comply" (12c.) and directly from Latin consentire "agree, accord," literally "feel together," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + sentir

 absorb 

 "to drink in, suck up, take in by absorption," early 15c., from Old French absorbir, assorbir (13c., Modern French absorber), from Latin absorbere "to swallow up, devour," from ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + sorbere "suck in," from PIE root *srebh- "to suck, absorb" (source also

 beam 

 Old English beam, "living tree," but by late 10c. also "rafter, post, ship's timber," from Proto-Germanic *baumaz "tree" (source also of Old Frisian bam "tree, gallows, beam," Middle Dutch boom, Old High German boum, German Baum "tree," and perhaps also (with unexplained sound ch

 review 

 mid-15c., review, revewe, reveue, "a formal inspection of military forces" by a higher official or superior in rank, to judge the effectiveness of their training, from Old French reveue "a reviewing, review" (Modern French revue), noun use of fem. past participle of reveeir "to s

 bless 

 Middle English blessen, from Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian "to consecrate by a religious rite, make holy, give thanks," from Proto-Germanic *blodison "hallow with blood, mark with blood," from *blotham "blood" (see blood (n.)). Originally a blood sprinkli

 college 

 late 14c., "organized association of persons invested with certain powers and rights or engaged in some common duty or pursuit," especially "body of scholars and students within an endowed institution of learning," also "resident body of ecclesiastics supported by an endowment," 

 broad 

 Old English brad "wide, not narrow," also "flat, open, extended," from Proto-Germanic *braidi- (source also of Old Frisian bred, Old Norse breiðr, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brouþs), which is of unknown origin. Not found outside Germanic languages. There is no clear distin

 altruism 

 1853, "unselfishness, devotion to the welfare of others, the opposite of egoism," from French altruisme, coined or popularized 1830 by French philosopher Auguste Comte, with -ism + autrui (Old French altrui) "of or to others," from Latin alteri, dative of alter "other" (see alter

 Share scimitar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/scimitar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/scimitar">Etymology of scimitar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of scimitar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/scimitar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of scimitar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scimitar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of scimitar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scimitar. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of scimitar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/scimitar (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near scimitar 
 scientism 
 scientist 
 Scientology 
 scilicet 
 Scilly 
 scimitar 
 scintilla 
 scintillant 
 scintillate 
 scintillation 
 sciolism 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix