URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/club
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:46:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Club - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Club - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of club 

 club (n.) 

 c. 1200, "thick stick wielded in the hand and used as a weapon," from Old Norse klubba "cudgel" or a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish klubba , Danish klubbe ), assimilated from Proto-Germanic *klumbon and related to clump (n.). Old English words for this were sagol , cycgel . Specific sense of "bat or staff used in games" is from mid-15c.

 The club suit in the deck of cards (1560s) bears the correct name (Spanish basto , Italian bastone ), but the pattern adopted on English decks is the French trefoil. Compare Danish klr , Dutch klaver "a club at cards," literally "a clover."

 The sense "company of persons organized to meet for social intercourse or to promote some common object" (1660s) apparently evolved from this word from the verbal sense "gather in a club-like mass" (1620s), then, as a noun, "association of people" (1640s).

 We now use the word clubbe for a sodality in a tavern. [John Aubrey, 1659]

 Admission to membership of clubs is commonly by ballot. Clubs are now an important feature of social life in all large cities, many of them occupying large buildings containing reading-rooms, libraries, restaurants, etc. [Century Dictionary, 1902]

 I got a good mind to join a club and beat you over the head with it. [Rufus T. Firefly, 1933] 

 Join the club "become one of a number of people having a common experience" is by 1944. Club soda is by 1881, originally a proprietary name (Cantrell & Cochrane, Dublin). Club car is from 1890, American English, originally one well-appointed and reserved for members of a club run by the railway company; later of any railway car fitted with chairs instead of benches and other amenities (1917). Hence club for "class of fares between first-class and transit" (1978).

 The club car is one of the most elaborate developments of the entire Commuter idea. It is a comfortable coach, which is rented to a group of responsible men coming either from a single point or a chain of contiguous points. The railroad charges from $250 to $300 a month for the use of this car in addition to the commutation fares, and the "club" arranges dues to cover this cost and the cost of such attendants and supplies as it may elect to place on its roving house. [Edward Hungerford, "The Modern Railroad," 1911]

 also from c. 1200 

 club (v.) 

 1590s, "to hit with a club," from club (v.). Meaning "gather in a club-like mass" is from 1620s. Related: Clubbed ; clubbing . Also in a military sense (1806):

 CLUB , 
 verb (military). — In manoeuvring troops, so to blunder the word of command that the soldiers get into a position from which they cannot extricate themselves by ordinary tactics. [Farmer & Henley]
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to club 

 clump (n.) 

 1580s, "lump; cluster or small, close group" (especially of shrubs or trees), from Middle English clompe "a lump" (c. 1300), from a Low German source (such as Dutch klomp "lump, mass," or Middle Low German klumpe "clog, wooden shoe"). Old English had clympre "lump, mass of metal."

 ball-club (n.) 

 also ballclub , "association of players of a ball game," 1845, from ball (n.1) + club (n.) in the "social organization" sense.

 club sandwich 
 clubbable 
 clubbed 
 clubby 
 club-fist 
 club-foot 
 club-house 
 club-moss 
 nightclub 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nine 

 "the cardinal number one more than eight or one less than ten; the number which is one more than eight;" Middle English nīn, from Old English nigen, from Proto-Germanic *newun (source also of Old Saxon nigun, Old Frisian niugun, Old Norse niu, Swedish nio, Middle Dutch neghen, Du

 society 

 1530s, "companionship, friendly association with others," from Old French societe "company" (12c., Modern French société), from Latin societatem (nominative societas) "fellowship, association, alliance, union, community," from socius "companion, ally," from PIE *sokw-yo-, suffixe

 guild 

 also gild, early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi "guild, brotherhood"), a semantic fusion of Old English gegield "guild, brotherhood," and gield "service, offering; payment, tribute; compensation," from Proto-Germanic *geldja- "payment, contribution" (so

 kit-cat 

 name of a club founded by Whig politicians in London (Addison and Steele were members), 1703; so called from Christopher...("Kit") Catling, or a name similar to it, a tavernkeeper or pastry cook in London, in whose property the club first met....less than half length in which a hand may be shown" (1754), supposedly is because the dining room in which portraits of club...

 Athenaeum 

 The modern meaning "literary club-room or reading room" is from 1799; the sense of "literary or scientific club" is from...

 machete 

 macheto), from Spanish machete "a chopping knife," probably a diminutive of macho "sledge hammer," alteration of mazo "club...," which is probably [Barnhart] a dialectal variant of maza "mallet," from Vulgar Latin *mattea "war club" (see mace (n.1...

 ladies 

 Ladies' night (1880) originally was any event to which women were invited at an all-male club....it is doubtful if any occasion has been more truly "the best ever" than the ladies' night of the Paint, Oil and Varnish Club...

 assemble 

 early 14c., transitive ("collect into one place") and intransitive ("meet or come together"), from Old French assembler "come together, join, unite; gather" (11c.), from Latin assimulare "to make like, liken, compare; copy, imitate; feign, pretend," later "to gather together," fr

 hunt 

 Old English huntian "chase game" (transitive and intransitive), perhaps developed from hunta "hunter," and related to hentan "to seize," from Proto-Germanic *huntojan (source also of Gothic hinþan "to seize, capture," Old High German hunda "booty"), which is of uncertain origin. 

 dive 

 c. 1200, diven, "descend or plunge headfirst into water," from a merger of Old English dufan "to dive, duck, sink" (intransitive, class II strong verb; past tense deaf, past participle dofen) and dyfan "to dip, submerge" (weak, transitive), from Proto-Germanic verb *dubijan, from

 Share club 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/club Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/club">Etymology of club by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of club. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/club Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of club," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/club. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of club." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/club. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of club." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/club (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near club 
 clowning 
 clownish 
 cloy 
 cloying 
 cloze 
 club 
 club sandwich 
 clubbable 
 clubbed 
 clubby 
 club-fist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix