URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/neb
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:41:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Neb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Neb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of neb 

 neb (n.) 

 "beak or bill of a bird," Old English nebb "beak, nose; human face, countenance; beak-shaped thing," from Proto-Germanic nabja "beak, nose" (source also of Old Norse nef "beak, nose," Middle Dutch nebbe "beak," Old High German snabul , German Schnabel "beak," Old Frisian snavel "mouth"), which is of uncertain origin.

 Entries linking to neb 

 nib (n.) 

 1580s, "beak or bill of a bird," Scottish variant of neb "beak or bill of a bird." Perhaps influenced by nibble (v.). Meaning "point" (of a pen or quill) is recorded by 1610s ( neb in this sense is from 1590s).

 nipple (n.) 

 1530s, nyppell , "protuberance of a mammalian breast," in a female the extremity where the milk-ducts discharge, alteration of neble (1520s), probably diminutive of neb "bill, beak, snout" (see neb ), hence, literally "a small projection." Used from 1713 of any thing or mechanical part that projects like a nipple. From 1875 in reference to the mouthpiece of an infant's nursing-bottle. Earlier words were pap (n.2), teat . A 16c.-17c. slang term for a woman's nipples was cherrilets .

 snaffle (n.) 

 simple bridle-bit, 1530s, a word of uncertain origin, likely from or related to Dutch snavel "beak, bill; nose or snout of a beast;" compare German Schnabel "beak, face," Old English nebb , Old Norse neff "beak, nose" (see neb ). Often figurative, in reference to loose restraint, etc. As a verb by 1550s. Related: Snaffled; snaffling .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 beak 

 mid-13c., "bird's bill," from Old French bec "beak," figuratively "mouth," also "tip or point of a nose, a lance, a ship, or a shoe," from Late Latin beccus (source also of Italian becco, Spanish pico), by the Romans said to be of Gaulish origin, perhaps from Gaulish beccus, and 

 bill 

 [written statement] late 14c., "formal document; formal plea or charge (in a court of law); personal letter," from Anglo-French bille, Anglo-Latin billa "a writing, a list, a seal," from Medieval Latin bulla "decree, seal, sealed document," in classical Latin "bubble, boss, stud,

 snout 

 early 13c., "trunk or projecting nose of an animal, the nose or jaws when protrusive," not found in Old English, from Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snute "snout," from Proto-Germanic *snut- (source also of German Schnauze, Norwegian snut, Danish snude "snout"). Throughout th

 rickey 

 [The Conservative, Nebraska City, Neb., July 6, 1899.]...

 bake 

 Old English bacan "to bake, to cook by dry heat in a closed place or on a heated surface," from Proto-Germanic *bakan "to bake" (source also of Old Norse baka, Middle Dutch backen, Old High German bahhan, German backen), from PIE *bheg- (source also of Greek phogein "to roast"), 

 mouth 

 Old English muþ "oral opening of an animal or human; opening of anything, door, gate," from Proto-Germanic *muntha- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund, German Mund, Gothic munþs "mouth"), 

 nose 

 Middle English nose, from Old English nosu "the nose of the human head, the special organ of breathing and smelling," from Proto-Germanic *nuso- (source also of Old Norse nös, Old Frisian nose, Dutch neus, Old High German nasa, German Nase), from PIE root *nas- "nose." Used of be

 trunk 

 mid-15c., "box, case," from Old French tronc "alms box in a church," also "trunk of a tree, trunk of the human body, wooden block" (12c.), from Latin truncus "trunk of a tree, trunk of the body," of uncertain origin, probably originally "mutilated, cut off," and perhaps from PIE 

 muzzle 

 late 14c., mosel, "device put over an animal's mouth to stop it from biting, eating, or rooting," from Old French musel "muzzle," also "snout, nose" (12c., Modern French museau), from muse "muzzle," from Gallo-Roman *musa "snout" (source also of Provençal mus, Old Spanish mus, It

 bird 

 "feathered, warm-blooded vertebrate animal of the class Aves," Old English bird, a rare collateral form of bridd, originally meaning "young bird, nestling" (the usual Old English for "bird" being fugol, for which see fowl (n.)), which is of uncertain origin with no cognates in an

 Share neb 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/neb Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/neb">Etymology of neb by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of neb. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/neb Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of neb," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/neb. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of neb." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/neb. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of neb." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/neb (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near neb 
 neat 
 neaten 
 neath 
 neatnik 
 neato 
 neb 
 nebbish 
 *nebh- 
 Nebraska 
 Nebuchadnezzar 
 nebula 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix