URL: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/shank
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: shank - Wiktionary, the free dictionary

shank - Wiktionary, the free dictionary 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Community portal 
 Requested entries 
 Recent changes 
 Random entry 
 Help 
 Glossary 
 Contact us 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Beginning

 1 
 English 

 Toggle English subsection 

 1.1 
 Etymology 

 1.2 
 Pronunciation 

 1.3 
 Noun 

 1.3.1 
 Derived terms 

 1.3.2 
 Translations 

 1.4 
 Verb 

 1.5 
 Adjective 

 1.6 
 See also 

 1.7 
 Anagrams 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 shank 

 28 languages 

 Brezhoneg 
 Català 
 Cymraeg 
 Esperanto 
 Eesti 
 Suomi 
 Français 
 Magyar 
 Հայերեն 
 Ido 
 Italiano 
 한국어 
 Kurdî 
 Malagasy 
 മലയാളം 
 မြန်မာဘာသာ 
 Oromoo 
 Polski 
 Русский 
 Simple English 
 Gagana Samoa 
 Svenska 
 Kiswahili 
 தமிழ் 
 తెలుగు 
 اردو 
 Tiếng Việt 
 中文 

 Entry 

 Discussion 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 

 Print/export

 Create a book 
 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wiktionary, the free dictionary

 English
 [ edit ] 

 English Wikipedia has an article on: shank 

 Wikipedia 

 Etymology
 [ edit ] 

 Inherited from Middle English sceonke , schank , schanke , shanke , schonke , sconke , sschanke , from Old English sċanca , sċeanca , sċeonca ( “ leg ” ) , from Proto-West Germanic *skankō , from Proto-Germanic *skankô ( “ shank; thigh ” ) , from Proto-Indo-European *(s)keng- ( “ to hobble, limp; to tilt ” ) .

 Cognates

 Cognate with West Frisian skonk ( “ leg ” ) , Dutch schenkel ( “ shank ” ) , German and Luxembourgish Schenkel ( “ thigh ” ) , Danish skank ( “ shank; leg ” ) , Norwegian Nynorsk skank , skonk ( “ thigh; foot ” ) , Swedish skank , skånk ( “ leg ” ) ; also Cornish kamm ( “ pace, step ” ) , Irish céim ( “ pace, step ” ) , Manx keim ( “ degree, pace, stage, step ” ) , Scottish Gaelic ceum ( “ pace, step ” ) , Welsh cam ( “ pace, step ” ) , Greek σκάω ( skáo ) , σκάζω ( skázo , “ to burst, explode ” ) , Bulgarian and Macedonian шега́ ( šegá , “ jest, joke; prank ” ) .

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 ( without æ-raising ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈʃæŋk/ , [ˈʃʰæŋk] 
 Audio ( US ) : ( file ) 

 ( æ-raising ) 
 ( US , Canada ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈʃeɪ̯ŋk/ , [ˈʃʰeɪ̯ŋk] ; /ˈʃɛ̃ŋk/ , [ˈʃʰɛ̃ŋk] 

 Rhymes: -æŋk 

 Hyphenation: shank 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 shank ( plural shanks ) 

 The part of the leg between the knee and the ankle.
 Edward I of England was nicknamed Edward Long shanks .

 c. 1598–1600 (date written) , William Shakespeare , “ As You Like It ”, in Mr. William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies   [ … ] ( First Folio ), London: [ … ] Isaac Iaggard , and Ed [ ward ] Blount , published 1623 , →OCLC , [ Act II, scene 7) ] : His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide / For his shrunk shank […] 

 Meat from that part of an animal.

 ( ornithology , colloquial ) A redshank or greenshank , various species of Old World wading birds in the genus Tringa having distinctly colored legs.

 A straight , narrow part of an object , such as a key or an anchor ; shaft ; stem .
 1904–1906 , Joseph Conrad , chapter IV, in The Mirror of the Sea , 1st American edition, New York, N.Y.; London: Harper & Brothers , published October 1906, →OCLC : The honest, rough piece of iron, so simple in appearance, has more parts than the human body has limbs: the ring, the stock, the crown, the flukes, the palms, the shank . All this, according to the journalist, is “cast” when a ship arriving at an anchorage is brought up. 

 The handle of a pair of shears , connecting the ride to the neck .

 The center part of a fishhook between the eye and the hook , the 'hook' being the curved part that bends toward the point .

 A protruding part of an object, by which it is or can be attached .
 This twist drill has a reduced shank so that it can be used even in a small chuck. 

 The metal part on a curb bit that falls below the mouthpiece, which length controls the severity of the leverage action of the bit , and to which the reins of the bridle are attached.

 ( golf ) A poorly played golf shot in which the ball is struck by the part of the club head that connects to the shaft.
 1953 , Arnold Gingrich, The Esquire Treasury : To a good golfer a shank is disgracefuller than being dead drunk or in jail. 

 ( shoemaking ) The part of the sole beneath the instep connecting the broader front part with the heel .

 ( shoemaking ) A metal strip strengthening the waists of shoes. (Also shankpiece .)

 ( slang ) An improvised stabbing weapon , originally in prison, possibly from the strips of metal in shoes.
 Synonym: ( slang ) shiv 
 Alternative form: yank 
 2017 , Stormzy , Mura Masa , “Mr Skeng” (track 1), in Gang Signs & Prayer , performed by Stormzy: LBC's tryna blackball me / And tryna blame your boy for knife crime (Like, what?) / I don't use a shank , I got money in the bank / Man, I'd rather do a drive-by 

 2019 , Casey Diaz, Mike Yorkey, The Shot Caller [ … ] , Emanate Books, →ISBN , page 76 : One of the shot callers ' responsibilities was to control the shanks within the prison population—the crude homemade knives used for stabbing another prisoner. 

 A loop forming an eye to a button .

 ( architecture ) The space between two channels of the Doric triglyph . [18th century] 

 ( metalworking ) A large ladle for molten metal , fitted with long bars for handling it.

 ( printing , dated ) The body of a type ; between the shoulder and the foot .

 Flat-nosed pliers , used by opticians for nipping off the edges of pieces of glass to make them round.

 The end or remainder, particularly of a period of time.

 The main part or beginning of a period of time.
 the shank of the morning 

 1945 , Tennessee Williams, The Glass Menagerie , page 92 : AMANDA : Going now? You're joking! Why, it's only the shank of the evening, Mr. O’Connor! 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 bit shank 
 catshank 
 dogshank 
 foreshank 
 greenshank 
 ham shank 
 Longshanks 
 midshank 
 redshank 
 shankbone ( “ bone of the foreleg ” ) 
 shank-iron 
 shankless 
 shank-nag 
 shank-painter 
 shanks' mare 
 shanks' nag 
 shanks' pony 
 shank-weary 
 sheepshank 
 spindleshanks 
 spotshank 
 toughshank 
 umbroshank 
 velvet shank 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 lower part of the leg

 Afrikaans: skenkel 

 Arabic: عُرْقُوب   m ( ʕurqūb ) 
 Egyptian Arabic: عرقوب   m ( ʕarʔūb ) 

 Armenian: սրունք   (hy) ( srunkʻ ) 

 Bashkir: сираҡ ( siraq ) , ашҡаҡ ( aşqaq ) , енсек ( yensek ) 

 Bengali: ঠেং   (bn) ( ṭheṅ ) 

 Bulgarian: подбедрица   f ( podbedrica ) 

 Catalan: garra   f 

 Czech: bérec   (cs)   m 

 Dutch: onderbeen   (nl)   n , schenkel   (nl)   m 

 Esperanto: kruro   (eo) 

 Finnish: sääri   (fi) ( in humans ) , potka   (fi) ( in animals ) 

 French: jambe   (fr)   f 

 Galician: canela   (gl) 

 German: Unterschenkel   (de)   m 

 Hungarian: lábszár   (hu) 

 Icelandic: leggur   (is)   m 

 Ingrian: sääri 

 Irish: spanla   m , lorga   m 

 Italian: gamba   (it)   f 

 Lithuanian: blauzda   (lt)   f 

 Kyrgyz: шыйрак ( şıyrak ) 

 Norman: gambe   f ( Jersey ) 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: skinnben   n , skinnbein   n , skank   m , skjenkel   m ( of some animals ) , legg   (no)   m ( both the calf and the shin; see also skinnelegg ) 

 Persian: قلم پا ( qalam-e pâ ) 

 Polish: goleń   (pl)   f 

 Portuguese: canela   (pt)   f 

 Romanian: gambă   (ro)   f 

 Russian: го́лень   (ru)   f ( gólenʹ ) ( in humans ) , плюсна́   (ru)   f ( pljusná ) ( in horses ) 

 Serbo-Croatian: potkoljenica   (sh)   f , gnjat   (sh)   m 

 Sicilian: gamma   (scn)   f , jamma   (scn)   f 

 Slovak: lýtko   (sk) , holeň   (sk) , píšťala 

 Southern Altai: јодо ( ǰodo ) , шыйрак ( šïyrak ) 

 Swedish: skänkel   (sv) 

 Turkish:
 Ottoman Turkish: اینجك ( incik ) , باجاق ( bacak ) 

 Ukrainian: гомілка   f ( homilka ) 

 meat from that part of animal

 Armenian: արտալա   (hy) ( artala ) 

 Bulgarian: джолан   m ( džolan ) 

 Estonian: koot 

 Finnish: potka   (fi) , etupotka ( front leg ) , takapotka ( hind leg ) 

 French: jarret   (fr)   m 

 Georgian: კანჭი ( ḳanč̣i ) 

 German: Beinstück   m , Hachse   (de)   f 

 Greek:
 Ancient Greek: κωλῆ   f ( kōlê ) , κωλήν   f ( kōlḗn ) 

 Indonesian: sengkel 

 Irish: speir   f 

 Italian: stinco   (it)   m 

 Ladino: puli   m 

 Macedonian: коленица   f ( kolenica ) 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: skank   m 

 Pannonian Rusyn: колєнко   n ( koljenko ) 

 Persian: سردست   (fa) ( sardast ) 

 Romanian: rasol   (ro)   n 

 Slovak: lýtko   (sk) 

 Swedish: skänkel   (sv) 

 Turkish: incik   (tr) 

 straight, narrow part of an object

 Bulgarian: стержен   m ( steržen ) 

 Czech: dřík   (cs)   m 

 Finnish: varsi   (fi) 

 French: tringle   (fr)   f 

 Italian: gambo   (it)   m 

 Russian: сте́ржень   (ru)   m ( stérženʹ ) 

 Swedish: skänkel   (sv) 

 Ukrainian: стрижень   (uk)   m ( stryženʹ ) 

 The centre part of a fishhook

 Māori: koreke 

 protruding part of an object, by which it can be attached

 Finnish: kahva   (fi) , otin   (fi) , ripa   (fi) 

 Russian: хвостови́к   (ru)   m ( xvostovík ) 

 Ukrainian: хвостовик   m ( xvostovyk ) 

 part of curb bit

 Finnish: varsi   (fi) 

 an improvised stabbing weapon

 Spanish: pincho   (es)   m 

 Swedish: syl   (sv) , vässat skaft 

 a bird of the genus Tringa 

 Catalan: gamba   (ca)   f 

 Russian: улит   (ru)   m ( ulit ) 

 Verb
 [ edit ] 

 shank ( third-person singular simple present shanks , present participle shanking , simple past and past participle shanked ) 

 ( archaic , Ulster ) To travel on foot .
 Synonyms: pedestrianize , walk ; see also Thesaurus: walk 

 ( slang ) To stab , especially with an improvised blade.
 Synonyms: jab , ( slang ) shiv ; see also Thesaurus: stab 
 2018 , Mike Oppenhuizen, “Pants of Fire” (1:53 from the start), in Geeta Patel, director, Atypical , season 2, episode 4, spoken by Casey and Sam (Jack Haven (credited as Brigette Lundy-Paine) and Keir Gilchrist), via Netflix: Casey: You're being too honest. You gotta... tell 'em what they want to hear. You gotta lie, dude.
Sam: I can't lie. I'm bad at it and I don't like it. What's the point?
Casey: Well, imagine if you didn't like your boss at work.
Sam: I do. I like Bob.
Casey: I know, that's why I said "imagine". If you lie and pretend that you like them, you're fine. But if you tell them the truth, you get fired, you can't afford food, and you get shanked for cutting in line at the soup kitchen. And then you die.
Sam: Huh! That does make sense.
Casey: Sometimes you have to lie to get by. 

 ( slang ) To remove another's trousers , especially in jest; to depants .
 Synonyms: debag , ( slang ) depants 

 ( transitive , golf ) To misstrike the ball with the part of the club head that connects to the shaft.

 ( transitive , chiefly tennis , soccer , gridiron football ) To hit or kick the ball in an unintended direction .
 2011 September 28, Tom Rostance, “Arsenal 2 - 1 Olympiakos”, in BBC Sport ‎ [1] : Marouane Chamakh then spurned a great chance to kill the game off when he ran onto Andrey Arshavin 's lofted through ball but shanked his shot horribly across the face of goal. 

 ( intransitive ) To fall off, as a leaf , flower , or capsule , on account of disease affecting the supporting footstalk ; usually followed by off .
 1861 , Charles Darwin , Cause of the variation of flowers : the gerrnens of these swelled, and on four out of the six I have now got fine pods, above 1% inch in length, with the seeds externally visible; whereas the flower stalks of the many other flowers all shanked off. 

 ( transitive , sewing ) To provide (a button) with a shank ( loop forming an eye ) .
 2000 , The Indian Textile Journal (volume 110, issues 7-12)
 The system is suitable for shanking all kind of sewn buttons (jackets, coats, blouses, shirts, trousers). 

 ( shoemaking ) To apply the shank to a shoe, during the process of manufacturing it.
 1986 March 6, "Factory Work" [ Poetry , 147], quoted in 2009 , Deborah Boe, The Girl of the Early Race: Poems , Gegensatz Press ( →ISBN ):
 I take those metal shanks, slide the backs of them in glue and make them lie down on the shoe-bottoms, [ … ] Last week they ran a contest to see which shankers shanked fastest. I'm not embarrassed to say I beat them all. 

 Adjective
 [ edit ] 

 shank ( comparative shanker , superlative shankest ) 

 ( slang ) Bad .

 See also
 [ edit ] 

 shank it 

 ( poorly played golf shot ) : thin , fat , toe 

 Anagrams
 [ edit ] 

 Hanks , Naskh , ankhs , hanks , khans 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=shank&oldid=92478449 "

 Categories : English terms derived from Proto-Indo-European 
 English terms derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *(s)keng- 
 English terms inherited from Middle English 
 English terms derived from Middle English 
 English terms inherited from Old English 
 English terms derived from Old English 
 English terms inherited from Proto-West Germanic 
 English terms derived from Proto-West Germanic 
 English terms inherited from Proto-Germanic 
 English terms derived from Proto-Germanic 
 English 1-syllable words 
 English terms with IPA pronunciation 
 English terms with audio pronunciation 
 Rhymes:English/æŋk 
 Rhymes:English/æŋk/1 syllable 
 English lemmas 
 English nouns 
 English countable nouns 
 English terms with quotations 
 en:Ornithology 
 English colloquialisms 
 English terms with usage examples 
 en:Golf 
 en:Shoemaking 
 English slang 
 en:Architecture 
 en:Metalworking 
 en:Printing 
 English dated terms 
 English verbs 
 English terms with archaic senses 
 Ulster English 
 English transitive verbs 
 en:Tennis 
 en:Football (soccer) 
 English intransitive verbs 
 en:Sewing 
 English adjectives 
 en:Body parts 
 en:Cuts of meat 
 en:Fishing 
 en:Footwear 
 en:Gaits 
 en:Horse tack 
 en:Prison 
 en:Scolopacids 
 en:Time 
 en:Tools 
 en:Weapons 

 Hidden categories: Pages with entries 
 Pages with 1 entry 
 Entries with translation boxes 
 Terms with Afrikaans translations 
 Terms with Arabic translations 
 Terms with Egyptian Arabic translations 
 Terms with Armenian translations 
 Terms with Bashkir translations 
 Terms with Bengali translations 
 Terms with Bulgarian translations 
 Terms with Catalan translations 
 Terms with Czech translations 
 Terms with Dutch translations 
 Terms with Esperanto translations 
 Terms with Finnish translations 
 Terms with French translations 
 Terms with Galician translations 
 Terms with German translations 
 Terms with Hungarian translations 
 Terms with Icelandic translations 
 Terms with Ingrian translations 
 Terms with Irish translations 
 Terms with Italian translations 
 Terms with Lithuanian translations 
 Terms with Kyrgyz translations 
 Terms with Norman translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Bokmål translations 
 Terms with Persian translations 
 Terms with Polish translations 
 Terms with Portuguese translations 
 Terms with Romanian translations 
 Terms with Russian translations 
 Terms with Serbo-Croatian translations 
 Terms with Sicilian translations 
 Terms with Slovak translations 
 Terms with Southern Altai translations 
 Terms with Swedish translations 
 Terms with Ottoman Turkish translations 
 Terms with Ukrainian translations 
 Terms with Estonian translations 
 Terms with Georgian translations 
 Terms with Ancient Greek translations 
 Terms with Indonesian translations 
 Terms with Ladino translations 
 Terms with Macedonian translations 
 Terms with Pannonian Rusyn translations 
 Terms with Turkish translations 
 Terms with Māori translations 
 Terms with Spanish translations 
 Quotation templates to be cleaned 

 This page was last edited on 4 September 2026, at 17:38.

 Definitions and other text are available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 

 Privacy policy 

 About Wiktionary 

 Disclaimers 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 shank 

 28 languages 

 Add topic