URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tungsten
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:38:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tungsten - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tungsten - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tungsten 

 tungsten (n.) 

 rare metallic element, noted for its hardness, 1796, from Swedish tungsten "calcium tungstate," coined 1780 by its discoverer, Swedish chemist Karl Wilhelm Scheele (1742-1786) from tung "heavy" + sten "stone" (see stone (n.)).

 The word was used earlier as the name for calcium tungstate (1770). The atomic symbol W is from Latin wolframium , from German Wolfram "iron tungstate" (see wolfram ). Related: Tungstate; tungstenic ; tungstite ; tungstous .
 also from 1796 

 Entries linking to tungsten 

 stone (n.) 

 "discrete piece of rock," especially not a large one, Old English stan , which was used of common rocks, precious gems, concretions in the body, memorial stones, from Proto-Germanic *stainaz (source also of Old Norse steinn , Danish steen , Old Saxon sten , Old Frisian sten , Dutch steen , Old High German stein , German Stein , Gothic stains ).

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *stoi-no- , suffixed form of root *stai- "stone," also "to thicken, stiffen" (source also of Sanskrit styayate "curdles, becomes hard;" Avestan stay- "heap;" Greek stear "fat, tallow," stia, stion "pebble;" Old Church Slavonic stena , Russian stiena "wall").

 From late 12c. as "substance of which stones consist, rock, stone as a medium." The sense of "testicle" was in late Old English. The British measure of weight (usually equal to 14 pounds) is from late 14c., originally a specific stone.

 Stone-fruit , "drupe, fruit with a hard stone or nut at the center," is from 1520s. Stone's throw for "a short distance" is attested from 1580s; stone's cast in the same sense is from late 13c., also "a short time." Stone age , "period of human cultural development marked by tools or weapons made of stone," is from 1864; adjectival extended sense of "outmoded, unsophisticated" is by 1927.

 To kill two birds with one stone "accomplish two purposes with one act" is attested by 1650s. To leave no stone unturned "use every possible expedient" is from 1540s.

 To have a heart of stone figuratively is by late 14c. (in a list of 1897 slang terms, to refuse a person's appeal is to give him the marble heart ).

 wolfram (n.) 

 type of mineral, 1757, from German Wolfram, wolform "iron tungstate" (1562), like many German miners' words, of obscure etymology (compare cobalt ).

 It looks like "wolf-cream" (from rahm "cream"), but the second element might be Middle High German ram (German Rahm ) "dirty mark, soot;" if so, perhaps "so called in sign of contempt because it was regarded of lesser value than tin and caused a considerable loss of tin during the smelting process in the furnace" [Klein]. Or perhaps the word is originally a personal name, "wolf-raven."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 W 

 not in the Roman alphabet, but the Modern English sound it represents is close to the devocalized consonant expressed by Roman -U- or -V-. In Old English, this originally was written -uu-, but by 8c. began to be expressed by the runic character wyn (Kentish wen), which looked lik

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 Druid 

 "one of the order of priests among the ancient Celts of Gaul, Britain, and Ireland," 1560s, from French druide (16c.), from Latin druis, fem. druias (plural druidae), from Gaulish Druides, from Celtic compound *dru-wid- "strong seer," from Old Celtic *derwos "true" (from PIE root

 ideology 

 1796, "science of ideas," originally "philosophy of the mind which derives knowledge from the senses" (as opposed to metaphysics), from French idéologie "study or science of ideas," coined by French philosopher Destutt de Tracy (1754-1836) from idéo- "of ideas," from Greek idea (

 panegyric 

 "eulogy, laudation, praise bestowed upon some person, action, or character," c. 1600, from French panégyrique (1510s), from Latin panegyricus "public eulogy," originally an adjective, "for a public festival," from Greek panēgyrikos (logos) "(a speech) given in or addressed to a p

 patent 

 late 14c., "open letter or official document from some authority granting permission to do something; a licence granting an office, right, title, etc.," shortened from Anglo-French lettre patent (also in Medieval Latin litteræ patentes), literally "open letter" (late 13c.), from 

 sorry 

 Middle English sori, from Old English sarig "distressed, grieved, full of sorrow" (not found in the physical sense of "sore"), from Proto-Germanic *sairiga- "painful" (source also of Old Saxon serag, Middle Dutch seerigh "sore; sad, sorry," Dutch zeerig "sore, full of sores," Old

 dispense 

 mid-14c., dispensen, "to dispose of, deal or divide out," from Old French dispenser "give out" (13c.), from Latin dispensare "disburse, administer, distribute (by weight)," frequentative of dispendere "pay out," from dis- "out" (see dis-) + pendere "to hang, cause to hang; weigh;

 Share tungsten 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tungsten Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tungsten">Etymology of tungsten by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tungsten. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tungsten Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tungsten," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tungsten. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tungsten." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tungsten. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tungsten." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tungsten (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tungsten 
 tuneless 
 tuner 
 tunesmith 
 tune-up 
 tung 
 tungsten 
 tunic 
 tunicate 
 tuning 
 tuning fork 
 Tunisian 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix