URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/red
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Red - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Red - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of red 

 red (adj.1) 

 "of a bright, warm color resembling that of blood or of the highest part of the primery rainbow" [Century Dictionary], Middle English rēd , redde , read , reid , from Old English rēad , used of various shades of purple, crimson, scarlet, pink, etc.; also red clothes, dye, ink, wine, or paint, also "having a ruddy or reddish complexion; red-haired, red-bearded;" from Proto-Germanic *rauthan (source also of Old Norse rauðr , Danish rød , Old Saxon rod , Old Frisian rad , Middle Dutch root , Dutch rood , German rot , Gothic rauþs ).

 This is reconstructed to be from a PIE root *reudh- "red, ruddy," the only color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. It also is the root of native ruddy , rust , and, via Latin, ruby , rubric , russet , etc.

 Along with dead , bread (n.), lead (n.1), its long vowel shortened in or after Middle English. The surname Read , Reid , Reade , etc. represents the old form of the adjective and retains the original Old English long vowel pronunciation. It corresponds to Brown , Black , White ; Red itself being rare as a surname. As the color designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s.

 In fixed comparisons, red as blood (Old English), roses (mid-13c.), cherry (c. 1400). From Old English as the color characteristic of inflammation, blistering, etc. Of the complexion, lips, etc., "ruddy, rosy, red" (c. 1200); also of person with a healthy complexion or skin color; to be red in the face as a result of powerful emotion or agitation is by c. 1200; to see red "get angry" is an American English expression attested by 1898.

 Red as the characteristic color of "British possessions" on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism, from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag, 1852.

 Red rover , the children's game, attested from 1891. Red ball signifying "express" in railroad jargon is by 1904, originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog , type of U.S. football pass rush, is recorded from 1959 (earlier "lowest grade of flour produced in a mill," by 1889). Red meat , that which is ordinarily served or preferred undercooked, is from 1808; the food of wild beasts, hence its figurative use for something that satisfies a basic appetite (by 1792; popular from late 20c.).

 Red shift in spectography is first recorded 1923. Red carpet "sumptuous welcome" is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far back as Aeschylus ("Agamemnon"); it also was the name of a type of English moth. Red ant is from 1660s.

 red (adj.2) 

 "Bolshevik, ultra-radical, revolutionary," 1917, from red (adj.1), the color they adopted for themselves. The association in Europe of red with revolutionary politics (on notion of blood and violence) is from at least 1297, but got a boost 1793 with adoption of the red Phrygian cap (French bonnet rouge ) as symbol of the French Revolution. The first specific political reference in English was in 1848 (adj.), in reports of the Second French Republic (a.k.a. Red Republic ).

 Red Army is from 1918; Red China is attested from 1934. Red-baiting is attested by 1929. The noun meaning "a radical, a communist" is from 1851.
 also from 1917 

 red (n.) 

  "the color red; red pigment; ruddiness; red wine," mid-13c., from red (adj.1). Compare Old High German roti , German röthe "redness, red," from the adjective in German. As "a person with red hair" from early 14c. In finance, in the red for "overdrawn, losing money" is by 1926, from the color formerly conventional for recording debts and balances in accounts.

 Red is one of the most general color-names, and embraces colors ranging in hue from rose aniline to scarlet iodide of mercury and red lead. A red yellower than vermillion is called scarlet; one much more purple is called crimson. A very dark red, if pure or crimson, is called maroon; if brownish, chestnut or chocolate. A pale red — that is, one of low chroma and high luminosity — is called a pink, ranging from rose-pink, or pale crimson, to salmon-pink, or pale scarlet. [Century Dictionary]
 also from mid-13c. 

 red (v.) 

 "make red, redden; become red," Middle English reden , redden , from Old English reodan, readian (past tense read , plural rudon ), from the source of red (adj.1). In Old English often "stain with blood, wound, kill."

 Entries linking to red 

 bread (n.) 

 "kind of food made from flour or the meal of some grain, kneaded into a dough, fermented, and baked," Old English bread "bit, crumb, morsel; bread," cognate with Old Norse brauð , Danish brød , Old Frisian brad , Middle Dutch brot , Dutch brood , German Brot .

 According to one theory [Watkins, etc.] from Proto-Germanic *brautham , from PIE root *bhreu- "to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn," in reference to the leavening. But OED argues at some length for the basic sense being not "cooked food" but "piece of food," and the Old English word deriving from a Proto-Germanic *braudsmon- "fragments, bits" (cognate with Old High German brosma "crumb," Old English breotan "to break in pieces") and being related to the root of break (v.). It cites Slovenian kruh "bread," literally "a piece."

 Either way, by c. 1200 it had replaced the usual Old English word for "bread," which was hlaf (see loaf (n.)).

 The extended sense of "food, sustenance in general" (late 12c.) is perhaps via the Lord's Prayer. The slang meaning "money" dates from 1940s, but compare breadwinner , and bread as "one's livelihood" dates to 1719. Bread and circuses (1914) is from Latin, in reference to food and entertainment provided by the government to keep the populace content. "Duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses" [Juvenal, Sat. x.80].

 dead (adj.) 

 Middle English ded , from Old English dead "having ceased to live," also "torpid, dull;" of water, "still, standing," from Proto-Germanic *daudaz (source also of Old Saxon dod , Danish død , Swedish död , Old Frisian dad , Middle Dutch doot , Dutch dood , Old High German tot , German tot , Old Norse dauðr , Gothic dauþs "dead"), a past-participle adjective based on *dau- , which is perhaps from PIE *dheu- (3) "to die" (see die (v.)).

 Meaning "insensible, void of perception" is from early 13c. Of places, "inactive, dull," from 1580s. Of sound, "muffled," 1520s. Used from 16c. as "utter, absolute, quite" (as in dead drunk , 1590s); from 1590s as "quite certain, sure, unerring;" by 1881 as "direct, straight." Dead heat , a race in which more than one competitor reaches the goal at the same time, is from 1796. The dead-nettle (c. 1400) resembles the nettle but does not sting.

 Dead on is 1889, from marksmanship. Dead letter is from 1703, used of laws lacking force as well as uncollected mail. Dead soldier "emptied liquor bottle" is from 1913; the image is older (compare dead men "bottles emptied at a banquet," c. 1700). Dead man's hand in poker, "pair of aces and pair of eights," is supposedly what Wild Bill Hickock held when Jack McCall shot him in 1876. Expression not be (seen/found/caught) dead "have nothing to do with" is by 1915.

 lead 
 rubric 
 ruby 
 ruddy 
 russet 
 rust 
 blood-red 
 infra-red 
 raddle 
 red cent 
 red flag 
 red herring 
 redbird 
 red-blooded 
 redbreast 
 redcap 
 redcoat 
 redden 
 See All Related Words (41) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lead 

 "to guide," Old English lædan (transitive) "cause to go with oneself; march at the head of, go before as a guide, accompany and show the way; carry on; sprout forth, bring forth; pass (one's life)," causative of liðan "to travel," from Proto-Germanic *laidjanan (source also of Ol

 rubric 

 c. 1300, robryk, ribrusch, rubryke, "directions in a liturgical book for participation in religious services" (which often were written in red ink), from Old French rubrique, rubriche "rubric, title" (13c.) and directly from Latin rubrica "red ochre, red coloring matter," from ru

 ruby 

 valuable precious gem, in modern understanding a clear, rich-red variety of corundum, c. 1300, rubi, rubie (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French rubi (12c.), from Medieval Latin rubinus lapis "red stone" (source also of Italian rubino), from Latin rubeus "red," which is relat

 rouge 

 1753, "red cosmetic coloring for the skin, fine red powder used to give artificial color to the face," from French rouge..."red coloring matter," noun use of adjective meaning "red" (12c.), from Latin rubeus, related to ruber "red" (from PIE root...*reudh- "red, ruddy")....The same French word had been borrowed in Middle English with the sense of "red color" (early 15c.), also "red" (adj.)....

 carbuncle 

 early 13c., "fiery jewel, gem of a deep red color, ruby," also the name of a semi-mythical gem from the East Indies formerly...Originally of rubies, garnets, and other red jewels....In English the word was used of red, eruptive subcutaneous inflammations and tumors from late 14c....Also "red spot on the nose or face caused by intemperance" (1680s)....

 coral 

 Originally especially the red variety found in the Mediterranean, used ornamentally, hence "red, the (red) color of coral...The coral-snake (1760) is so called for the red zones in its markings....

 crimson 

 "highly chromatic deep red color," early 15c., cremesin, "cloth dyed deep purplish-red," also as an adjective, "of a crimson...For similar transfer of the dye word to generic use for "red," compare Old Church Slavonic čruminu, Russian čermnyj "red,...

 Oklahoma 

 state in southwestern U.S., from Choctaw (Muskogean), literally "red people," from okla "nation, people" + homma "red." Coined by Choctaw scholar and Presbyterian minister Allen Wright (1826-1885), later principal chief of the Choctaw Nation, and first used in the Choctaw-Chickas

 sum 

 c. 1300, somme, summe, "a quantity or amount of money," from Anglo-French and Old French summe, somme "amount, total; collection; essential point; summing up, conclusion" (13c., Modern French somme), from Latin summa "the top, summit; chief place, highest rank; main thing, chief 

 OK 

 "all right, correct," 1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c. 1838-9 for abbreviations of common phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings, such as K.G. for "no go," as if spelled know go; N.C. for enough said (" 'nuff ced"); K.Y. for no use ("know yuse")

 Share red 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/red Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/red">Etymology of red by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of red. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/red Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of red," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/red. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of red." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/red. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of red." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/red (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near red 
 recyclable 
 recycle 
 recycling 
 -red 
 *red- 
 red 
 red book 
 red cent 
 red cross 
 red flag 
 red herring 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix