URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/timber
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:58:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Timber - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Timber - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of timber 

 timber (n.) 

 Middle English timber "wood cut and prepared for use as building material; wood suitable for making houses or ships or for carpentry;" from Old English timber , originally "building, structure," in late Old English "building material, growing trees yielding wood suitable for building," and by extension "trees or woods in general."

 This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *tem(b)ra- (source also of Old Saxon timbar "a building, room," Old Frisian timber "wood, building," Old High German zimbar "timber, wooden dwelling, room," Old Norse timbr "timber," German Zimmer "room"), according to Watkins from PIE *deme- "to build," possibly a form of the root *dem- meaning "house, household" (source of Greek domos , Latin domus ).

 For timbers in nautical slang expressions, see shiver (v.2)); the meaning is "pieces of wood composing the frames of a ship's hull" (1748). Slang timber-toes "wooden-legged man" is by 1785.

 The timber-wolf (1846), ordinary large wolf of the U.S. West, is the gray wolf, not confined to forests but so-called to distinguish it from the prairie-wolf (coyote). Timberdoodle , colloquial name for the American woodcock, is attested by 1889; earlier the name of an alcoholic drink (1842).

 timber (v.) 

 Old English timbran , timbrian , "to build," verb from the source of timber (n.). It was the chief Old English word for "to build," but now is obsolete in this sense. Compare Dutch timmeren , German zimmern . As "furnish with timber" from 1570s. As a call of warning when a cut tree is about to fall, attested from 1912 in Canadian English. Related: Timbered "wooded, having trees" (1701).

 Entries linking to timber 

 shiver (v.2) 

 "to break in or into many small pieces; to burst, fly, or fall apart at once into many pieces," mid-14c., shiveren , from shiver (n.2) or its source.

 Chiefly in the phrase shiver my timbers (1794), "a mock oath attributed in comic fiction to sailors" [OED]. Start my timbers in the same sense is by 1775; smite my timbers by 1782; split by 1786; burst by 1791). My timbers! as a nautical oath is attested by 1775, and timber (n.) "pieces of wood composing the frames of a ship's hull" seems to have been 18c. sailor's slang for "arms and legs" (perhaps with a grim awareness that some of theirs might be of wood after a sea-battle; compare timber-toe "wooden leg," in Grose). Related: Shivered ; shivering .

 build (v.) 

 Middle English bilden , from late Old English byldan "construct a house," verb form of bold "house," from Proto-Germanic *buthla- (source also of Old Saxon bodl , Old Frisian bodel "building, house"), from PIE *bhu- "to dwell," from root *bheue- "to be, exist, grow."

 Rare in Old English; in Middle English it won out over the more common Old English timbran (see timber ). The modern spelling is unexplained. Figurative use is from mid-15c. Of physical things other than buildings from late 16c. Related: Builded (archaic); built ; building .

 In the United States, this verb is used with much more latitude than in England. There, as Fennimore Cooper puts it, everything is BUILT. The priest BUILDS up a flock; the speculator a fortune; the lawyer a reputation; the landlord a town; and the tailor, as in England, BUILDS up a suit of clothes. A fire is BUILT instead of made, and the expression is even extended to individuals, to be BUILT being used with the meaning of formed. [Farmer, "Slang and Its Analogues," 1890]

 carpenter 
 timberline 
 *dem- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 carpenter 

 "artificer in timber, one who does the heavier sort of wood-working," c. 1300 (attested from early 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French carpenter, Old North French carpentier (Old French and Modern French charpentier), from Late Latin (artifex) carpentarius "wagon (maker); carri

 forest 

 late 13c., "extensive tree-covered district," especially one set aside for royal hunting and under the protection of the king, from Old French forest "forest, wood, woodland" (Modern French forêt), probably ultimately from Late Latin/Medieval Latin forestem silvam "the outside wo

 lumber 

 "timber sawn into rough planks for use," 1660s, American English (Massachusetts), earlier "disused bit of furniture; heavy, useless objects" (1550s), of uncertain origin. It is said to be probably from lumber (v.1) on the notion of "awkward to move," and perhaps to have been infl

 holt 

 Proto-Germanic *hultam- (source also of Old Frisian, Old Norse, Middle Dutch holt, Dutch hout, German Holz "a wood, wood as timber..."), from PIE *kldo- (source also of Old Church Slavonic klada "beam, timber;" Russian koloda, Lithuanian kalada "block of...

 shore 

 Germanic (Middle Dutch schooren "to prop up, support;" Middle Low German schore "a barrier;" Old Norse skorða "piece of timber...noun survives in technical senses, "post or beam for temporary support of something" (mid-15c.), especially an oblique timber...

 raft 

 late 15c., "floating platform of timber lashed or fastened together," from earlier meaning "rafter, beam" (c. 1300), from...In North America, rafts are constructed of immense size, and comprise timber, boards, staves, etc....

 architrave 

 from Latin archi- "beginning, origin" (see archon) + Italian trave "beam," from Latin trabem (nominative trabs) "beam, timber...

 land 

 Old English lond, land, "ground, soil," also "definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries," from Proto-Germanic *landja- (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, Gothic land, German Land), perhaps fro

 foster 

 Old English *fostrian "to supply with food, nourish, support," from fostor "food, nourishment, bringing up," from Proto-Germanic *fostra-, from extended form of PIE root *pa- "to feed." Meaning "to bring up a child with parental care" is from c. 1200; that of "to encourage or hel

 terra firma 

 c. 1600, "part of the Italian mainland ruled by Venice," from Modern Latin terra firma, literally "firm land," from Latin terra "earth, land" (from PIE root *ters- "to dry") + firma, fem. of firmus "strong, steadfast" (from suffixed form of PIE root *dher- "to hold firmly, suppor

 Share timber 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/timber Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/timber">Etymology of timber by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of timber. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/timber Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of timber," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/timber. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of timber." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/timber. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of timber." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/timber (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near timber 
 tiller 
 tilly-vally 
 Tilsit 
 tilt 
 tilth 
 timber 
 timberline 
 timbre 
 timbrel 
 Timbuktu 
 time 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix