URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/*kleu-
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:59:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: *kleu- - Etymology and Meaning of the Root

*kleu- - Etymology and Meaning of the Root 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of *kleu- 

 *kleu- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to hear."

 It might form all or part of: ablaut ; Cleon ; Clio ; Damocles ; Hercules ; leer ; list (v.2) "hear, harken;" listen ; loud ; Mstislav ; Pericles ; Slav ; slave ; Slavic ; Slovene ; Sophocles ; Themistocles ; umlaut ; Wenceslas ; Yugoslav .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit srnoti "hears," srosati "hears, obeys," srutah "heard of, celebrated;" Avestan sraothra "ear;" Middle Persian srod "hearing, sound;" Greek klyo "hear, be called," klytos "heard of, celebrated," kleos "report, rumor, fame glory," kleio "make famous;" Latin cluere "to hear oneself called, be spoken of," inclutus "renowned, famous;" Armenian lu "known;" Lithuanian klausau, klausyti "to hear," šlovė "splendor, honor;" Old Church Slavonic slusati "to hear," slava "fame, glory," slovo "word;" Old Irish ro-clui-nethar "hears," clunim "I hear," clu "fame, glory," cluada "ears," Irish cloth "noble, brave;" Welsh clywaf "I hear," clod "praise, fame;" Old English hlud "loud," hlysnan "to listen, hear," hleoðor "tone, tune;" Old High German hlut "sound;" Gothic hiluþ "listening, attention."

 Entries linking to *kleu- 

 ablaut (n.) 

 "systematic vowel alteration in the root of a word to indicate shades of meaning or tense," a characteristic of Indo-European languages, 1845, from German Ablaut , literally "off-sound" ("off" here denoting substitution), coined by J.P. Zweigel in 1568 from ab "off" (from Old High German aba "off, away from," from PIE root *apo- "off, away") + Laut "sound, tone" (from Old High German hlut , from Proto-Germanic *hludaz "heard, loud," from suffixed form of PIE root *kleu- "to hear"). The word was popularized by Jakob Grimm and Franz Bopp. The process is what makes strong verbs in Germanic. An example is bind / band / bond / bound + (German) Bund . Compare umlaut .

 In our language, it seems to us that the uncouthness of such compounds as Upsound, Offsound, and Insound, could hardly be compensated by any advantage to be derived from their use; and we therefore purpose, in the course of this work, where any of these terms occur in the original, to retain them in their German shape. Of these terms, 
 Ablaut and 
 Umlaut are those which chiefly, if not alone, are used by our author. [from footnote in translation of Bopp's "Comparative Grammar," London, 1845]

 Cleon 

 masc. proper name, from Latinized form of Greek kleon , kleos "rumor, report, news; good report, fame, glory," from PIE *klew-yo- , suffixed form of root *kleu- "to hear."

 Clio 
 Damocles 
 Hercules 
 leer 
 list 
 listen 
 loud 
 Mstislav 
 Pericles 
 Slav 
 slave 
 Slavic 
 Slovene 
 Sophocles 
 Themistocles 
 umlaut 
 Wenceslas 
 Yugoslav 
 See All Related Words (21) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 leer 

 1520s, "to look obliquely" (since 18c. usually implying a lustful, wolfish, malicious intent), probably from Middle English noun ler "cheek," from Old English hleor "the cheek, the face," from Proto-Germanic *hleuza- "near the ear," from *hleuso- "ear," from PIE root *kleu- "to h

 list 

 "catalogue consisting of names in a row or series," c. 1600, from Middle English liste "border, edging, stripe" (late 13c.), from Old French liste "border, band, row, group," also "strip of paper," or from Old Italian lista "border, strip of paper, list," both from Germanic sourc

 listen 

 Old English hlysnan (Northumbrian lysna) "to listen, hear; attend to, obey" (transitive), from Proto-Germanic *hlusinon (source also of Dutch luisteren, Old High German hlosen "to listen," German lauschen "to listen"), from PIE root *kleu- "to hear." This root is the source also 

 administration 

 mid-14c., administracioun, "act of giving or dispensing;" late 14c., "management (of a business, property, etc.), act of administering," from Latin administrationem (nominative administratio) "aid, help, cooperation; direction, management," noun of action from past-participle ste

 act 

 late 14c., "a thing done," from Latin actus "a doing; a driving, impulse, a setting in motion; a part in a play," and actum "a thing done" (originally a legal term), both from agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform," figuratively "incite to action; 

 communication 

 early 15c., communicacioun, "act of communicating, act of imparting, discussing, debating, or conferring," from Old French comunicacion (14c., Modern French communication) and directly from Latin communicationem (nominative communicatio) "a making common, imparting, communicating

 theme 

 early 14c., "subject or topic on which a person writes or speaks," from Old French tesme (13c., with silent -s- "indicating vowel length" [OED], Modern French thème) and directly from Latin thema "a subject, thesis," from Greek thema "a proposition, subject, deposit," literally "

 Christ 

 "the Anointed," synonymous with and translating to Greek  Hebrew mashiah (see messiah), a title given to Jesus of Nazareth; Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus, from Greek khristos "the anointed," noun use of verbal adjective of khriein "to rub, anoi

 record 

 c. 1200, recorden, "to repeat, reiterate, recite; rehearse, get by heart" (senses now obsolete), from Old French recorder "tell, relate, repeat, recite, report, make known" (12c.) and directly from Latin recordari "remember, call to mind, think over, be mindful of," from re-, her

 Semite 

 1847, "a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean" (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French Sémite (1845), from Modern Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem, Greek Sēm "Shem," one of the three sons of Noah (G

 Share *kleu- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/*kleu- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/*kleu-">Etymology of *kleu- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of *kleu-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/*kleu- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of *kleu-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/*kleu-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of *kleu-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/*kleu-. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of *kleu-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/*kleu- (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near *kleu- 
 *klei- 
 klepto 
 kleptocracy 
 kleptomania 
 kleptomaniac 
 *kleu- 
 klezmer 
 klieg 
 Klondike 
 kludge 
 klutz 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix