URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dervish
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:19:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dervish - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dervish - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dervish 

 dervish (n.) 

 "Islamic monk or friar who has taken a vow of poverty and austerity," 1580s, from Turkish dervish , from Persian darvesh , darvish "beggar, poor," hence "religious mendicant;" equivalent of Arabic faqir (see fakir ). The "whirling dervishes" are one order among many. Originally dervis ; modern spelling is from mid-19c.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to dervish 

 fakir (n.) 

 c. 1600, from Arabic faqir "a poor man," from faqura "he was poor." Term for Muslim holy man who lived by begging, supposedly from a saying of Muhammad's, el fakr fakhri ("poverty is my pride"). Misapplied in 19c. English (possibly under influence of faker ) to Hindu ascetics. Arabic plural form fuqara may have led to variant early English forms such as fuckeire (1630s).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 museum 

 1610s, "the university building in Alexandria," from Latin museum "library, study," from Greek mouseion "place of study, library or museum, school of art or poetry," originally "a temple or shrine of the Muses," from Mousa "Muse" (see muse (n.)). The earliest use in reference to 

 giddy-up 

 command to a horse to go, 1909, probably an extended form of earlier giddap (1867), itself probably from get up. Compare gee. The terms used to start horses in harness and to urge them to a better appreciation of the value of time comprise vulgar corruptions of ordinary speech a

 convention 

 early 15c., convencioun, "a formal agreement, covenant, treaty," also "a formal meeting or convention" (of rulers, etc.), also "a private or secret agreement," from Old French convencion "agreement" and directly from Latin conventionem (nominative conventio) "a meeting, assembly;

 discreet 

 late-14c., "morally discerning, prudent, circumspect, wise or judicious in avoiding mistakes," from Old French discret "discreet, sensible, intelligent, wise," from Latin discretus "separated, distinct," in Medieval Latin "discerning, careful," past participle of discernere "to s

 element 

 c. 1300, "earth, air, fire, or water; one of the four things regarded by the ancients as the constituents of all things," from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementum "rudiment, first principle, matter in its most basic form" (translating Greek stoikheion), origin and ori

 phobia 

 "irrational fear, horror, or aversion; fear of an imaginary evil or undue fear of a real one," 1786, perhaps based on a similar use in French, abstracted from compounds in -phobia, the word-forming element from Greek phobos "fear, panic fear, terror, outward show of fear; object 

 scarlet 

 mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), "rich cloth" (often, but not necessarily, bright red), from a shortened form of Old French escarlate "scarlet (color), top-quality fabric" (12c., Modern French écarlate), which, with Medieval Latin scarlatum "scarlet, cloth of scarlet," Italian 

 cowboy 

 1725, "boy who tends to cows and drives them to and from pasture," from cow (n.) + boy. American-English sense of "man employed to have care of grazing cattle on the Great Plains for a stockman or ranch, doing his work on horseback" is by 1849. Earlier it was an insulting name fo

 right hand 

 the hand opposed to the left hand, late Old English rihthand; see right (adj.2) + hand (n.). So called as the one normally the stronger of the two. Applied to the right side generally by c. 1200. As a symbol of friendship or alliance, by 1590s. Figurative for "indispensable helpe

 Jupiter 

 also Juppiter, c. 1200, "supreme deity of the ancient Romans," from Latin Iupeter, Iupiter, Iuppiter, "Jove, god of the sky and chief of the gods," from PIE *dyeu-peter- "god-father" (originally vocative, "the name naturally occurring most frequently in invocations" [Tucker]), fr

 Share dervish 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dervish Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dervish">Etymology of dervish by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dervish. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dervish Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dervish," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dervish. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dervish." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dervish. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dervish." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dervish (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dervish 
 derriere 
 derring-do 
 derringer 
 Derry 
 *deru- 
 dervish 
 des- 
 Des Moines 
 desalination 
 desaturate 
 descant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix