URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nano-
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:22:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nano- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Nano- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nano- 

 nano- 

 introduced 1947 (at 14th conference of the Union Internationale de Chimie ) as a prefix for units of one thousand-millionth part (now "one-billionth"), from Greek nanos "a dwarf." According to Watkins, this is originally "little old man," from nannos "uncle," masc. of nanna "aunt" (see nana ), but Beekes calls it "An onomatopoeic word of unknown origin." Earlier nano- was used as a prefix to mean "dwarf, dwarfish," and still it is used in a non-scientific sense of "very small."
 also from 1947 

 Entries linking to nano- 

 nana 

 child's word for "grandmother" or, sometimes, "nurse," 1844 (see nanny ).

 nanogram (n.) 

 "one-billionth of a gram," 1951, from nano- + gram .

 nanometer 
 nanosecond 
 nanotechnology 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 smart 

 Middle English smerten, "to cause pain, to suffer pain," from Old English smeortan "be painful," in reference to wounds, from Proto-Germanic *smarta- (source also of Middle Dutch smerten, Dutch smarten, Old High German smerzan, German schmerzen "to pain," originally "to bite"). T

 alliteration 

 1650s, "repetition of the same sound or letter at the beginning of words in close succession," from Modern Latin alliterationem (nominative alliteratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of alliterare "to begin with the same letter," from Latin ad "to" (see ad-) + littera

 chicken 

 Middle English chiken, from Old English cicen (plural cicenu) "young of the domestic hen, the young of any bird;" by early Middle English, "any chicken," regardless of age, from Proto-Germanic *kiukinam (source also of Middle Dutch kiekijen, Dutch kieken, Old Norse kjuklingr, Swe

 Arab 

 "one of the native people of Arabia and surrounding regions," late 14c. (Arabes, a plural form), from Old French Arabi, from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem), from Greek Araps (genitive Arabos), from Arabic 'arab, indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally "inhabitant of the

 canon 

 "a rule or law," Old English canon "rule, law, or decree of the Church," from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon "Church law, a rule or doctrine enacted by ecclesiastical authority," in classical Latin, "measuring line, rule," from Greek kanon "any straight rod or

 depression 

 c. 1400 as a term in astronomy, "angular distance of a star below the horizon," from Old French depression (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin deprimere "to press down, depress" (see depres

 desultory 

 1580s, "skipping about, jumping, flitting" in a figurative sense, from Latin desultorius "hasty, casual, superficial," adjective form of desultor (n.) "a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop," from desul-, stem of desilire "jump down," 

 groom 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), grome "male child, boy;" c. 1300, "a youth, young man," also "male servant, attendant, minor officer in a royal or noble household ranking higher than a page; a knight's squire." A word of unknown origin with no certain cognates in other Germanic 

 nod 

 late 14c., "to quickly bow the head; to assent, beckon, or salute quickly by an inclination of the head," late 14c., nodden, a word of unknown origin, probably an Old English word, but not recorded, or perhaps from a Low German word related to Old High German hnoton "to shake," f

 measure 

 early 14c., mesuren, "to exercise moderation;" mid-14c., "to deal out or divide up by measure," also "to ascertain spatial dimensions, quantity, or capacity of by comparison with a standard;" from Old French mesurer "measure; moderate, curb" (12c.), from Late Latin mensurare "to 

 Share nano- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nano- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nano-">Etymology of nano- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nano-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nano- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nano-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nano-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nano-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nano-. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nano-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nano- (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nano- 
 nance 
 Nancy 
 nankeen 
 Nanking 
 nanny 
 nano- 
 nanogram 
 nanometer 
 nanosecond 
 nanotechnology 
 Nantucket 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix