URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/beer
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:58:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Beer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Beer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of beer 

 beer (n.) 

 alcoholic drink made from grain (generally barley), infused with hops and boiled and fermented, Middle English ber , from Old English beor "strong drink, beer, mead," cognate with Old Frisian biar , Middle Dutch and Dutch bier , Old High German bior , German Bier ; a West Germanic word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin.

 It is probably a 6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber "a drink, beverage" (from Latin infinitive bibere "to drink," from PIE root *po(i)- "to drink"). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz- , from *beuwo- "barley." The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.). "The word occurs in OE., but its use is rare, except in poetry, and it seems to have become common only in the 16th c. as the name of a hopped malt liquor." [OED]

 Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck] 

 They did have words for it, however. Greek brytos , used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English breowan "brew;" Latin zythum is from Greek zythos , first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zymē "leaven."

 Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia "beer." Old Church Slavonic pivo , source of the general Slavic word for "beer," is originally "a drink" (compare Old Church Slavonic piti "drink"). French bière is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang beer goggles , through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.

 Entries linking to beer 

 ale (n.) 

 "intoxicating liquor made by malt fermentation," Old English ealu "ale, beer," from Proto-Germanic *aluth- (source also of Old Saxon alo , Old Norse öl ), which is of uncertain origin. Perhaps from a PIE root meaning "bitter" (source also of Latin alumen "alum"), or from PIE *alu-t "ale," from root *alu- , which has connotations of "sorcery, magic, possession, and intoxication" [Watkins]. The word was borrowed from Germanic into Lithuanian ( alus ) and Old Church Slavonic ( olu ).

 In the fifteenth century, and until the seventeenth, ale stood for the unhopped fermented malt liquor which had long been the native drink of these islands. Beer was the hopped malt liquor introduced from the Low Countries in the fifteenth century and popular first of all in the towns. By the eighteenth century, however, all malt liquor was hopped and there had been a silent mutation in the meaning of the two terms. For a time the terms became synonymous, in fact, but local habits of nomenclature still continued to perpetuate what had been a real difference: 'beer' was the malt liquor which tended to be found in towns, 'ale' was the term in general use in the country districts. [Peter Mathias, "The Brewing Industry in England," Cambridge University Press, 1959]

 Meaning "festival or merry-meeting at which much ale was drunk" was in Old English (see bridal ).

 cerveza (n.) 

 Spanish for "beer," from Latin cervisia "beer" (related to Latin cerea "a Spanish beer"), which is perhaps related to Latin cremor "thick broth," or from Celtic *kerb- (compare Gaulish curmi , Old Irish cuirm , Middle Irish coirm , Welsh cwrwf , Old Cornish coref "beer"), from Proto-Celtic *kormi- , probably from the same source as Latin cremare "to burn" (see cremation ). "Connection with ceres (as a drink from grain) is very dubious" [Tucker].

 beery 
 *po(i)- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 porter 

 type of dark-brown malty beer, 1734, short for porter's ale (1721), porter-beer, etc., from porter (n.1), said to be so called...because the beer was made for or preferred by porters and other laborers, being cheap and strong, and it survived into 20c..."There is no evidence that London porters, as distinguished from London cabmen or London artisans, favored this sort of beer...

 balderdash 

 1590s, of obscure origin despite much 19c. conjecture; in early use "a jumbled mix of liquors" (milk and beer, beer and wine...

 stale 

 Cognate with Middle Dutch stel "stale" (of beer and old urine)....Originally a desirable quality (in beer and wine), "old," hence "strong."...

 alum 

 literally "bitter salt," cognate with Greek aludoimos "bitter" and perhaps with English ale and some Balto-Slavic words for "beer...

 suds 

 Meaning "soapy water" dates from 1580s; slang meaning "beer" first attested 1904. Related: Sudsy....

 pewter 

 alloys having tin as their main constituent" (the usual ratio is one part lead to four parts tin), used to make tableware, beer...

 latex 

 liquid, fluid," probably from Greek latax "dregs," from PIE root *lat- "wet, moist" (source also of Middle Irish laith "beer...

 large 

 c. 1200, of areas, "great in expanse," of persons, "bountiful, inclined to give or spend freely," from Old French large "broad, wide; generous, bounteous" (12c.), from Latin largus "abundant, copious, plentiful; bountiful, liberal in giving, generous" (source also of Spanish larg

 regal 

 "kingly, pertaining to a king," late 14c., from Old French regal "royal" (12c., Modern French réal) and directly from Latin regalis "royal, kingly; of or belonging to a king, worthy of a king," from rex (genitive regis) "king," from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with 

 brew 

 "produce (a beverage) by fermentation; prepare by mixing and boiling," Old English breowan (class II strong verb, past tense breaw, past participle browen), from Proto-Germanic *breuwan "to brew" (source also of Old Norse brugga, Old Frisian briuwa, Middle Dutch brouwen, Old High

 Share beer 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/beer Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/beer">Etymology of beer by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of beer. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/beer Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of beer," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/beer. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of beer." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/beer. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of beer." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/beer (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near beer 
 bee-line 
 Beelzebub 
 been 
 beep 
 beeper 
 beer 
 beery 
 bee-sting 
 beestings 
 beeswax 
 beet 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix