URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/court
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:24:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Court - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Court - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of court 

 court (n.) 

 late 12c., "formal assembly held by a sovereign," from Old French cort "king's court; princely residence" (11c., Modern French cour ), from Latin cortem , accusative of cors (earlier cohors ) "enclosed yard," and by extension (and perhaps by association with curia "sovereign's assembly"), "those assembled in the yard; company, cohort," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see com- ) + stem hort- related to hortus "garden, plot of ground" (from PIE root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose").

 Both senses of the Latin word emerged in English. From the purely physical sense come "palace, residence of a sovereign" (c. 1200), "enclosed space connected with a building or buildings" (early 14c.), and the sporting sense "smooth, level plot of ground on which a ball game is played" (1510s, originally of tennis). Also "short arm of a public street, enclosed on three sides by buildings" (1680s), formerly noted for poverty or as business districts.

 From the notion of "surroundings of a sovereign in his regal state" (c. 1200) comes the legal meaning "a tribunal for judicial investigation" (c. 1300, early assemblies for justice were overseen by the sovereign personally), also "hall or chamber where justice is administered" (c. 1300). As an adjective, "pertaining to a court," late 13c.

 also from late 12c. 

 court (v.) 

 1570s, "endeavor to gain the favor of by amorous attention," also "solicit, seek to win or attract," from court (n.), based on the sorts of behavior associated with royal courts. Related: Courted ; courting .

 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to court 

 Cortes (n.) 

 1660s, "national legislative assembly of Spain; parliament or legislature of Portugal," from Spanish and Portuguese plural of corte , from Latin cortem (see court (n.)).

 courteous (adj.) 

 c. 1300, curteis , "having elegant manners, well-bred, polite, urbane," also "gracious, benevolent," from Old French curteis (Modern French courtois ) "having courtly bearing or manners," from curt "court" (see court (n.)) + -eis , from Latin -ensis .

 Rare before c. 1500. In feudal society, also denoting a man of good education (hence the name Curtis ). Medieval courts were associated with good behavior and also beauty; compare German hübsch "beautiful," from Middle High German hübesch "beautiful," originally "courteous, well-bred," from Old Franconian hofesch , from hof "court." Related: Courteously (mid-14c., kurteis-liche ).

 courtesan 
 courthouse 
 courtier 
 courtly 
 court-marshal 
 court-martial 
 courtroom 
 courtship 
 courtyard 
 curtilage 
 com- 
 *gher- 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 courtesan 

 also courtezan, "a prostitute," 1540s, from French courtisane, from Italian cortigiana "prostitute," literally "woman of the court" (a mock-use or euphemism), fem. of cortigiano "one attached to a court," from corte "court," from Latin cortem (see court (n.)). An earlier identica

 court-martial 

 also court martial, "court of military or naval officers to try cases of desertion, mutiny, etc.," 1650s (plural courts martial), originally martial court (1570s), from court (n.) + martial (adj.). Word-order changed on the model of French cour martiale. As a verb, from 1859. Rel

 romance 

 c. 1300, romaunce, "a story, written or recited, in verse, telling of the adventures of a knight, hero, etc.," often one designed principally for entertainment, from Old French romanz "verse narrative" (Modern French roman), also "the vulgar language." It was originally an adverb

 judicial 

 "of or pertaining to a judge; pertaining to the administration of justice," from Latin iudicialis "of or belonging to a court...of justice," from iudicium "judgment, decision of a court of justice," also the court itself, from iudex "a judge," a compound...

 bar 

 profession," 1550s, a sense which derives ultimately from the railing that separated benchers from the hall in the Inns of Court...As the place where the business of court was done, bar in this sense had become synonymous with court by early 14c....

 Eurydice 

 form of Greek Eurydike, literally "wide justice," from eurys "wide" (see eury-) + dike "custom, usage; justice, right; court...case," "custom, usage," and, via the notion of "right as dependent on custom," "law, a right; a judgment; a lawsuit, court...

 bailey 

 Middle English baylle, "wall enclosing an outer court" of a castle, fortified city, etc....The word was extended to mean the outer court itself (early 14c.)....Hence Old Bailey, seat of Central Criminal Court in London, so called because it stood within the ancient bailey of the city...

 atrium 

 1570s, in ancient Roman architecture, "entrance-hall," the most important and usually the most splendid apartment of a house. from Latin atrium "central court or first main room of a house, room which contains the hearth," from Proto-Italic *atro-, sometimes said (on authority of

 cloister 

 early 13c., cloystre, "a monastery or convent, a place of religious retirement or seclusion," from Old French cloistre "monastery, convent; enclosure" (12c., Modern French cloître), from Medieval Latin claustrum "portion of monastery closed off to laity," from Latin claustrum (us

 inquisition 

 late 14c., "judicial investigation, act or process of inquiring," from Old French inquisicion "inquiry, investigation" (12c., Modern French inquisition), from Latin inquisitionem (nominative inquisitio) "a searching into, a seeking; legal examination, a seeking of grounds for acc

 Share court 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/court Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/court">Etymology of court by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of court. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/court Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of court," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/court. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of court." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/court. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of court." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/court (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near court 
 courageous 
 courant 
 courier 
 course 
 courser 
 court 
 courteous 
 courtesan 
 courtesy 
 courthouse 
 courtier 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close