URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mate
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:52:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mate 

 mate (n.1) 

 mid-14c., "associate, fellow, comrade;" late 14c.,"habitual companion, friend;" from Middle Low German mate, gemate "one eating at the same table, messmate," from Proto-Germanic *ga-matjon, meaning "(one) having food ( *matiz ) together ( *ga- )." For *matiz , see meat . It is built on the same notion as companion (which is thought to be a loan-translation from Germanic). Cognate with German Maat "mate," Dutch maat "partner, colleague, friend."

 Meaning "one of a wedded pair" is attested from 1540s. Used as a form of address by sailors, laborers, etc., at least since mid-15c. Meaning "officer on a merchant vessel" is from late 15c.; his duty is to oversee the execution of the orders of the master or commander.
 also from mid-14c. 

 mate (v.1) 

 c. 1500, transitive, "to equal, rival," 1590s as "to match as mates, couple, join in marriage," from mate (n.1). Also, of animals, "to pair for the purpose of breeding" (c. 1600). Intransitive sense of "be joined in companionship" is from 1580s. Related: Mated ; mating .
 also from c. 1500 

 mate (v.2) 

 "to checkmate," c. 1300, from Old French mater "to checkmate, defeat, overcome," from mat "checkmated" (see checkmate (v.)).
 also from c. 1300 

 mate (n.2) 

 in chess, "a condition of checkmate, the state of the king when he is in check and cannot move out of it," c. 1300, mat , from Old French mat , from mater "to checkmate" (see mate (v.2)).

 Fool's mate , a mode of checkmate in which the tyro, moving first, is mated by his opponent's second move.—
 Scholar's mate , a simple mode of checkmate, sometimes practised on inexperienced players, in which the skilled player's queen, supported by a bishop, mates the tyro in four moves. [Century Dictionary]
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to mate 

 checkmate (v.) 

 late 14c., figurative, "to thwart, frustrate;" see checkmate (n.). As a verb in chess, from 1789. Related: Checkmated ; checkmating .

 companion (n.) 

 c. 1300, "one who accompanies or associates with another," from Old French compagnon "fellow, mate, friend, partner" (12c.), from Late Latin companionem (nominative companio ), etymologically "bread fellow, messmate," from Latin com "with, together" (see com- ) + panis "bread" (from PIE root *pa- "to feed").

 The Late Latin word is found first in the 6c. Frankish Lex Salica , and probably it is a translation of some Germanic word (compare Gothic gahlaiba "messmate," from hlaib "loaf of bread"). It replaced Old English gefera "traveling companion," from faran "go, fare."

 The meaning "person who lives with another in need of society, and who, though receiving remuneration, is treated rather as a friend and equal than as an inferior or servant" [OED 1989] is attested by 1766.

 meat 
 classmate 
 housemate 
 inmate 
 matey 
 matte 
 messmate 
 playmate 
 roommate 
 schoolmate 
 shipmate 
 soulmate 
 stalemate 
 team-mate 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 meat 

 Middle English mēte, from Old English mete "food, nourishment, sustenance" (paired with drink), "item of food; animal food, fodder," also "a meal, repast," from Proto-Germanic *mati (source also of Old Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats

 mat 

 "an article plaited or woven of more or less coarse natural materials (rushes, straw, twine, etc.) used as bedding, floor-coverings, etc.," Old English matte, from Late Latin matta "mat made of rushes" (4c.), probably from Punic or Phoenician matta (compare Hebrew mittah "bed, co

 stalemate 

 1765, in chess, "position in which a player not in check has no available moves in his turn," from stale "stalemate" (mid-15c.) + mate (n.2) "checkmate." Middle English stale probably is from Anglo-French estaler "to stalemate" "standstill," which is related to Old French estal "

 make 

 "match, mate, companion" (now archaic or dialectal), from Old English gemaca "mate, equal; one of a pair, comrade; consort...

 comrade 

 "one who shares the same room," hence "a close companion," from French camarade (16c.), from Spanish camarada "chamber mate...

 Moll 

 prostitute," but in low slang by early 19c. it also meant "female companion not bound by ties of marriage, but often a life-mate...

 match 

 Middle English macche, from Old English mæcca "companion, mate, one of a pair, wife, husband, one suited to another, an equal...

 holly 

 evergreen shrub especially used for decoration at Christmas, mid-15c., earlier holin (mid-12c.), shortening of Old English holegn, holen "holly," from Proto-Germanic *hulin- (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German hulis, Old Norse hulfr, Middle Dutch huls, Dutch, German hulst 

 partner 

 c. 1300, partiner, "a sharer or partaker in anything," altered from parcener (late 13c.), from Old French parçonier "partner, associate; joint owner, joint heir," from parçon "partition, division. portion, share, lot," from Latin partitionem (nominative partitio) "a sharing, part

 dire 

 "causing or attended by great fear, dreadful, awful," 1560s, from Latin dirus "fearful, awful, boding ill," a religious term, which is of unknown origin. Apparently a dialect word in Latin; perhaps from Oscan and Umbrian and perhaps cognate with Greek deinos "terrible," Sanskrit 

 Share mate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mate">Etymology of mate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mate. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mate (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mate 
 match-head 
 matchless 
 matchlock 
 matchmaker 
 match-wood 
 mate 
 mater- 
 materia medica 
 material 
 materialism 
 materialist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix