URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cylinder
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:13:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cylinder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cylinder - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cylinder 

 cylinder (n.) 

 late 14c., chilindre , "portable sundial in the shape of a cylinder with a conical top," from Old French cylindre (14c.) and directly from Latin cylindrus "roller, cylinder," from Greek kylindros "a cylinder, roller, roll," from kylindein "to roll," which is of unknown origin.

 From 1560s as "a solid figure which may be conceived as generated by the revolution of a rectangle about one of its sides." From 1690s as "chamber of a steam engine in which the force of the steam is exerted on the piston." By 1849 as "part of a revolver which contains the chamber for the cartridges." By 1878 as "cylindrical record for a phonograph."
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to cylinder 

 calender (n.) 

 "machine consisting of close-set revolving cylinders or rolls which smooths and presses paper, cloth, etc.," 1510s (late 13c. in calenderer , surname of persons who use such a machine), from Old French calandreur , from Medieval Latin calendra "cloth-pressing machine," so called from the shape of the machine used, from Latin cylindrus , from Greek kylindros "roll, cylinder" (see cylinder ).

 cylindrical (adj.) 

 "having the form or properties of a cylinder," 1640s, probably from cylindric (but this is attested only from 1680s), from Latinized form of Greek kylindrikos , from kylindros (see cylinder ) + -al (1).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 reciprocating 

 A form of engine in which the piston and piston-rod move back and forth in a straight line, absolutely relative to the cylinder..., as in oscillating-cylinder engines: in contradistinction to rotary engine....

 roundness 

 Roundness applies with equal freedom to a circle, a sphere, a cylinder, or a cone, and, by extension, to forms that by approach...

 pith 

 Old English piþa "central cylinder of the stems of plants," also, figuratively, "essential part, quintessence, condensed...

 spool 

 early 14c., spole, "weaver's bobbin, cylinder with a projecting disk at one end for winding thread upon," from Old North...

 carburetor 

 Motor vehicle sense "apparatus for injecting fuel in fine particles into air to prepare it for the cylinder" is from 1896...

 gramophone 

 Edison's phonograph used a cylinder and did not....

 roller 

 The sense of "heavy cylinder for smoothing the ground is from 1520s....

 stalactite 

 "hanging formation of carbonite of lime from the roof of a cave," 1670s, Englished from Modern Latin stalactites (used 1654 by Olaus Wormius), from Greek stalaktos "dripping, oozing out in drops," from stalassein "to trickle, drip, shed drops," from PIE root *stag- "to seep, drip

 shank 

 "leg of a human or animal," especially "the part of the leg from the knewe to the ankle," Old English sceanca "leg, shank, shinbone," specifically, the part of the leg from the knee to the ankle, from Proto-Germanic *skunkia- (source also of Middle Low German schenke, German sche

 chamber 

 c. 1200, "a room in a house," usually a private one, from Old French chambre "room, chamber, apartment" (11c.), from Late Latin camera "a chamber, room" (see camera). The Old French word and the Middle English one also were used alone and in combinations to form words for "latrin

 Share cylinder 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cylinder Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cylinder">Etymology of cylinder by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cylinder. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cylinder Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cylinder," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cylinder. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cylinder." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cylinder. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cylinder." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cylinder (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cylinder 
 Cyclops 
 cyclorama 
 cyclosporiasis 
 cyclotron 
 cygnet 
 cylinder 
 cylindrical 
 cymbal 
 Cymric 
 cynanthropy 
 cynic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix