URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bane
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:37:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bane - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bane - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bane 

 bane (n.) 

 Middle English bane , from Old English bana "killer, slayer, murderer, a worker of death" (human, animal, or object), also "the devil," from Proto-Germanic *banon , cognate with *banja- "wound" (source also of Old Frisian bona "murderer," Old Norse bani "death; that which causes death," Old High German bana "death, destruction," Old English benn "wound," Gothic banja "stroke, wound"), a word of no certain IE etymology. The sense of "that which causes ruin or woe" is attested from 1570s. Related: Baneful .

 Entries linking to bane 

 autobahn (n.) 

 "German expressway," 1937, from German Autobahn (1930s), from auto "motor car, automobile" (short for automobil ; see auto ) + bahn "path, road," from Middle High German ban , bane "way, road," literally "strike" (as a swath cut through), from PIE *gwhen- "to strike, kill" (see bane ).

 bezoar (n.) 

 1540s, "stone used as an antidote against poison," via Medieval Latin, from Arabic bazahr , from Persian pad-zahr "counter-poison," from pad "protecting, guardian, master" (from Iranian *patar- , source also of Avestan patar- , from PIE *pa-tor- , from root *pa- "to feed, protect") + zahr "poison" (from Old Iranian *jathra , from PIE *gwhn-tro- , from root *gwhen- "to strike, kill;" see bane ).

 The name is attested later in reference to a concoction from solid matter found in the stomachs and intestines of ruminants, which was held to have antidotal qualities (1570s). Related: Bezoardic .

 fleabane 
 gonfalon 
 gun 
 henbane 
 Persephone 
 ratsbane 
 U-bahn 
 wolfsbane 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gonfalon 

 1590s, variant of Middle English gonfanon (c. 1300), from Old French gonfanon "knight's pennon" (12c., Modern French gonfalon), from Frankish *gundfano or Old High German guntfano "battle flag," from a Proto-Germanic compound of *gunthjo "war, battle" (from PIE *gwhen- "to strike

 gun 

 mid-14c., gunne "an engine of war that throws rocks, arrows or other missiles from a tube by the force of explosive powder or other substance," apparently a shortening of woman's name Gunilda, found in Middle English gonnilde "cannon" and in an Anglo-Latin reference to a specific

 henbane 

 poisonous Eurasian plant, mid-13c., said to be from hen (n.) + bane (n.) but this may be folk etymology. Brewer says of it, "There is no such [Old English] word as hen-bana, hen murderer, and the notion of the seeds being fatal to poultry arose from misapprehension of the word." 

 mail-order 

 Before television and the internet, the bane of retailers and shop-owners....

 banlieue 

 German had a similar formation, bann-meile (see mile (n.)), in the same sense; and compare Middle English bane cruces "crosses...

 revenue 

 Department of Revenue agent," the bane of Appalachian moonshiners, is attested by 1880....

 antimony 

 In French, by folk etymology, it became anti-moine "monk's bane."...

 scourge 

 c. 1200, "a whip used for inflicting pain or punishment, a lash used for torture," from Anglo-French scorge, escorge, back-formation from Old French scurge, eschurge "a whip, scourge, thong," from escorgier "to whip," which is from Vulgar Latin *excorrigiare. This is a compound o

 nemesis 

 1570s, Nemesis, "Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath," from Greek nemesis "just indignation, righteous anger," literally "distribution" (of what is due), related to nemein "distribute, allot, apportion one's due," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take."

 affliction 

 c. 1300, affliccioun, "misery, sorrow, pain, distress" (originally especially "self-inflicted pain, self-mortification, religious asceticism"), from Old French afliction "act of humility, humiliation, mortification, punishment" (11c.) and directly from Latin afflictionem (nominat

 Share bane 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bane Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bane">Etymology of bane by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bane. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bane Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bane," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bane. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bane." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bane. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bane." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bane (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bane 
 bandstand 
 bandwagon 
 bandwidth 
 bandy 
 bandy-legged 
 bane 
 bang 
 banger 
 Bangladesh 
 bangle 
 bangs 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix