URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmeric
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:02:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Turmeric - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Turmeric - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of turmeric 

 turmeric (n.) 

 pungent powder made from the root of an East Indian plant of the ginger family, 1530s, altered from Middle English turmeryte (early 15c.), which is of uncertain origin. "Middle English Compendium" compares Medieval Latin terra merita (16c.), French terre mérite (17c.), literally "worthy earth," though the reason why it would be called this is obscure. Klein suggests it might be a folk-etymology corruption of Arabic kurkum "curcuma, saffron."
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to turmeric 

 *(s)mer- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to get a share of something." 

 It might form all or part of: demerit ; emeritus ; isomer ; isomeric ; meretricious ; merism ; meristem ; merit ; meritorious ; mero- ; monomer ; Moira ; polymer ; turmeric .

 It might also be the source of: Greek meros "part, lot," moira "share, fate," moros "fate, destiny, doom;" Hittite mark "to divide" a sacrifice; Latin merere, meriri "to earn, deserve, acquire, gain."

 *ters- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to dry."

 It might form all or part of: inter ; Mediterranean ; metatarsal ; parterre ; subterranean ; tarsal ; tarsus ; Tartuffe ; terra ; terrace ; terra-cotta ; terrain ; terran ; terraqueous ; terrarium ; terrene ; terrestrial ; terrier ; territory ; thirst ; toast ; torrent ; torrid ; turmeric ; tureen .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit tarsayati "dries up;" Avestan tarshu- "dry, solid;" Greek teresesthai "to become or be dry," tersainein "to make dry;" Latin torrere "dry up, parch," terra "earth, land;" Gothic þaursus "dry, barren," Old High German thurri , German dürr , Old English þyrre "dry;" Old English þurstig "thirsty."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 curry 

 In modern Indian cookery, "curry" refers to spice blends with turmeric as their key ingredient; spice blends without turmeric...

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 phenomenon 

 1570s, "a fact directly observed, a thing that appears or is perceived, an occurrence," especially a regular kind of fact observed on certain kinds of occasions, from Late Latin phænomenon, from Greek phainomenon "that which appears or is seen," noun use of neuter present partici

 certain 

 c. 1300, "determined, fixed," from Old French certain "reliable, sure, assured" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *certanus, extended form of Latin certus "determined, resolved, fixed, settled," of things whose qualities are invariable, "established," also "placed beyond doubt, sure, tru

 cynic 

 1550s, "one of the ancient sect of philosophy founded by Antisthenes," from Latinized form of Greek kynikos "a follower of Antisthenes," literally "dog-like," from kyōn (genitive kynos) "dog" (from PIE root *kwon- "dog"). Supposedly the name is a reference to the coarseness of li

 prose 

 c. 1300, "story, narration," from Old French prose (13c.) and directly from Latin prosa, short for prosa oratio "straightforward or direct speech" (without the ornaments of verse), from prosa, fem. of prosus, earlier prorsus "straightforward, direct," from Old Latin provorsus "(m

 prowess 

 early 13c., prouesse, "an act of bravery;" c. 1300, "military bravery combined with skill in combat," from Old French proece "prowess, courage, brave deed" (Modern French prouesse), from prou, later variant of prud "brave, valiant," from Vulgar Latin *prodem (source also of Spani

 creature 

 c. 1300, "anything created," hence "a thing" in general, animate or not, but most commonly "a living being," from Old French creature "created being; all creation" (Modern French créature), from Late Latin creatura "a thing created; the creation; a creature," from creatus, past p

 dearth 

 c. 1300, derthe "scarcity of food," of other situations of scarcity by mid-14c., abstract noun from root of Old English deore "precious, costly" (see dear) + abstract noun suffix -th (2). A common Germanic formation, though not always with the same sense (Old Saxon diurtha "splen

 Islam 

 "religious system revealed by Muhammad," 1816, from Arabic islam, literally "submission" (to the will of God), from root of aslama "he resigned, he surrendered, he submitted," causative conjunction of salima "he was safe," and related to salam "peace." ... Islam is the only majo

 Share turmeric 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmeric Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmeric">Etymology of turmeric by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of turmeric. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmeric Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of turmeric," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmeric. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of turmeric." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmeric. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of turmeric." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmeric (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near turmeric 
 turkey-vulture 
 Turkic 
 Turkish 
 Turkoman 
 Turkophile 
 turmeric 
 turmoil 
 turn 
 turn up 
 turnable 
 turnabout 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix