URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rival
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:33:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rival - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rival - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rival 

 rival (n.) 

 1570s, "one who is in pursuit of the same object as another;" 1640s, "one who emulates or strives to equal or exceed another" in some way; from Latin rivalis "a rival, adversary in love; neighbor," originally, "of the same brook," from rivus "brook" (from PIE root *rei- "to run, flow").

 The sense evolution seems to be based on the competitiveness of neighbors: "one who uses the same stream," or "one on the opposite side of the stream," hence in various ways "one who is in pursuit of the same object or resource as another."

 A secondary sense in Latin and sometimes in English was "associate, companion in duty," from the notion of "one having a common right or privilege with another." As an adjective, "having the same pretentions or claims, holding the position of rivals," 1580s, from the noun.
 also from 1570s 

 rival (v.) 

 "stand in or enter into competition with another; strive to equal, emulate," c. 1600, from rival (n.). Related: Rivaled ; rivaling .
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to rival 

 arch-rival (n.) 

 also archrival , "chief opponent or competitor for the same goal," by 1805, from arch- + rival (n.).

 rivalry (n.) 

 "act of rivaling, competition, strife or effort to attain an object another is pursuing," 1590s; from rival (n.) + -ry . Shakespeare has rivality ("Antony and Cleopatra"), but meaning "association, partnership, equality in rank," from the secondary sense of the Latin adjective. Jonson has rivalship (1630s); rivaltry (1640s) also was used.

 unrivalled 
 *rei- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 equal 

 late 14c., "identical in amount, extent, or portion;" early 15c., "even or smooth of surface," from Latin aequalis "uniform, identical, equal," from aequus "level, even, flat; as tall as, on a level with; friendly, kind, just, fair, equitable, impartial; proportionate; calm, tran

 touch 

 late 13c., "make deliberate physical contact with," from Old French tochier "to touch, hit, knock; mention, deal with" (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare "to knock, strike" as a bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative orig

 match 

 "stick for striking fire." Late 14c., macche, "wick of a candle or lamp," a sense now obsolete, from Old French meiche "wick of a candle," from Vulgar Latin *micca/*miccia (source also of Catalan metxa, Spanish mecha, Italian miccia), which is of uncertain origin, probably ultima

 antagonist 

 from French antagoniste (16c.) or directly from Late Latin antagonista, from Greek antagonistēs "competitor, opponent, rival...," agent noun from antagonizesthai "to struggle against, oppose, be a rival," from anti "against" (see anti-) + agonizesthai...

 emulation 

 aemulationem (nominative aemulatio) "rivalry, emulation, competition," noun of action from past-participle stem of aemulari "to rival..., strive to excel," from aemulus "striving, rivaling" (also as a noun, "a rival," fem. aemula), from Proto-Italic *aimo-,...

 envy 

 Jealousy is the malign feeling which is often had toward a rival, or possible rival, for the possession of that which we...Envy is a similar feeling toward one, whether rival or not, who already possesses that which we greatly desire....

 pull 

 claim to one who has influence" is by 1889, American English, from earlier sense "power to pull (and not be pulled by)" a rival...

 scratch 

 c. 1400, scracchen, transitive, "mark or wound slightly on the surface by a scraping or tearing action with something rough, sharp, or pointed," probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning "to scratch," both of uncertain origin. Also compare scr-. Relat

 queen 

 Middle English quene, "pre-eminent female noble; consort of a king," also "female sovereign, woman ruling in her own right," from Old English cwen "queen, female ruler of a state; woman; wife," from Proto-Germanic *kwoeniz (source also of Old Saxon quan "wife," Old Norse kvaen, G

 contend 

 mid-15c., "engage in rivalry, compete," from Old French contendre and directly from Latin contendere "to stretch out; to shoot, hurl, throw; strive after mentally; measure or try one's strength with, fight, vie with," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefi

 Share rival 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rival Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rival">Etymology of rival by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rival. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rival Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rival," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rival. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rival." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rival. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rival." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rival (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rival 
 rite 
 ritual 
 ritualistic 
 Ritz 
 ritzy 
 rival 
 rivalrous 
 rivalry 
 rive 
 riven 
 river 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix