URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/school
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:28:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: School - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

School - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of school 

 school (n.1) 

 [place of instruction] Middle English scole , from Old English scol , "institution for instruction," from Latin schola "meeting place for teachers and students, place of instruction;" also "learned conversation, debate; lecture; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect," also in the older Greek sense of "intermission of work, leisure for learning."

 This is from Greek skholē "spare time, leisure, rest, ease; idleness; that in which leisure is employed; learned discussion;" also "a place for lectures, school;" originally "a holding back, a keeping clear," from skhein "to get" (from PIE root *segh- "to hold") + -olē by analogy with bolē "a throw," stolē "outfit," etc.

 The basic sense of the Greek word is "leisure," which passed to "otiose discussion" (in Athens or Rome, the favorite or proper use of free time), then it came to be used for the place for such discussion.

 The Latin word was widely borrowed (in addition to Old French escole , French école , Spanish escuela , Italian scuola; Old High German scuola , German Schule , Swedish skola , Gaelic sgiol , Welsh ysgol , Russian shkola ).

 The meaning "students attending a school" in English is attested from c. 1300; the sense of "school building" is by 1590s. Sense of "people united by a general similarity of principles and methods" is from 1610s; hence school of thought (by 1848). As an adjective by mid-18c., "pertaining to or relating to a school or to education."

 School of hard knocks "rough experience in life" is by 1870; to tell tales out of school "betray damaging secrets" is from 1540s. School-bus is from 1908. School days is from 1590s. School board "local committee of education" is by 1836; school district "division of a town or city for the management of schools" is by 1809.

 school (n.2) 

 [large number of fish] late 14c., scole , from Middle Dutch schole (Dutch school ) "group of fish or other animals" (porpoises, whales), which is cognate with Old English scolu "band, troop, crowd of fish," both from West Germanic *skulo- (source also of Old Saxon scola "troop, multitude," West Frisian skoal ), perhaps with a literal sense of "division," and from PIE root *skel- (1) "to cut." Compare shoal (n.2)), the assibilated form of the same word. For possible sense development, compare section (n.) from Latin secare "to cut."

 also from late 14c. 

 school (v.1) 

 "educate, instruct;" also "reprimand, discipline, reprove," mid-15c., scolen , from school (n.1). Especially "to train or discipline thoroughly and strictly," as in a school (1570s).
 also from mid-15c. 

 school (v.2) 

 "collect or swim in schools," as fish, 1590s, from school (n.2). Related: Schooled ; schooling .
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to school 

 section (n.) 

 late 14c., seccioun , in astronomy, "the intersection of two straight lines; a division of a scale;" from Old French section and directly from Latin sectionem (nominative sectio ) "a cutting, cutting off, division," noun of action from past-participle stem of secare "to cut" (from PIE root *sek- "to cut").

  The meaning "a part cut off or separated from the rest" is from early 15c. That of "a drawing representing something as if cut through" is from 1660s. From 1550s in English in the meaning "act of cutting or dividing," a sense now rare or archaic and preserved in some medical phrases, most notably Caesarian section . The meaning "a subdivision of a written work, statute, etc." is from 1570s.

 Books are commonly divided into 
 Chapters , 
 Chapters into 
 Sections , and 
 Sections into 
 Paragraphs or 
 Breaks , as Printers call them .... [Blount, "Glossigraphia," 1656]

 In music, "a group of similar instruments in a band or orchestra" (1880). In U.S. history, a square of 640 acres into which public lands were divided (1785). In World War II U.S. military slang, section eight was a reference to the passage in an Army Regulations act that referred to discharge on grounds of insanity.

 shoal (n.2) 

 "large number, great multitude" (especially of fish), 1570s, a word of uncertain origin. It is apparently identical with Middle English scole "a troop, throng, crowd," from Old English scolu "band, troop, crowd of fish" (see school (n.2)), but it also might be a 16c. adoption of the cognate Middle Dutch schole .

 diatribe 
 homeschool 
 old-school 
 preschool 
 public school 
 sch 
 scholar 
 scholarch 
 scholastic 
 scholiast 
 school-book 
 schoolboy 
 schooled 
 schoolgirl 
 school-house 
 schooling 
 schoolmarm 
 school-master 
 See All Related Words (27) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 diatribe 

 1640s (in Latin form in English from 1580s), "continued discourse, critical dissertation" (senses now archaic), from French diatribe (15c.) and directly from Latin diatriba "learned discussion," from Greek diatribe "employment, study," in Plato, "discourse," literally "a wearing 

 scholar 

 Middle English scolere, from Old English scolere "student, one who receives instruction in a school, one who learns from a teacher," from Medieval Latin scholaris, "a pupil, scholar," noun use of Late Latin scholaris "of a school," from Latin schola (see school (n.1), and compare

 scholastic 

 1590s, "of or pertaining to Scholastic theologians" (Churchmen in the Middle Ages whose theology and philosophy was based on Church Fathers and Aristotle), from French scholastique (14c.), from Latin scholasticus "of a school," from Greek skholastikos "enjoying leisure; devoting 

 gymnasium 

 1590s, "place of exercise," from Latin gymnasium "school for gymnastics," from Greek gymnasion "public place where athletic...exercises are practiced; gymnastics school," in plural, "bodily exercises," from gymnazein "to exercise or train," literally...Hence its use in German from 15c. as a name for "high school" (more or less paralleling a sense also in Latin); in English...For the "continental high school sense," English in 19c. sometimes used gymnastical as an adjective, gymnasiast for a student...

 junior 

 Junior college is attested by 1896; junior high school is from 1909....The junior high school is rapidly becoming the people's high school....[Anne Laura McGregor, "Supervised Study in English for Junior High School Grades," New York, 1921]...

 middle 

 Middle school is attested from 1838, originally "middle-class school, school for middle-class children;" the sense in reference...to a school for grades between elementary and high school is from 1960....

 Ionic 

 The Ionic school of philosophers (Thales, Anaxamander, etc.) studied the material world in ways that somewhat anticipated...It also once was the name of an important school of Greek painting, but all of it save the name is lost....

 civilize 

 c. 1600, "to bring out of barbarism, introduce order and civil organization among, refine and enlighten," from French civiliser, verb from Old French civil (adj.), from Latin civilis "relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable, courteous

 swim 

 Middle English swimmen, from Old English swimman, of a person, fish, bird, "to move in the water, float on the water, move in water by natural means of locomotion" (class III strong verb; past tense swamm, past participle swummen), from Proto-Germanic *swimjan (source also of Old

 secession 

 1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) "a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal, insurrection, schism," noun of action from past-participle stem of secedere "go away, withdraw, separate; rebel, revolt," from se- "apart" (see se-) + cedere "to go" (from PIE roo

 Share school 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/school Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/school">Etymology of school by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of school. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/school Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of school," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/school. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of school." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/school. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of school." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/school (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near school 
 scholarly 
 scholarship 
 scholastic 
 scholasticism 
 scholiast 
 school 
 school-book 
 schoolboy 
 schooled 
 schoolgirl 
 school-house 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix