URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stethoscope
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stethoscope - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stethoscope - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stethoscope 

 stethoscope (n.) 

 instrument for examining the chest, 1820, from French stéthoscope , coined 1819 by its inventor, French physician René-Théophile-Hyacinthe Laënnec (1781-1826), from Greek stēthos "chest, breast" + -scope . Greek stēthos is perhaps related to sternon (see sternum ); it meant "front of the chest," and was only rarely used of a woman's breasts, but in Modern Greek it became the preferred polite term. Related: Stethoscopic; stethoscopically ; stethoscopy .
 also from 1820 

 Entries linking to stethoscope 

 sternum (n.) 

 "breastbone of a human or other vertebrate," 1660s, from Greek sternon "chest, breast, breastbone" (in Homer, only of males), also "the breast as the seat of affections," which probably is related to stornynai "to spread out," from PIE *ster-no- "to stretch, extend," from root *stere- "to spread," on the notion of the chest as broad and flat, as opposed to the neck, "even if the exact semantic development remains uncertain," according to Beekes, who compares Old High German stirna "forehead," Russian storoná "region, side." Related: Sternal .

 -scope 

 word-forming element indicating "an instrument for seeing," from Late Latin -scopium , from Greek -skopion , from skopein "to look at, examine" (from PIE root *spek- "to observe").

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 moral 

 mid-14c., "associated with or characterized by right behavior," also "associated with or concerning conduct or moral principles" (good or bad), from Old French moral (14c.) and directly from Latin moralis "proper behavior of a person in society," literally "pertaining to manners,

 fathom 

 Old English fæðm "length of the outstretched arms" (a measure of about six feet), also "arms, grasp, embrace," and, figuratively "power," from Proto-Germanic *fathmaz "embrace" (source also of Old Norse faðmr "embrace, bosom," Old Saxon fathmos "the outstretched arms," Dutch vade

 fantasy 

 early 14c., "illusory appearance," from Old French fantaisie, phantasie "vision, imagination" (14c.), from Latin phantasia, from Greek phantasia "power of imagination; appearance, image, perception," from phantazesthai "picture to oneself," from phantos "visible," from phainestha

 meme 

 "an idea, behavior, or style that spreads from person to person within a culture," 1976, introduced by evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in "The Selfish Gene," coined by him from Greek sources, such as mimeisthai "to imitate" (see mime (n.)), and intended to echo gene. We n

 social 

 early 15c., "devoted to or relating to home life;" 1560s as "living with others," from French social (14c.) and directly from Latin socialis "of companionship, of allies; united, living with others; of marriage, conjugal," from socius "companion, ally," probably originally "follo

 afflict 

 late 14c., "to cast down" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare "to damage, harass, torment," frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) "to dash down, overthrow," from ad "to" (see ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) "to strike.

 election 

 c. 1300, eleccioun, "act of choosing" someone to occupy a position, elevation to office" (whether by one person or a body of electors); also "the holding of a vote by a body of electors by established procedure; the time and place of such a vote," from Anglo-French eleccioun, Old

 prejudice 

 c. 1300, "despite, contempt," from Old French prejudice "a prejudice, prejudgment; damage" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin prejudicium "injustice," from Latin praeiudicium "prior judgment, judicial examination before trial; damage, harm," from prae- "before" (see pre-) + 

 neat 

 1540s, "clean, free from dirt," from Anglo-French neit, French net "clear, pure" (12c.), from Latin nitidus "well-favored, elegant, trim," literally "gleaming," from nitere "to shine," from PIE root *nei- "to shine" (source also of Middle Irish niam "gleam, splendor," niamda "shi

 Balaclava 

 "woolen head covering," especially worn by soldiers, evidently named for village near Sebastopol, site of a battle Oct. 25, 1854, in the Crimean War. But the term (originally Balaclava helmet) does not appear before 1881 and seems to have come into widespread use in the Boer War.

 Share stethoscope 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stethoscope Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stethoscope">Etymology of stethoscope by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stethoscope. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stethoscope Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stethoscope," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stethoscope. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stethoscope." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stethoscope. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stethoscope." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stethoscope (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stethoscope 
 sternward 
 steroid 
 sterol 
 stertorous 
 stet 
 stethoscope 
 Stetson 
 stevedore 
 Steven 
 stevia 
 stew 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix