URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/asparagus
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:39:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Asparagus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Asparagus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of asparagus 

 asparagus (n.) 

 plant cultivated for its edible shoots, late 14c., aspergy ; earlier sparage (late Old English), from Latin asparagus (in Medieval Latin often in the form sparagus ), from Greek asparagos / aspharagos , which is of uncertain origin; perhaps with euphonic a- + PIE root *sp(h)er(e)g- "to spring up," but Beekes suggests "it is rather a substrate word," based in part on the p/ph variation.

 In Middle English, asperages sometimes was regarded as a plural, with false singular aspergy . By 16c. the word had been Englished as far as sperach , sperage . The classical Latin form of the word is attested in English from mid-16c., but was limited at first to herbalists and botanists; the common form from 17c.-19c. was the folk-etymologized variant sparrowgrass , during which time asparagus had "an air of stiffness and pedantry" [John Walker, "Critical Pronouncing Dictionary," 1791]. Known in Old English as eorðnafela . Related: Asparaginous .

 "In his daily and ordinary talke cetaine phrases he had which hee used very often and significantly [...] To expresse the speedy expedition of a thing done hastily, Quicker, would he say, than SPARAGES can be sodden." [Philemon Holland, "The Historie of Tvvelve Caesars Emperours of Rome," 1606]

 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to asparagus 

 aspartame (n.) 

 commercial name of an artificial sweetener, 1973, from aspartic acid (1836), formed irregularly from asparagine (1813, earlier in French), a crystalline compound found in asparagus, beet-root, etc., which was named from asparagus + chemical suffix -ine (2). The -ame is perhaps because aspartamine is an amide.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 herb 

 c. 1300, erbe "non-woody plant," especially a leafy vegetable used for human food, from Old French erbe "grass, herb, plant fed to animals" (12c., Modern French herbe), from Latin herba "grass, an herb; herbage, turf, weeds" (source also of Spanish yerba, Portuguese herva, Italia

 vegetable 

 early 15c., "capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous;" also "neither animal nor mineral, of the plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant," from Old French vegetable "living, fit to live," and directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis "growing, flourishing," from Late Lati

 titan 

 early 15c., from Latin titan, from Greek titan, "a member of a mythological race of giants" (originally six sons and six daughters of Gaia and Uranus) who were overthrown by Zeus and the other gods. The war was a popular theme for Greek artists and writers. The name is perhaps fr

 baffle 

 1540s, "to disgrace," of uncertain origin. Perhaps a Scottish respelling of bauchle "to disgrace publicly" (especially a perjured knight), which is probably related to French bafouer "to abuse, hoodwink" (16c.), possibly from baf, a natural sound of disgust, like bah (compare Ger

 testimony 

 c. 1400, "proof or demonstration of some fact, evidence, piece of evidence;" early 15c., "legal testimony, sworn statement of a witness," from Old North French testimonie (Old French testimoine 11c.), from Latin testimonium "evidence, proof, witness, attestation," from testis "a 

 bolt 

 Old English bolt "short, stout arrow with a heavy head;" also "crossbow for throwing bolts," from Proto-Germanic *bultas (source also of Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps originally "arrow, missile," and from PIE *bheld- "to knock, strike" (source 

 attrition 

 early 15c., attricioun, "a breaking;" 1540s, "abrasion, scraping, the rubbing of one thing against another," from Latin attritionem (nominative attritio), literally "a rubbing against," noun of action from past-participle stem of atterere "to wear, rub away," figuratively "to des

 genre 

 1770, "particular style of art," a French word in English (nativized from c. 1840), from French genre "kind, sort, style" (see gender (n.)). Used especially in French for "independent style." In painting, as an adjective, "depicting scenes of ordinary life" (a domestic interior o

 ponder 

 mid-14c., ponderen, "to estimate the worth of, to appraise" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French ponderer "to weigh, poise" (14c., Modern French pondérer) and directly from Latin ponderare "ponder, consider, reflect," literally "to weigh," from pondus (genitive ponderis) "weig

 Atlantic 

 early 15c., Atlantyke, "of or pertaining to the sea off the west coast of Africa," from Latin Atlanticus, from Greek Atlantikos "of Atlas," adjectival form of Atlas (genitive Atlantos) as used in reference to Mount Atlas in Mauritania (see Atlas). The name has been extended since

 Share asparagus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/asparagus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/asparagus">Etymology of asparagus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of asparagus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/asparagus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of asparagus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/asparagus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of asparagus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/asparagus. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of asparagus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/asparagus (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near asparagus 
 aslant 
 asleep 
 Asmodeus 
 asocial 
 asp 
 asparagus 
 aspartame 
 Aspasia 
 aspect 
 aspen 
 asperate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix