URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/morbid
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:33:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Morbid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Morbid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of morbid 

 morbid (adj.) 

 1650s, "of the nature of a disease, indicative of a disease," from Latin morbidus "diseased," from morbus "sickness, disease, ailment, illness," according to de Vaan perhaps connected to the root of mori "to die," as "looking like death" (from PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm," also "to die" and forming words referring to death and to beings subject to death), or from a non-IE word. Meaning "diseased, sickly" is from 1731. Transferred use, of mental states, "unwholesome, excessive, unreasonable" is by 1834. Related: Morbidly ; morbidness . Middle English had morbous "diseased" (early 15c.), from Latin morbosus .
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to morbid 

 morbidity (n.) 

 "morbid condition or state," 1721, from morbid + -ity or from French morbidité .

 premorbid (adj.) 

 also pre-morbid , "preceding the occurrence of symptoms or disease," 1905, from pre- "before" + morbid .

 *mer- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to rub away, harm." Possibly identical with the root *mer- that means "to die" and forms words referring to death and to beings subject to death.

 It might form all or part of: amaranth ; ambrosia ; amortize ; Amritsar ; immortal ; manticore ; marasmus ; mare (n.3) "night-goblin, incubus;" morbid ; mordacious ; mordant ; moribund ; morsel ; mort (n.2) "note sounded on a horn at the death of the quarry;" mortal ; mortality ; mortar ; mortgage ; mortify ; mortmain ; mortuary ; murder ; murrain ; nightmare ; post-mortem ; remorse .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit mrnati "crushes, bruises," mriyate "to kill," martave "to die," mrta- "died, dead," mrtih "death," martah "mortal man," amrta- "immortal;" Avestan miriia- "to die," miryeite "dies," Old Persian martiya- "man;" Hittite mer- "to disappear, vanish," marnu- "to make disappear;" Armenian meranim "to die;" Greek marainein "to consume, exhaust, put out, quench," marasmus "consumption," emorten "died," brotos "mortal" (hence ambrotos "immortal"); Latin mors (genitive mortis ) "death," mori "to die;" Armenian merani- "to die;" Gothic maurþr , Old English morþ "murder;" Old Irish marb , Welsh marw "dead;" Lithuanian mirti "to die," mirtis "death;" Old Church Slavonic mreti "to die," mrutvu "dead;" Russian mertvyj , Serbo-Croatian mrtav "dead."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nymphomania 

 "morbid and uncontrollable sexual desire in women," 1775, in English translation of "Nymphomania, or a Dissertation Concerning...Defined as "a female disease characterized by morbid and uncontrollable sexual desire." Compare also nympholepsy....

 self-conscious 

 The morbid sense of "preoccupied with one's own personality, conscious of oneself as an object of observation to others"...

 ailurophobia 

 "morbid fear of cats," 1905, with -phobia "fear" + Greek ailouros "cat" (probably only "wildcat," as "domestic cats were...

 knuckle 

 mid-14c., knokel "finger joint; any joint of the body, especially a knobby one; morbid lump or swelling."...

 lyssophobia 

 "morbid dread of having caught rabies," a psychological condition which sometimes mimicked the actual disease, 1874, Modern...

 congestion 

 early 15c., "accumulation of morbid matter in the body," from Old French congestion (14c.) and directly from Latin congestionem...

 cerebral 

 Cerebral palsy attested from 1824, originally a general term for cases of paralysis that seemed to be traceable to "a morbid...

 spurn 

 Middle English spurnen, from Old English spurnan "to kick (away), strike against, drive back," as with the foot (a sense now obsolete); also "reject with disdain, scorn, despise," from Proto-Germanic *spurnon (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German spurnan, Old Frisian spur

 bug 

 "insect, beetle," 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably (but not certainly) from or influenced by Middle English bugge "something frightening, scarecrow" (late 14c.), a word or meaning that has become obsolete since the "insect" sense arose, except

 adolescent 

 mid-15c., "youth, young person, one who is growing up," from French adolescent (15c.) or directly from Latin adolescentem/adulescentem (nominative adolescens/adulescens) "young man or woman, a youth," noun use of an adjective meaning "growing, near maturity, youthful." The adject

 Share morbid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/morbid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/morbid">Etymology of morbid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of morbid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/morbid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of morbid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/morbid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of morbid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/morbid. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of morbid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/morbid (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near morbid 
 moratoria 
 moratorium 
 Moravia 
 Moravian 
 moray 
 morbid 
 morbidity 
 mordacious 
 mordant 
 Mordecai 
 more 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close