URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/algorithm
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Algorithm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Algorithm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of algorithm 

 algorithm (n.) 

 1690s, "Arabic system of computation," from French algorithme , refashioned (under mistaken connection with Greek arithmos "number") from Old French algorisme "the Arabic numeral system" (13c.), from Medieval Latin algorismus , a mangled transliteration of Arabic al-Khwarizmi "native of Khwarazm" (modern Khiva in Uzbekistan), surname of the mathematician whose works introduced sophisticated mathematics to the West (see algebra ). The earlier form in Middle English was algorism (early 13c.), from Old French. The meaning broadened to any method of computation; from mid-20c. especially with reference to computing.
 also from 1690s 

 Entries linking to algorithm 

 algebra (n.) 

 "formal mathematics; the analysis of equations; the art of reasoning about quantitative relations by the aid of a compact and highly systematized notation," 1550s, from Medieval Latin algebra , from Arabic "al-mukhtasar fi hisab al-jabr wa al-muqabala" ("the compendium on calculation by restoring and balancing"), the title of the famous 9c. treatise on equations by Baghdad mathematician Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi.

 Arabic al jabr ("in vulgar pronunciation, al-jebr " [Klein]) "reunion of broken parts" (reducing fractions to integers in computation) was one of the two preparatory steps to solving algebraic equations; it is from Arabic jabara "reintegrate, reunite, consolidate." Al-Khwarizmi's book (translated into Latin in 12c.) also introduced Arabic numerals to the West.

 John Dee (16c.) calls the work algiebar and almachabel . The accent shifted 17c. from second syllable to first. The same word was used in English 15c.-16c. to mean "bone-setting," as was Medieval Latin algebra , a usage picked up probably from Arab medical men in Spain.

 Algol 

 variable star (Beta Persei) in the constellation Perseus, late 14c., literally "the Demon," from Arabic al-ghul "the demon" (see ghoul ). It corresponds, in modern representations of the constellation, to the gorgon's head Perseus holds, but probably it was so called because it visibly varies in brightness every three days, which sets it apart from other bright stars.

 The computer language (1959) is a contraction of algo(rithmic) l(anguage) ; see algorithm .

 algorism 
 algorithmic 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bucket 

 one's remaining life," is by 2007, probably based on kicking the bucket as "dying," but the phrase was used earlier in algorithm...

 lure 

 early 14c., "something which allures or entices, an attraction" (a figurative use), originally the name of a device for recalling a hawk, from Anglo-French lure, Old French loirre "device used to recall hawks, lure," from Frankish *lothr or some other Germanic source, from Proto-

 rule 

 c. 1200, "principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed" from Old French riule, Norman reule "rule, custom, (religious) order" (in Modern French partially re-Latinized as règle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula "straight stick, bar,

 formula 

 1630s, "words used in a ceremony or ritual" (earlier as a Latin word in English), from Latin formula "form, draft, contract, regulation;" in law, "a rule, method;" literally "small form," diminutive of forma "form" (see form (n.)). Modern sense is colored by Carlyle's use (1837) 

 program 

 1630s, "public notice," from Late Latin programma "proclamation, edict," from Greek programma "a written public notice," from stem of prographein "to write publicly," from pro "forth" (see pro-) + graphein "to write" (see -graphy).  The meaning "written or printed list of pi

 market 

 early 12c., "a meeting at a fixed time for buying and selling livestock and provisions, an occasion on which goods are publicly exposed for sale and buyers assemble to purchase," from Old North French market "marketplace, trade, commerce" (Old French marchiet, Modern French march

 park 

 mid-13c., "tract of land enclosed as a preserve for beasts of the chase," from Old French parc "enclosed wood or heath land used as a game preserve" (12c.), probably ultimately from West Germanic *parruk "enclosed tract of land" (source also of Old English pearruc, root of paddoc

 conceit 

 late 14c., "a thought, a notion, that which is mentally conceived," from conceiven (see conceive) based on analogy of deceit/deceive and receipt/receive. The sense evolved from "something formed in the mind" to "fanciful or witty notion, ingenious thought" (1510s), to "vanity, ex

 peace 

 mid-12c., pes, "freedom from civil disorder, internal peace of a nation," from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais "peace, reconciliation, silence, permission" (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) "compact, agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence o

 Lent 

 "period between Ash Wednesday and Easter," late 14c., short for Lenten (n.) "the forty days of fasting before Easter" in the Christian calendar (early 12c.), from Old English lencten "springtime, spring," the season, also "the fast of Lent," from West Germanic *langitinaz "long-d

 Share algorithm 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/algorithm Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/algorithm">Etymology of algorithm by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of algorithm. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/algorithm Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of algorithm," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/algorithm. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of algorithm." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/algorithm. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of algorithm." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/algorithm (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near algorithm 
 algolagnia 
 algologist 
 Algonquian 
 Algonquin 
 algorism 
 algorithm 
 algorithmic 
 Alhambra 
 alias 
 alibi 
 Alice 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close