URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sparrow
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:40:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sparrow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sparrow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sparrow 

 sparrow (n.) 

 small brown and gray bird ( Passer domesticus ), of European origin but widely spread by colonists and now naturalized in North America, Australia, etc.; Middle English sparwe , from Old English spearwa , from Proto-Germanic *sparwan (source also of Old Norse spörr , Old High German sparo , German Sperling , Gothic sparwa ).

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *spor-wo- , from a root *sper- (3), forming names of small birds in Germanic, Baltic, and Greek (source also of Old Prussian spurglis "sparrow;" Greek sparasion "small, sparrow-like bird," a diminutive form; spergoulos "small field bird," psar "starling").

 The sparrow is a conirostral granivorous bird, whose food is principally seeds and grain, yet it has been introduced in many countries for the purpose of destroying noxious insects. ... It speedily becomes a pest wherever introduced, and seldom destroys noxious insects to any appreciable extent. It was brought into the United States from Germany about 1869, and is now probably more numerous than any single native bird. [Century Dictionary, 1895]

 In English use, with qualifying words, in reference to many small, sparrow-like birds (e.g. snow-sparrow  for "junco"). Used also of small, active, quick-witted persons, especially London cockneys (by 1861). Sparrow-pie (1881) was the proverbial dish of those who gained sharper wits. Of things, indicating those of a small or inferior sort.

 Sparrowfarts (1886) was Cheshire slang for "very early morning." To be sparrow-blasted (1650s) was to be balefully stricken ( sparrow-blasting is from 1580s), but the sense is unclear.

 Entries linking to sparrow 

 sparrow-hawk (n.) 

 also sparrowhawk , "hawk that preys on small birds," late 14c., sparowhawke , replacing spar-hauc and other Middle English forms from Old English spearhafoc ; see sparrow + hawk (n.). Compare Swedish sparfhök , Danish sporvehög .

 spavin (n.) 

 disease of the hock joint of a horse, early 15c., spavein , from Old French espavain , esparvain (Modern French épavin , cognate with Italian spavenio , Spanish esparavan ); the old explanation is that it is perhaps from Frankish *sparwan "sparrow" (see sparrow ), on the supposition that a horse affected with spavin moved with a walk that reminded people of the bird's awkward gait. This seems a stretcher, and Century Dictionary admits it rests on mere resemblance of the forms of the words. Related: Spavined (adj.) "lame, halting, affected with spavin."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ostrich 

 from PIE root *awi- "bird") + Late Latin struthio "ostrich," from Greek strouthion "ostrich," from strouthos megale "big sparrow...The Greeks also knew the bird as strouthokamelos "camel-sparrow," for its long neck....For generic use of "sparrow" for "bird," compare Spanish pájaro, Romanian pasăre "bird," from Latin passer "sparrow."...

 musket 

 "firearm for infantry" (later replaced by the rifle), 1580s, from French mousquette, also the name of a kind of sparrow-hawk...French mousquette had been borrowed earlier into Middle English (late 14c.; c. 1200 as a surname) in its literal sense of "sparrow-hawk...

 bachelorette 

 Sparrow a bachelor? Miss Cornelia. He is, and in all probability will remain one. Jessica....

 Philip 

 Skelton made it the name applied to a common sparrow (perhaps from resemblance to the bird's call)....

 pica 

 Bathgate, "The Sparrow Plague and its Remedy," in Transactions of the New Zealand Institute, 1903]...

 hedge 

 Old English hecg "hedge," originally any fence, living or artificial, from West Germanic *hagjo (source also of Middle Dutch hegge, Dutch heg, Old High German hegga, German Hecke "hedge"), from a verb *hagjanan, from PIE root *kagh- "to catch, seize; wickerwork, fence" (source al

 true 

 Middle English treu, from Old English triewe (West Saxon), treowe (Mercian) "faithful, trustworthy, honest, steady in adhering to promises, friends, etc.," from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz "having or characterized by good faith" (source also of Old Frisian triuwi, Dutch getrouw, Old 

 exacerbation 

 "act of exacerbating; state of being exacerbated; increase of violence or virulence, aggravation," c. 1400, exacerbacioun, from Late Latin exacerbationem (nominative exacerbatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin exacerbare "exasperate, irritate, provoke," from e

 history 

 late 14c., "relation of incidents" (true or false), from Old French estoire, estorie "story; chronicle, history" (12c., Modern French histoire), from Latin historia "narrative of past events, account, tale, story," from Greek historia "a learning or knowing by inquiry; an account

 resign 

 late 14c., "give up (something), surrender, abandon, submit; relinquish (an office, position, right, claim)," from Old French resigner "renounce, relinquish" (13c.), from Latin resignare "to check off, annul, cancel, give back, give up," from re-, here perhaps denoting "opposite"

 Share sparrow 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sparrow Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sparrow">Etymology of sparrow by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sparrow. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sparrow Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sparrow," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sparrow. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sparrow." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sparrow. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sparrow." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sparrow (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sparrow 
 spark 
 sparkle 
 sparkler 
 sparkling 
 sparkly 
 sparrow 
 sparrow-hawk 
 sparse 
 Sparta 
 Spartacist 
 Spartan 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix