URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoof
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:55:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hoof - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hoof - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hoof 

 hoof (n.) 

 Old English hof "hoof," from Proto-Germanic *hōfaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian hof , Old Norse hofr , Danish hov , Dutch hoef , German Huf "hof"), perhaps from PIE *kop- "to beat, strike" (source also of Sanskrit saphah "hoof," Polish kopyto "hoof;" see hatchet (n.)). But Boutkan acknowledges only Indo-Iranian cognates and writes, "We may be dealing with a typical relic form that only survived in the periphery of the IE area ...." For spelling, see hood (n.1).

 A 
 hoof differs from a nail or claw only in being blunt and large enough to inclose the end of the limb; and almost every gradation is to be found between such structures as the human nails, or the claws of a cat, and the hoofs of a horse or an ox. The substance is the same in any case, and the same as horn, being modified and greatly thickened cuticle or epidermis. [Century Dictionary]

 Hoof-and-mouth disease is attested from 1866. Phrase on the hoof is from 1750 as "walking;" later it was cattlemen and butchers' slang for "not (yet) slaughtered."

 hoof (v.) 

 "having hoofs (of a specified kind)," c. 1500 in compounds, from hoof (n.). The colloquial meaning "to walk" (as in hoof it ) is attested from 1640s; the slang meaning "to dance" is by 1920, American English (implied in hoofer ). Related: Hoofing .

 Non-Hoofable Band Sued By Ballroom Mgr. 

 [Variety headline, Nov. 30, 1938] 
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to hoof 

 hatchet (n.) 

 c. 1300 (mid-12c. in surnames), "small axe with a short handle," designed to be used by one hand, from Old French hachete "small combat-axe, hatchet," diminutive of hache "axe, battle-axe, pickaxe," possibly from Frankish *happja or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hapjo- (source also of Old High German happa "sickle, scythe").

 This is perhaps from PIE root *kop- "to beat, strike" (source also of Greek kopis "knife," koptein "to strike, smite," komma "piece cut off;" Lithuanian kaplys "hatchet," kapti, kapiu "to hew, fell;" Old Church Slavonic skopiti "castrate," Russian kopat' "to hack, hew, dig;" Albanian kep "to hew").

 Hatchet-face in reference to one with sharp and prominent features is from 1650s. In Middle English, hatch itself was used in a sense "battle-axe." In 14c., hang up (one's) hatchet meant "stop what one is doing." Phrase bury the hatchet "lay aside instruments of war, forget injuries and make peace" (1754) is from a Native American custom to conclude a peace-making, is described from 1680 ( bury a tomahawk is by 1705). Hatchet-man was originally California slang for "hired Chinese assassin" (1880), later extended figuratively to journalists who attacked the reputation of a public figure (1944).

 hood (n.1) 

 "covering," Old English hod "a hood, soft covering for the head" (usually extending over the back of the neck and often attached to a garment worn about the body), from Proto-Germanic *hōd- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian hod "hood," Middle Dutch hoet , Dutch hoed "hat," Old High German huot "helmet, hat," German Hut "hat," Old Frisian hode "guard, protection"), which is of uncertain etymology, perhaps from PIE *kadh- "to cover" (see hat ).

 Modern spelling is early 1400s to indicate a "long" vowel, which is no longer pronounced as such. Used for hood-like things or animal parts from 17c. Meaning "Foldable or removable cover for a carriage to protect the occupants" is from 1826; meaning "sunshade of a baby-carriage" is by 1866. Meaning "hinged cover for an automobile engine" attested by 1905 (in U.K. generally called a bonnet ). Little Red Riding Hood (1729) translates Charles Perrault's Petit Chaperon Rouge ( "Contes du Temps Passé" 1697).

 hoofbeat 
 hoof-mark 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 foot 

 "terminal part of the leg of a vertebrate animal," Old English fot "foot," from Proto-Germanic *fōts (source also of Old Frisian fot, Old Saxon fot, Old Norse fotr, Danish fod, Swedish fot, Dutch voet, Old High German fuoz, German Fuß, Gothic fotus "foot"), from PIE root *ped- "f

 chelicerae 

 proboscis of a scorpion or spider, 1831, plural of Modern Latin chelicera, from Greek khēlē "crab claw, talon, pincers; cloven hoof...of cattle, horse's hoof," metaphorically "surgical forceps, hooked needle, crochet needle, notch of an arrow," a word of...

 onyx 

 "onyx" (12c.), and directly from Latin onyx (genitive onychis), from Greek onyx "onyx-stone," originally "claw, talon, hoof...

 pastern 

 original sense is obsolete; the meaning was extended by 1520s to the part of the horse's leg between the fetlock and the hoof...

 paw 

 c. 1300, paue, "hand or foot of an animal which has nails or claws" (distinguished from a hoof), from Old French powe, poue...

 palm 

 Greek palamē "open hand," Old Irish lam, Welsh llaw, Old English folm, Old High German folma "hand," Sanskrit panih "hand, hoof...

 grouch 

 He seemed perpetually to carry the Hoof-Marks of a horrible Nightmare....

 dance 

 c. 1300, dauncen, "move the body or feet rhythmically to music," from Old French dancier (12c., Modern French danser), which is of unknown origin, perhaps from Low Frankish *dintjan and akin to Old Frisian dintje "tremble, quiver." Through French influence in arts and society, it

 walk 

 "travel on foot," c. 1200, a merger of two verbs, 1. Old English wealcan "to toss, roll, move round" (past tense weolc, past participle wealcen), and 2. wealcian "to roll up, curl," from Proto-Germanic *welk- (source also of Old Norse valka "to drag about," Danish valke "to full"

 toe 

 Old English ta "toe" (plural tan), contraction of *tahe (Mercian tahæ), from Proto-Germanic *taihwō(n) (source also of Old Norse ta, Old Frisian tane, Middle Dutch te, Dutch teen (perhaps originally a plural), Old High German zecha, German Zehe "toe"). Perhaps originally meaning 

 Share hoof 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoof Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoof">Etymology of hoof by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hoof. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoof Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hoof," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoof. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hoof." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoof. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hoof." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoof (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hoof 
 hoodie 
 hoodlum 
 hoodoo 
 hoodwink 
 hooey 
 hoof 
 hoofbeat 
 hoof-mark 
 hook 
 hookah 
 hooked 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix