URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pattern
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:41:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pattern - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pattern - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pattern 

 pattern (n.) 

 a Modern English variant of patron , retaining its other old sense of "outline, plan, model, an original proposed for imitation," from Old French patron "patron, protector; model, pattern." The difference in form and sense between English patron and pattern wasn't firm before 1700s. The meaning "a design or figure corresponding in outline to an object that is to be fabricated and serving as a guide for its shape and dimensions" is by late 14c. Extended sense of "repeated decorative design" is from 1580s. From 1640s as "a part showing the figure or quality of the whole." Meaning "model or design in dressmaking" (especially one of paper) is recorded by 1792 (Jane Austen). Pattern-book is from 1774; pattern-maker is by 1851; pattern baldness is by 1916.

 pattern (v.) 

 1580s, "to make a pattern for, design, plan" (a sense now obsolete), from pattern (n.). Meaning "to make something after a pattern" is from c. 1600; that of "to cover with a design or pattern" is by 1857. To pattern after "take as a model" is by 1878.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to pattern 

 patron (n.) 

 c. 1300, patroun , "a lord-master, one who protects, supports, or encourages," also "one who has the right of presenting a clergyman to a preferment," from Old French patron "patron, protector, patron saint" (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin patronus "patron saint, bestower of a benefice; lord, master; model, pattern, example," from Latin patronus "defender, protector; former master (of a freed slave); advocate," from pater (genitive patris ) "father" (see father (n.)). A doublet of pattern (n.); also compare patroon .

 From late 14c. as "founder of a religious order," also "a patron saint." The meaning "one who advances and encourages the cause or work" of an artist, institution, etc., usually by means of the person's wealth and power, is suggested from late 14c., clearly in this sense by c. 1600; "commonly a wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery" [Johnson]. The commercial sense of "regular customer" is recorded from c. 1600. Patron saint "saint regarded as a special protector of a person, place, profession, etc." (by 1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 design 

 late 14c., "to make, shape," ultimately from Latin designare "mark out, point out; devise; choose, designate, appoint," from de "out" (see de-) + signare "to mark," from signum "identifying mark, sign" (see sign (n.)). The Italian verb disegnare in 16c. developed the senses "to c

 figure 

 c. 1200, "numeral;" mid-13c., "visible appearance of a person;" late 14c., "visible and tangible form of anything," from Old French figure "shape, body; form of a word; figure of speech; symbol, allegory" (10c), from Latin figura "a shape, form, figure; quality, kind, style; figu

 convention 

 early 15c., convencioun, "a formal agreement, covenant, treaty," also "a formal meeting or convention" (of rulers, etc.), also "a private or secret agreement," from Old French convencion "agreement" and directly from Latin conventionem (nominative conventio) "a meeting, assembly;

 sampler 

 early 14c., "pattern or model to be imitated," from sample (n.) in one of its older senses now found only in its source,...to show skill," (1520s) is probably originally meant as "piece of embroidery serving as an illustrative specimen," or "pattern...to be copied or to fix and retain a valuable pattern."...

 norm 

 "a standard, pattern, or model," 1821 (Coleridge), from French norme, from Latin norma "carpenter's square, rule, pattern...

 paragon 

 "a model or pattern of special excellence or perfection; a person of supreme merit or excellence," 1540s, from French paragon..."a model, pattern of excellence" (15c., Modern French parangon), from Italian paragone, originally "touchstone to test gold...

 diaper 

 mid-14c., "costly silken fabric of one color having a repeated pattern of the same color woven into it," from Old French...The sense of the English word descended through "textile fabric having a pattern not strongly defined and repeated at short...intervals," especially, since 15c., of linen where the pattern is indicated only by the direction of the thread, the whole...Also "any pattern constantly repeated over a relatively large surface" (by 1851)....

 plan 

 1670s as a technical term in perspective drawing; more generally by 1706 as "the representation of anything drawn on a plane; a drawing, sketch, or diagram of any object," from French plan "ground plot of a building, map," literally "plane surface" (mid-16c.), from Latin planum "

 cooperation 

 "the act of working together to one end," 1620s, from French coopération, or directly from Late Latin cooperationem (nominative cooperatio) "a working together," noun of action from past-participle stem of cooperari "to work together," from assimilated form of com "with, together

 occult 

 1530s, "secret, not divulged," from French occulte and directly from Latin occultus "hidden, concealed, secret," past participle of occulere "cover over, conceal," from assimilated form of ob "over" (see ob-) + a verb related to celare "to hide" (from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover

 Share pattern 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pattern Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pattern">Etymology of pattern by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pattern. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pattern Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pattern," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pattern. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pattern." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pattern. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pattern." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pattern (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pattern 
 patronymic 
 patroon 
 patsy 
 patten 
 patter 
 pattern 
 patty 
 patzer 
 *pau- 
 paucity 
 Paul 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix