URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/echolalia
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:42:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Echolalia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Echolalia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of echolalia 

 echolalia (n.) 

 "meaningless repetition of words and phrases," 1876, from German (von Romberg, 1865), from Greek ēkhō (see echo (n.)) + lalia "talk, prattle, a speaking," from lalein "to speak, prattle," of echoic origin.
 also from 1876 

 Entries linking to echolalia 

 echo (n.) 

 mid-14c., "sound repeated by reflection," from Latin echo , from Greek ēkhō , personified in classical mythology as a mountain nymph who pined for love of Narcissus until nothing remained but her voice. It is from or related to ēkhē "sound," ēkhein "to resound," from extended form of PIE root *(s)wagh- "to resound" (source also of Sanskrit vagnuh "sound," Latin vagire "to cry," Old English swogan "to resound"). Related: Echoes . Also see echo chamber .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 repetition 

 early 15c., repeticioun, "act of saying over again," from Old French repetition and directly from Latin repetitionem (nominative repetitio) "a repeating," noun of action from past-participle stem of repetere "do or say again" (see repeat (v.)). Of actions or events recurring or d

 spare 

 Middle English sparren, from Old English sparian, Mercian spearian, "refrain from harming or injury, leave undamaged; be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly," from the source of Old English spær "sparing, frugal," from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (source also of Old Saxon sp

 consume 

 late 14c., "to destroy by separating into parts which cannot be reunited, as by burning or eating," hence "destroy the substance of, annihilate," from Old French consumer "to consume" (12c.) and directly from Latin consumere "to use up, eat, waste," from assimilated form of com-,

 onomatopoeia 

 "formation of words or names by imitation of natural sounds; the naming of something by a reproduction of the sound made by it or a sound associated with it," 1570s, from Late Latin onomatopoeia, from Greek onomatopoiia "the making of a name or word" (in imitation of a sound asso

 solstice 

 "one of the two times of the year when the sun is at the greatest distance from the equator," mid-13c., from Old French solstice (13c.), from Latin solstitium "point at which the sun seems to stand still," especially the summer solstice, from sol "the sun" (from PIE root *sawel- 

 imperative 

 1520s, in grammar, "expressing command," used of the form of a verb which expresses command, entreaty, advice, or exhortation, from Late Latin imperativus "pertaining to a command," from imperat-, past participle stem of imperare "to command, requisition," from assimilated form o

 opinion 

 early 14c., opinioun, "a judgment formed or a conclusion reached, especially one based on evidence that does not produce knowledge or certainty," from Old French opinion "opinion, view, judgements founded upon probabilities" (12c.), from Latin opinionem (nominative opinio) "opini

 default 

 early 13c., "offense, crime, sin;" late 13c., "a failing or failure, failure to act," from Old French defaute (12c.) "fault, defect, failure, culpability, lack, privation," from Vulgar Latin *defallita "a deficiency or failure," past participle of *defallere, from Latin de "away"

 lede 

 by 1965, alternative spelling of lead (n.2) in the newspaper journalism sense, to distinguish this specialized sense from other possible meanings of the written word, perhaps especially the molten lead (n.1) used in 20c. typesetting machines...."a people, nation, race; the subjec

 Saturday 

 seventh or last day of the week, Old English sæterdæg, sæternesdæg, literally "day of the planet Saturn," from Sæternes (genitive of Sætern; see Saturn) + Old English dæg (see day). Partial loan-translation of Latin Saturni dies "Saturn's day" (compare Dutch Zaterdag, Old Frisian

 Share echolalia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/echolalia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/echolalia">Etymology of echolalia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of echolalia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/echolalia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of echolalia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/echolalia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of echolalia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/echolalia. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of echolalia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/echolalia (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near echolalia 
 echidna 
 echinoderm 
 echo 
 echo chamber 
 echoic 
 echolalia 
 echolocation 
 echopraxia 
 echovirus 
 eclair 
 eclampsia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix