URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/slime
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:04:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Slime - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Slime - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of slime 

 slime (n.) 

 "Any soft, ropy, glutinous, or viscous substance" [Century Dictionary], Old English slim "soft mud," from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (source also of Old Norse slim , Old Frisian slym , Dutch slijm "slime, phlegm," German Schleim "slime"), which is probably related to Old English lim "birdlime; sticky substance."

 This is from a PIE root *(s)lei- "slimy, sticky, slippery" (source also of Sanskrit linati "sticks, stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears;" Russian slimak "snail;" Old Church Slavonic slina "spittle;" Old Irish sligim "to smear," leinam "I follow," literally "I stick to;" Welsh llyfn "smooth;" Greek leimax "snail," limne "marsh, pool, lake," alinein "to anoint, besmear;" Latin limus "slime, mud, mire," linere "to daub, besmear, rub out, erase").

 As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Figuratively, of anything clinging and offensive, 1570s. Slime-mold , common name for a type of fungi, is from 1880.

 slime (v.) 

 1620s, "to cover with or as with slime," from slime (n.). Intransitive sense of "become slimy" is by 1842. Related: Slimed ; sliming .
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to slime 

 delete (v.) 

 "destroy, eradicate," 1530s, from Latin deletus , past participle of delere "destroy, blot out, efface," from delevi , originally perfective tense of delinere "to daub, erase by smudging" (as of the wax on a writing table), from de "from, away" (see de- ) + linere "to smear, wipe," from PIE root *(s)lei- "slime, slimy, sticky" (see slime (n.)). In English, specifically in reference to written matter from c. 1600. Related: Deleted ; deleting .

 limaceous (adj.) 

 "pertaining to slugs," 1650s, with -ous + Latin limax (genitive limacis ) "snail, slug," from Greek leimax , from PIE root *(s)lei- "slime" (see slime (n.)). The Greek word is cognate with Russian slimák "snail," Lithuanian sliekas "earthworm," and the first element in Old English slaw-wyrm "slow-worm."

 lime 
 liniment 
 litotes 
 loam 
 oblivion 
 slick 
 slight 
 slimy 
 slip 
 Urschleim 
 limno- 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lime 

 "chalky, sticky mineral used in making mortar," from Old English lim "sticky substance, birdlime;" also "mortar, cement, gluten," from Proto-Germanic *leimaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Danish lim, Dutch lijm, German Leim "birdlime"), from PIE root *(s)lei- "slime, slim

 loam 

 Old English lam "clay, mud, clayey or muddy earth," from Proto-Germanic *laimaz (source also of Old Saxon lemo, Dutch leem, German Lehm "loam"), from PIE root *(s)lei- "slimy" (source also of Latin limus "mud;" see slime (n.)). In early use also the stuff from which God made man 

 oblivion 

 late 14c., oblivioun, "state or fact of forgetting, forgetfulness, loss of memory," from Old French oblivion (13c.) and directly from Latin oblivionem (nominative oblivio) "forgetfulness; a being forgotten," from oblivisci (past participle oblitus) "forget," which is of uncertain

 blenny 

 type of small fish, 1774, from Latin blennius (in Pliny), from Greek blennos, from blenna "slime, snot, mucous discharge,...Blennies (B. gattorugine and allied species) are little fishes common in the rock pools, often called Butterfishes from the slime...

 clay 

 Some sources see these as being from a common PIE root meaning "slime; glue" also forming words for "clay" and verbs for...beeswax;" Greek gloios "sticky matter;" Lithuanian glitus "sticky," glitas "mucus;" Old Church Slavonic glina "clay," glenu "slime...

 mucus 

 viscid fluid secreted by the mucous membranes of animals," 1660s (replacing Middle English mucilage), from Latin mucus "slime...

 moist 

 Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *muscidus "moldy," also "wet," from Latin mucidus "slimy, moldy, musty," from mucus "slime" (see...

 ooze 

 "to flow as ooze, percolate through the pores of a substance" (intrans.), also "emit in the shape of moisture" (trans.), late 14c., wosen, verbal derivative of Old English noun wos "juice, sap," from Proto-Germanic *wosan (source of Middle Low German wose "scum"), from same sourc

 silo 

 1835, "a pit in the ground or a cavity in rock for storage of green crops," often in reference to other countries, and the word in English is explained at first, from Spanish silo, traditionally derived from Latin sirum (nominative sirus), from Greek siros "a pit to keep corn in.

 soil 

 early 13c., "to defile or pollute with sin," from Old French soillier "to splatter with mud, to foul or make dirty," originally "to wallow" (12c., Modern French souillier), from souil "tub, wild boar's wallow, pigsty," which is from Latin solium "tub for bathing; seat" (from PIE 

 Share slime 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/slime Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/slime">Etymology of slime by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of slime. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/slime Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of slime," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/slime. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of slime." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/slime. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of slime." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/slime (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near slime 
 slight 
 slighting 
 slightly 
 slightness 
 slim 
 slime 
 slimline 
 slimming 
 slimmish 
 slimnastics 
 slimy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix