URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/syn-
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Syn- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Syn- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of syn- 

 syn- 

 word-forming element of Greek origin (corresponding to Latin con- ) meaning "together with, jointly; alike; at the same time," also sometimes completive or intensive, from Greek syn (prep.) "with, together with, along with, in the company of," from PIE *ksun- "with" (source also of Russian so- "with, together," from Old Russian su(n)- ).

 The Greek prefix was assimilated to -l- , reduced to sy- before -s- and -z- , and altered to sym- before -b- , -m- and -p- . Very productive from c. 1860 in forming words for modern sciences. Since 1970s also with a sense of "synthetic."

 Entries linking to syn- 

 asymptote (n.) 

 "straight line continually approaching but never meeting a curve," 1650s, from Greek asymptotos "not falling together," from a- "not" (see a- (3)) + assimilated form of syn "with" (see syn- ) + ptotos "fallen," verbal adjective from piptein "to fall" (from PIE root *pet- "to rush; to fly"). Related: Asymptosy .

 asyndeton (n.) 

 "figure of speech consisting of omission of conjunctions," 1580s, from Latin, from Greek asyndeton , neuter of asyndetos "unconnected," from a- "not, without" (see a- (3)) + syndetos , from syndein "to bind together," from syn- "together" (see syn- ) + dein "to bind," related to desmos "band" (from PIE root *dē- "to bind").

 "I pitied thee, Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour One thing or other." ["The Tempest"] 

 idiosyncrasy 
 sanhedrim 
 Sejm 
 syllable 
 syllabus 
 syllepsis 
 syllogism 
 symbiosis 
 symbol 
 symmetry 
 sympathy 
 sympatric 
 symphony 
 symphysis 
 symplectic 
 symposium 
 symptom 
 synaesthesia 
 See All Related Words (52) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 idiosyncrasy 

 c. 1600, from French idiosyncrasie, from Latinized form of Greek idiosynkrasia "a peculiar temperament," from idios "one's own" (see idiom) + synkrasis "temperament, mixture of personal characteristics," from syn "together" (see syn-) + krasis "mixture," from PIE root *kere- "to 

 sanhedrim 

 supreme council and highest ecclesiastical and judicial tribunal of the ancient Jews, 1580s, from Late Hebrew sanhedrin (gedola) "(great) council," from Greek synedrion "assembly, council," literally "sitting together," from syn- "together" (see syn-) + hedra "seat" (from PIE roo

 syllable 

 "vocal sound uttered with a single effort of articulation," late 14c., sillable, from Anglo-French sillable, an alteration of Old French silabe "syllable" (12c., Modern French syllabe), from Latin syllaba, from Greek syllabē "that which is held together; a syllable, several sound

 synecdoche 

 together or jointly," from synekdekhesthai "supply a thought or word; take with something else, join in receiving," from syn...- "with" (see syn-) + ek "out" (see ex-) + dekhesthai "to receive," related to dokein "seem good" (from PIE root *dek- "to...

 son 

 Sanskrit sunus, Greek huios, Avestan hunush, Armenian ustr, Lithuanian sūnus, Old Church Slavonic synu, Russian and Polish syn...

 sin 

 Middle English sinne, from Old English synn, syn "violation of divine law, offense against God; moral wrongdoing," also "...

 groom 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), grome "male child, boy;" c. 1300, "a youth, young man," also "male servant, attendant, minor officer in a royal or noble household ranking higher than a page; a knight's squire." A word of unknown origin with no certain cognates in other Germanic 

 pipsqueak 

 also pip-squeak, contemptuous name for an insignificant person, 1910, from the trivial noise a young or weak creature makes. In World War I it was the soldier's slang name for a small German shell "which makes both a pip and a squeak when it comes over the trenches" [Farrow, "Dic

 dwell 

 Old English dwellan "to lead into error, deceive, mislead," related to dwelian "to be led into error, go wrong in belief or judgment," from Proto-Germanic *dwaljana "to delay, hesitate," *dwelana "go astray" (source also of Old Norse dvelja "to retard, delay," Danish dvæle “to li

 reservoir 

 1680s, "a place where something tends to collect, place where anything is kept in store," originally figurative, from French réservoir "storehouse," from Old French reserver "set aside, withhold," from Latin reservare "keep back, save up; retain, preserve," from re- "back" (see r

 Share syn- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/syn- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/syn-">Etymology of syn- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of syn-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/syn- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of syn-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syn-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of syn-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syn-. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of syn-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/syn- (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near syn- 
 symposium 
 symptom 
 symptomatic 
 symptomatology 
 symptomology 
 syn- 
 synaesthesia 
 synagogue 
 synalgia 
 synallagmatic 
 synapse 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix