URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Morocco
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:38:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Morocco - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Morocco - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of morocco 

 morocco (n.) 

 "kind of fine flexible leather," 1630s, earlier maroquin (16c.), via French; ultimately from Morocco , the country in northwest Africa, where the sumac-tanned goatskin leather first was made. Valued for its firmness of texture, flexibility, and grained surface, it was used to make durable book-bindings, for upholstering seats, and somewhat in shoe-making.
 also from 1630s 

 Morocco 

 country in northwest Africa, from Italian, from Berber Marrakesh (properly the name of the city of Marrakesh ), from Arabic Maghrib-al-Aqsa "Extreme West." Compare French Maroc , German Marokko . In English, the first vowel has been altered, apparently by influence of Moor . Related: Moroccan .

 Entries linking to morocco 

 moor (v.) 

 "to fasten (a ship) in a particular location by or as by cables, anchors, etc.," late 15c., probably related to Old English mærels "mooring rope," via unrecorded *mærian "to moor," or possibly borrowed from Middle Low German moren or Middle Dutch maren "to moor," from West Germanic *mairojan . Related: Moored , mooring . French amarrer is from Dutch.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bluchers 

 Prince Blucher demi boots were described in 1815 as "military (or half-boots), of royal purple, or dark blue morocco or kid...

 cordwainer 

 It is sometimes goatskin tanned and dressed, but more frequently split horsehide; it differs from morocco in being prepared...

 Averroes 

 Latinization of name of Ibn Rushd (1126-1198) of Cordova, Arab philosopher and physician of Spain and Morocco....

 canary 

 this is folk-etymology, and the name might instead be that of the Canarii, a Berber people who lived near the coast of Morocco...

 Brazil 

 "red dyewood" word by association with Pliny's Insulae Purpurariae ("Purple Islands") in the Atlantic off the coast of Morocco...

 elephant 

 procure elephants, since in antiquity the animal was found native in the regions of North Africa now known as Tripoli and Morocco...

 Levant 

 "Mediterranean lands east of Italy," especially the coastal region and islands of Asia Minor, Syria, and Lebanon, late 15c., from French levant "the Orient" (12c.), from present participle of lever "to rise" (from Latin levare "to raise," from PIE root *legwh- "not heavy, having 

 leather 

 Old English leðer (only in compounds) "tanned or otherwise dressed hide or skin of an animal," from Proto-Germanic *lethran (source also of Old Norse leðr, Old Frisian lether, Old Saxon lethar, Middle Dutch, Dutch leder, Old High German ledar, German Leder), from PIE *letro- "lea

 granite 

 1640s, from French granit(e) (17c.) or directly from Italian granito "granite," originally "grained," past-participle adjective from granire "granulate, make grainy," from grano "grain," from Latin granum "grain" (from PIE root *gre-no- "grain"). In reference to the appearance of

 moonlight 

 "hold a second job, especially at night," 1957 (implied in the verbal noun moonlighting), from moonlighter "one who takes a second job after hours" (1954), from the notion of working by the light of the moon; see moonlight (n.). Earlier the verb had been used to mean "commit crim

 Share morocco 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/morocco Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/morocco">Etymology of morocco by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of morocco. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/morocco Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of morocco," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/morocco. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of morocco." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/morocco. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of morocco." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/morocco (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near morocco 
 morituri te salutant 
 Mormon 
 morn 
 morning 
 Moro 
 morocco 
 moron 
 moronic 
 morose 
 morosely 
 moroseness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix