URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/character
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Character - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Character - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of character 

 character (n.) 

 mid-14c., carecter , "symbol marked or branded on the body;" mid-15c., "symbol or drawing used in sorcery;" late 15c., "alphabetic letter, graphic symbol standing for a sound or syllable;" from Old French caratere "feature, character" (13c., Modern French caractère ), from Latin character , from Greek kharaktēr "engraved mark," also "symbol or imprint on the soul," properly "instrument for marking," from kharassein "to engrave," from kharax "pointed stake," a word of uncertain etymology which Beekes considers "most probably Pre-Greek." In English the Latin ch- spelling was restored from 1500s.

 The meaning of Greek kharaktēr was extended in Hellenistic times by metaphor to "a defining quality, individual feature." In English, the meaning "sum of qualities that define a person or thing and distinguish it from another" is from 1640s. That of "moral qualities assigned to a person by repute" is from 1712.

 You remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically? The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment. [Stendhal 
 "de l'Amour,"  1822] 

 The sense of "person in a play or novel" is first attested 1660s, in reference to the "defining qualities" he or she is given by the author. The meaning "a person" in the abstract is from 1749; especially "eccentric person" (1773). The colloquial sense of "chap, fellow" is from 1931. Character-actor , one who specializes in characters with marked peculiarities, is attested from 1861; character assassination is so called from 1888; character building (n.) from 1886.

 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to character 

 characteristic 

 adjective ("pertaining to or indicating character") and noun ("a distinctive trait; that which gives or indicates character") both first attested 1660s, from character + -istic on model of Greek kharaktēristikos . Earlier in the adjectival sense was characteristical (1620s). Related: Characteristically (1640s). Characteristics "distinctive traits" also is attested from 1660s.

 characterize (v.) 

 1590s, "engrave, write," a back-formation from characterization , or else from Medieval Latin characterizare , from Greek kharaktērizein "designate by a characteristic mark," from kharaktēr (see character ). The meaning "describe the qualities of" is recorded from 1630s; the sense of "be characteristic of" is from 1744; that of "impart a special stamp or character to" is from 1807. Related: Characterized ; characterizing .

 gash (n.) 

 1540s, an alteration of Middle English garce "a gash, cut, wound, incision" (early 13c.), from Old North French garser "to scarify, cut, slash" (Old French *garse ), apparently from Vulgar Latin *charassare , from Greek kharassein "engrave, sharpen, carve, cut" (from PIE *gher- (4) "to scrape, scratch;" see character ). The loss of -r- is characteristic (see cuss (v.)). Slang use for "vulva" dates to mid-1700s. Provincial English has a set of words ( gashly , gashful , etc.) with forms from gash but senses from gast- "dreadful, frightful."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 quality 

 c. 1300, qualite, "temperament, character, disposition," from Old French calite, qualite "quality, nature, characteristic" (12c., Modern French qualité), from Latin qualitatem (nominative qualitas) "a quality, property; nature, state, condition" (said [Tucker, etc.] to have been 

 lineament 

 early 15c., liniament, "distinctive feature of the body, outline," from Latin lineamentum "contour, outline; a feature," literally "a line, stroke, mark," from lineare "to reduce to a straight line" (here apparently in an unrecorded sense "trace lines"), from linea "string, threa

 role 

 c. 1600, "part or character one takes," from French rôle "part played by a person in life," literally "roll" (of paper) on which an actor's part is written, from Old French rolle (see roll (n.)). Not originally in English with direct reference to actors and the stage, but figurat

 pierrot 

 1733, stock buffoonish character in pantomime, also a popular character in masked balls, from French Pierrot, diminutive...The character originates in Italian commedia dell'arte, usually said to be the character Pedrolino (diminutive of Pedro or...Pietro, the Italian equivalent to Pierre) but an older stock character, Pirro, might be the source, in which case it derives...

 celadon 

 "pale grayish-green color," 1768, from French Céladon, name of a character in the once-popular romance of "l'Astrée" by Honoré...1610); an insipidly sentimental lover who wore bright green clothes, he is named in turn after Celadon (Greek Keladon), a character...

 Tartuffe 

 "pretender to piety," 1670s, from name of the principal character in the comedy by Molière (1664), apparently from Old French...Italian Tartufo is said to have been the name of a hypocritical character in Italian comedy....

 divinity 

 c. 1300, "science of divine things, theology;" late 14c., "quality or character of being divine," also "a divine being, God...Figurative meaning "that which is divine in character or quality" is from 1640s....

 case 

 early 13c., "what befalls one; state of affairs," from Old French cas "an event, happening, situation, quarrel, trial," from Latin casus "a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap," literally "a falling," from cas-, past-participle stem of cadere "to fall, sink, settle do

 attribute 

 late 14c., "assign, bestow," from Latin attributus, past participle of attribuere "assign to, allot, commit, entrust;" figuratively "to attribute, ascribe, impute," from assimilated form of ad "to" (see ad-) + tribuere "assign, give, bestow" (see tribute). Related: Attributed; at

 star 

 "celestial body appearing as a luminous point," Middle English sterre, from Old English steorra "star," from Proto-Germanic *sternan- (source also of Old Saxon sterro, Old Frisian stera, Dutch ster, Old High German sterro, German Stern, Old Norse stjarna, Swedish stjerna, Danish 

 Share character 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/character Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/character">Etymology of character by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of character. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/character Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of character," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/character. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of character." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/character. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of character." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/character (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near character 
 Chappaquiddick 
 chaps 
 chapter 
 char 
 charabanc 
 character 
 characterisation 
 characterise 
 characteristic 
 characterization 
 characterize 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix