URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/orthodox
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:46:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Orthodox - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Orthodox - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of orthodox 

 orthodox (adj.) 

 mid-15c., in reference to theological opinions or faith, "what is regarded as true or correct," from Late Latin orthodoxus , from Greek orthodoxos "having the right opinion," from orthos "right, true, straight" (see ortho- ) + doxa "opinion, praise" (from dokein "to seem;" from PIE root *dek- "to take, accept").

 Of other subjects than religion or theology from 1640s. Meaning "of or pertaining to the Greek Church," by 1772. In reference to a branch of Judaism, recorded from 1853; as a noun meaning "an Orthodox Jew," by 1889.
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to orthodox 

 homodox (n.) 

 "one of the same opinion as another," 1650s, from Greek homodoxos "of the same opinion," from homos "same" (see homo- (1)) + doxa "opinion, praise" (see orthodox ). 

 orthodoxy (n.) 

 "correctness of opinion," especially in theology; "conformity to the Church creeds," 1620s, from French orthodoxie and directly from Late Latin orthodoxia , from late Greek orthodoxia "right opinion," abstract noun from orthodoxos "having the right opinion" (see orthodox ). Orthodoxies "correct belief or opinion" is by 1871.

 unorthodox 
 *dek- 
 ortho- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Hicksite 

 The remainder of the profession (the minority numerically) were known as Orthodox Friends....About the only way I can tell whether a particular Meeting was Orthodox or Hicksite has to do with clocks and pianos....If not, it was Orthodox. [Francis G. Brown, "Downingtown Friends Meeting," 1999]...

 Copt 

 The majority of the Egyptian churches separated from the Orthodox Church after the Council of Chalcedon (451 C.E.)....

 iconoclast 

 Extended sense of "one who attacks orthodox beliefs or cherished institutions" is first attested 1842....

 parapsychology 

 "the study of phenomena outside the sphere of orthodox psychology," by 1923, from German para-psychologie; see para- (1)...

 Pennsylvania 

 The story goes that the younger Penn wanted to call it New Wales, but the king's secretary, a Welshman of orthodox religion...

 Averroes 

 influences, he greatly elevated Aristotle's importance and the reverence for his pagan doctrines to a degree that alarmed the orthodox...

 antipodes 

 1240, translated by John of Trevisa c. 1398] Belief in them could be counted as a heresy in medieval Europe, when the orthodox...

 prevail 

 c. 1400, prevailen, "be successful; be efficacious," from Old French prevaleir (Modern French prévaloir) and directly from Latin praevalere "be stronger or more able, have greater power," from prae "before" (see pre-) + valere "have power, be strong" (from PIE root *wal- "to be s

 urban 

 "characteristic of city life, pertaining to cities or towns," 1610s (but rare before 1830s), from Latin urbanus "of or pertaining to a city or city life; in Rome," also "in city fashion, polished, refined, cultivated, courteous," but also sometimes "witty, facetious, bold, impude

 premise 

 late 14c., in logic, "a previous proposition from which another follows, a judgment causing another judgment," from Old French premisse (14c.), from Medieval Latin praemissa (propositio or sententia) "(the proposition) set before," noun use of fem. past participle of Latin praemi

 Share orthodox 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/orthodox Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/orthodox">Etymology of orthodox by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of orthodox. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/orthodox Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of orthodox," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orthodox. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of orthodox." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orthodox. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of orthodox." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/orthodox (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near orthodox 
 ortho- 
 orthodontia 
 orthodontic 
 orthodontics 
 orthodontist 
 orthodox 
 orthodoxy 
 orthognathous 
 orthogonal 
 orthographic 
 orthography 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix