URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gynecology
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T14:59:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gynecology - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gynecology - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gynecology 

 gynecology (n.) 

 also gynaecology , "science of women's health and of the diseases peculiar to women," 1847, from French gynécologie , from Latinized form of Greek gynaiko- , combining form of gynē "woman, female," from PIE root *gwen- "woman." Second element is from French -logie "study of," from Greek (see -logy ). Another word for it was gyniatrics .
 also from 1847 

 Entries linking to gynecology 

 gynecological (adj.) 

 also gynaecological , 1858, from gynecology + -ical . Related: Gynecologically .

 gynecologist (n.) 

 also gynaecologist , 1851, from gynecology + -ist .

 *gwen- 
 -logy 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 medicine 

 c. 1200, "medical treatment, cure, healing," also (early 14c.) "substance used in treatment of a disease, medicinal potion or plaster," also used figuratively of spiritual remedies, from Old French medecine (Modern French médicine) "medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, poti

 curtain 

 c. 1300, curtine, "hanging screen of textile fabric used to close an opening or shut out light, enclose a bed, or decorate an altar," from Old French cortine "curtain, tapestry, drape, blanket," from Late Latin cortina "curtain," but in classical Latin "round vessel, cauldron," f

 souvenir 

 1775, "a remembrance or memory" (Walpole), from French souvenir (12c.), from Old French noun use of souvenir (v.) "to remember, come to mind," from Latin subvenire "come to mind," from sub "up from below" (see sub-) + venire "to come," from a suffixed form of PIE root *gwa- "to g

 guilt 

 Old English gylt "crime, sin, moral defect, failure of duty," of unknown origin, though some suspect a connection to Old English gieldan "to pay for, debt," but OED editors find this "inadmissible phonologically." The -u- is an unetymological insertion. In law, "That state of a m

 countenance 

 mid-13c., contenaunce, "behavior, bearing, conduct, manners;" early 14c., "outward appearance, looks," from Old French contenance "demeanor, bearing, conduct," from Latin continentia "restraint, abstemiousness, moderation," literally "way one contains oneself," from continentem, 

 faith 

 mid-13c., faith, feith, fei, fai "faithfulness to a trust or promise; loyalty to a person; honesty, truthfulness," from Anglo-French and Old French feid, foi "faith, belief, trust, confidence; pledge" (11c.), from Latin fides "trust, faith, confidence, reliance, credence, belief,

 dog 

 "quadruped of the genus Canis," Old English docga, a late, rare word, used in at least one Middle English source in reference specifically to a powerful breed of canine; other early Middle English uses tend to be depreciatory or abusive. Its origin remains one of the great myster

 toy 

 c. 1300, "amorous playing, sport," later "piece of fun or entertainment" (c. 1500), "thing of little value, trifle" (1520s), and "thing for a child to play with" (1580s). Of uncertain origin, and there may be more than one word here. Compare Middle Dutch toy, Dutch tuig "tools, a

 logic 

 mid-14c., logike, "branch of philosophy that treats of forms of thinking; the science of distinction of true from false reasoning," from Old French logique (13c.), from Latin (ars) logica "logic," from Greek (he) logike (techne) "(the) reasoning (art)," from fem. of logikos "pert

 curmudgeon 

 "churlish, miserly fellow, mean man," 1570s, of unknown origin. Drant (1568) translating Gregory of Nazianus, calls someone "a bolde curmogine chuffe." Liberman says the word "must have been borrowed from Gaelic" (and references muigean "disagreeable person"), with variant spelli

 Share gynecology 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gynecology Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gynecology">Etymology of gynecology by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gynecology. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gynecology Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gynecology," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gynecology. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gynecology." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gynecology. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gynecology." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gynecology (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gynecology 
 gynaecolatry 
 gynarchy 
 gyneco- 
 gynecological 
 gynecologist 
 gynecology 
 gynecomastia 
 gyno- 
 gyp 
 gypsophila 
 gypsum 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix