URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightmare
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:27:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nightmare - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nightmare - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nightmare 

 nightmare (n.) 

 c. 1300, "an evil female spirit afflicting men (or horses) in their sleep with a feeling of suffocation," compounded from night + mare (n.3) "goblin that causes nightmares, incubus." The meaning shifted mid-16c. from the incubus to the suffocating sensation it causes. Sense of "any bad dream" is recorded by 1829; that of "very distressing experience" is from 1831.

 Cognate with Middle Dutch nachtmare , German Nachtmahr . An Old English word for it was niht-genga . An 11c. gloss gives, for Latin Echo , Anglo-Saxon wudumær , a "wood-mere."

 In the Anglo-Saxon superstitions, the Echo was supposed to be a spirit which dwelt in the wilds and mocked people who passed there, as the night-mare tormented people in bed. [Thomas Wright, "Anglo-Saxon and Old English Vocabularies," 1884]
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to nightmare 

 mare (n.3) 

 "night-goblin, incubus, oppressed sleep," Old English mare "incubus, nightmare, monster; witch, sorcerer," from mera, mære , from Proto-Germanic *maron "goblin" (source also of Middle Low German mar , Middle Dutch mare , Old High German mara , German Mahr "incubus," Old Norse mara "nightmare, incubus").

 This is from PIE *mora- "incubus" (source also of first element in Old Irish Morrigain "demoness of the corpses," literally "queen of the nightmare," also Bulgarian, Serbian mora , Czech mura , Polish zmora "incubus").

 Also compare French cauchemar "nightmare," with first element from Old French caucher "to trample" and second element from Germanic.

 All this is probably from PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm" (also "to die" and forming words referring to death and to beings subject to death).

 The word in English now survives only in nightmare (q.v.). In a very early Anglo-Saxon text Latin echo is glossed with wudumer "*woodmare."

 night (n.) 

 late Old English niht (West Saxon neaht , Anglian næht , neht ) "the dark part of a day; the night as a unit of time; darkness," also "absence of spiritual illumination, moral darkness, ignorance," from Proto-Germanic *nahts (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German naht , Old Frisian and Dutch nacht , German Nacht , Old Norse natt , Gothic nahts ).

 The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- "night" (source also of Greek nyx "a night," Latin nox , Old Irish nochd , Sanskrit naktam "at night," Lithuanian naktis "night," Old Church Slavonic nosti , Russian noch' , Welsh henoid "tonight"), according to Watkins, probably from a verbal root *neg- "to be dark, be night." For spelling with -gh- see fight . The vowel indicates that the modern English word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte , dative niht ).

 The fact that the Aryans have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by nights. [Weekley]

 Thus in Old English combinations night was "the night before (a certain day or feast day);" compare German Weihnachten "Christmas," literally "holy night." In early times, the day was held to begin at sunset, so Old English monanniht "Monday night" was the night before Monday, or what we would call Sunday night ; so saeterniht "Friday night." Thomas à Becket's Wednes-night (Old English Wodnes-niht ) would be our Tuesday night. The Greeks, by contrast, counted their days by mornings.

 To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night soil "excrement" (1770) is so called because it was removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train is attested from 1838; night-school from 1520s; night-life "habitual nocturnal carousing" is attested from 1852.

 nightmarish 
 *mer- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pant 

 puff, pant, be out of breath, be in distress" (12c.), which is probably from Vulgar Latin *pantasiare "be oppressed with a nightmare..., struggle for breathing during a nightmare," literally "to have visions," from Greek phantasioun "have or form images, subject...

 Orwellian 

 It is as if George Orwell had conceived the nightmare instead of analyzed it, helped to create it instead of helping to dispel...

 grouch 

 He seemed perpetually to carry the Hoof-Marks of a horrible Nightmare....

 mask 

 French masque "covering to hide or guard the face" (16c.), from Italian maschera, from Medieval Latin masca "mask, specter, nightmare...

 geek 

 form and the popular use with reference to circus sideshow "wild men" is from 1946, in William Lindsay Gresham's novel "Nightmare...

 elf 

 The Germanic elf originally was dwarfish and malicious (compare elf-lock "knot in hair," Old English ælfadl "nightmare,"...

 mascot 

 from masco "witch," from Old Provençal masca, itself of unknown origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin masca "mask, specter, nightmare...

 dream 

 "sequence of sensations or images passing through the mind of a sleeping person," mid-13c., probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish drøm, Swedish dröm, Old Saxon drom "merriment, noise," Old Frisian dram "dream," Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German Traum "dream." Thes

 situation 

 early 15c., situacioun, "place, position, or location," from Old French situacion or directly from Medieval Latin situationem (nominative situatio) "a position, situation," noun of action from past-participle stem of situare "to place, locate," from Latin situs "a place, position

 keep 

 Middle English kēpen, from late Old English cepan (past tense cepte) "to seize, hold; seek after, desire," also "to observe or carry out in practice; look out for, regard, pay attention to," from Proto-Germanic *kopjan, which is of uncertain origin. Old English cepan was used c. 

 Share nightmare 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightmare Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightmare">Etymology of nightmare by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nightmare. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightmare Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nightmare," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightmare. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nightmare." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightmare. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nightmare." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nightmare (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nightmare 
 nightingale 
 nightjar 
 night-light 
 nightlong 
 nightly 
 nightmare 
 nightmarish 
 night-night 
 night-owl 
 nightshade 
 night-shift 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix