URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/amphi-
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:50:45Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Amphi- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Amphi- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of amphi- 

 amphi- 

 before a vowel amph- , word-forming element meaning "on both sides, of both kinds; on all sides, all around," from Greek amphi (prep., adv.) "round about, on both sides of, all around; about, regarding," which is cognate with Latin ambi- , both from PIE root *ambhi- "around."

 Entries linking to amphi- 

 amphibian (adj.) 

 1630s, "having two modes of existence; of doubtful nature," from Greek amphibia , neuter plural of amphibios "living a double life," from amphi "of both kinds" (see amphi- ) + bios "life" (from PIE root *gwei- "to live").

 Formerly used by zoologists to describe any sort of animal at home on land and in the water, including crocodiles, walruses, beavers, seals, hippopotamuses; the restriction to the class of animals between fishes and reptiles with life cycles that begin in water and mature on land is from 1835.

 amphibrach (n.) 

 in prosody, a foot of three syllables, the middle long, the first and last short; 1580s, from Latin amphibrachus , from Greek amphibrakhys , name for a foot consisting of a long syllable between two short, literally "short at both ends," from amphi "on both sides" (see amphi- ) + brakhys "short" (from PIE root *mregh-u- "short"). Related: Amphibrachic .

 amphigory 
 amphisbaena 
 Amphitrite 
 amphora 
 amphoteric 
 umbe 
 *ambhi- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 amphigory 

 "burlesque nonsense writing or verse," 1809, from French amphigouri (18c.), which is of unknown origin, perhaps itself a nonsense word, though the first element seems to suggest Greek amphi (see amphi-). The second sometimes is said to be somehow from Greek gyros "circle," making

 amphora 

 early 14c., "two-handled vessel for holding wine, oil, etc.," from Latin amphora from Greek amphoreus "an amphora, jar with two handles, urn," a contraction of amphiphoreus, literally "two-handled," from amphi "on both sides" (see amphi-) + phoreus "bearer," from pherein "to bear

 amphoteric 

 of a chemical compound, "capable of reacting either as an acid or as a base," 1832, from Greek amphoteros "each or both of two," a variant of amphō "both" that replaced the earlier word. It is identical with Latin ambo and ultimately from the source of amphi- (q.v.). Other langua

 amphitheater 

 amphitheatrum, from Greek amphitheatron "double theater, amphitheater," neuter of amphitheatros "with spectators all around," from amphi...Classical theaters were semi-circles, thus two together made an amphi-theater....

 Amphiscians 

 Medieval Latin Amphiscii, from Greek amphiskioi "inhabitants of the tropics," literally "throwing a shadow both ways," from amphi...

 Amphictyonic 

 from Latinized form of Greek amphiktionikos, from amphiktionēs "neighbors," literally "they that dwell round about," from amphi...

 solution 

 late 14c., solucioun, "explanation, answer; interpretation of a dream; the dissolving of a substance in a liquid, transformation of matter to a liquid state," from Old French solucion "division, dissolving; explanation; payment" and directly from Latin solutionem (nominative solu

 metastasis 

 "change of substance, conversion of one substance into another," 1570s, originally in rhetoric, from Late Latin metastasis "transition," from Greek metastasis "a removing, removal; migration; a changing; change, revolution," from methistanai "to remove, change," from meta, here i

 twilight 

 "light from the sky when the sun is below the horizon at morning and evening," late 14c. (twilighting), a compound of twi- + light (n.) Cognate with Middle Flemish twilicht, Dutch tweelicht (16c.), Middle High German twelicht, German zwielicht. Exact connotation of twi- in this w

 brain 

 "soft, grayish mass filling the cranial cavity of a vertebrate," in the broadest sense, "organ of consciousness and the mind," Old English brægen "brain," from Proto-Germanic *bragnan (source also of Middle Low German bregen, Old Frisian and Dutch brein), a word of uncertain orig

 Share amphi- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/amphi- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/amphi-">Etymology of amphi- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of amphi-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/amphi- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of amphi-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amphi-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of amphi-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amphi-. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of amphi-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/amphi- (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near amphi- 
 amp 
 amperage 
 ampere 
 ampersand 
 amphetamine 
 amphi- 
 amphibian 
 amphibious 
 amphibrach 
 Amphictyonic 
 amphigory 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix