URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cabaret
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:48:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cabaret - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cabaret - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cabaret 

 cabaret (n.) 

 1650s, "tavern, bar, little inn," from French cabaret , originally "tavern" (13c.), which is of uncertain origin, perhaps from Middle Dutch cambret , from Old French (Picard dialect) camberete , diminutive of cambre "chamber" (see chamber (n.)). The word was "somewhat naturalized" in this sense [OED, 1989]. It was borrowed again from French with a meaning "a restaurant/night club" in 1912; the extension of meaning to "entertainment, floor show" is by 1918.
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to cabaret 

 chamber (n.) 

 c. 1200, "a room in a house," usually a private one, from Old French chambre "room, chamber, apartment" (11c.), from Late Latin camera "a chamber, room" (see camera ).

 The Old French word and the Middle English one also were used alone and in combinations to form words for "latrine, privy" from the notion of "bedroom utensil for containing urine." In anatomy, "enclosed space in a body," from late 14c. Of machinery, "artificial cavity," from 1769.

 The gunnery sense of "part of the bore in which the charge is placed" is from 1620s. The meaning "legislative body" is from c. 1400, an extended sense from the chambers or rooms where an assembly meets. Chamber music (1765) traditionally was that meant to be performed in smaller spaces.

 DA CAMERA: of the chamber, i. e.  belonging to the chamber, suitable for the chamber, designed for the chamber,—a term applied to parlor or chamber music. ["Godfrey Weber's General Music Teacher," Boston, 1842]

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 club 

 c. 1200, "thick stick wielded in the hand and used as a weapon," from Old Norse klubba "cudgel" or a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish klubba, Danish klubbe), assimilated from Proto-Germanic *klumbon and related to clump (n.). Old English words for this were sagol, cyc

 cover 

 For instance, at some of the larger hotels in New York, where there is dancing, or cabaret, or high-priced soloists, or entertainment...

 show 

 Middle English sheuen, from Old English sceawian "to look at, see, gaze, behold, observe; inspect, examine; look for, choose," from Proto-Germanic *skauwojanan (source also of Old Saxon skauwon "to look at," Old Frisian skawia, Dutch schouwen, Old High German scouwon "to look at"

 dive 

 c. 1200, diven, "descend or plunge headfirst into water," from a merger of Old English dufan "to dive, duck, sink" (intransitive, class II strong verb; past tense deaf, past participle dofen) and dyfan "to dip, submerge" (weak, transitive), from Proto-Germanic verb *dubijan, from

 honky-tonk 

 "cheap night club," by 1893, American English, of unknown origin. It starts to appear frequently about 1893 in newspapers in Texas and Oklahoma; a much-reprinted snippet defines it as "a particularly vicious and low-grade theater." In the Fort Worth, Texas, "Gazette" in 1889 it s

 post 

 "a timber of considerable size set upright," from Old English post "pillar, doorpost," and from Old French post "post, upright beam," both from Latin postis "door, post, doorpost," in Medieval Latin "a beam, rod, pole," which is perhaps from Vulgar Latin *por- "forth," a variant 

 spot 

 c. 1200, "moral stain;" by mid-14c. as "speck, stain left by something on a surface;" probably at least in part from a variant of Old English splott "a spot, blot, patch (of land)," and partly from or related to Middle Dutch spotte "spot, speck." Other cognates are East Frisian s

 stop 

 Middle English stoppen, "obstruct (a passage) with a physical barrier; close up by filling, stuffing, or plugging," from Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian "to stop up, stifle"), a general West Germanic word, cognate with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low Germ

 night 

 late Old English niht (West Saxon neaht, Anglian næht, neht) "the dark part of a day; the night as a unit of time; darkness," also "absence of spiritual illumination, moral darkness, ignorance," from Proto-Germanic *nahts (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German naht, Old Fr

 floor 

 Old English flor "floor, pavement, ground, bottom (of a lake, etc.)," from Proto-Germanic *floruz "floor" (source also of Middle Dutch and Dutch vloer, Old Norse flor "floor," Middle High German vluor "floor, flooring," German Flur "field, meadow"), from PIE *plaros "flat surface

 Share cabaret 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cabaret Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cabaret">Etymology of cabaret by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cabaret. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cabaret Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cabaret," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cabaret. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cabaret." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cabaret. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cabaret." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cabaret (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cabaret 
 cabal 
 cabala 
 cabalistic 
 caballero 
 cabana 
 cabaret 
 cabbage 
 cabbala 
 cabbalistic 
 cabbie 
 caber 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix