URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/decipher
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:40:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Decipher - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Decipher - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of decipher 

 decipher (v.) 

 1520s, "find out, discover" (a sense now obsolete); 1540s, "interpret (a coded writing, etc.) by the use of a key," from de- + cipher (v.). Perhaps in part a loan-translation from French déchiffrer . From c. 1600 in the transferred sense of "discover or explain the meaning of what is difficult to understand." Sense of "succeed in reading what is written in obscure or partially obliterated characters" is by 1710. Related: Deciphered ; deciphering .
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to decipher 

 cipher (v.) 

 also cypher , 1520s, "to do arithmetic" (with Arabic numerals), from cipher (n.). Transitive sense "reckon in figures, cast up" is from 1860. Meaning "to write in code or occult characters" is from 1560s. Related: Ciphered ; ciphering .

 decipherable (adj.) 

 "capable of being deciphered," c. 1600; see decipher + -able .

 indecipherable 
 undecipherable 
 de- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 trace 

 late 14c., "follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something," also figurative; "ponder, investigate," from Old French tracier "look for, follow, pursue" (12c., Modern French tracer), from Vulgar Latin *tractiare "delineate, score, trace" (source also of Spanish traza

 Rosetta Stone 

 B.C.E., its trilingual inscription helped Jean-François Champollion decipher Egyptian demotic and hieroglyphics in 1822,...

 moniker 

 Rawlinson can decipher cuneiform, but can he tell us why "moniker"—the word has a certain Coptic or Egyptian twang—means...

 rewrite 

 1560s, "reply in writing," from re- "back, again" + write (v.). The sense of "write again, write a second time" especially in a different form is by 1730. Related: Rewrote; rewritten; rewriting. The newspaper rewrite man, who works up copy for publication from information or stor

 cater 

 c. 1600, "provide food for," from Middle English catour (n.) "buyer of provisions" (c. 1400; late 13c. as a surname), a shortening of Anglo-French achatour "buyer" (Old North French acatour, Old French achatour, 13c., Modern French acheteur), from Old French achater "to buy,

 react 

 1640s, "to exert, as a thing acted upon, an opposite action upon the agent," from re- "back" + act (v.). Related: Reacted; reacting (1610s). For sense development, see reaction. The verb meaning "to perform again, do a second time" (often written re-act and given full pronunciati

 dare 

 Middle English durren, daren, from first and third person singular of Old English durran "be bold enough, have courage" (to do something), also transitive "to venture, presume," from Proto-Germanic *ders- (source also of Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan

 dear 

 Old English deore (Anglian diore, West Saxon dyre), "precious, valuable; costly, expensive; glorious, noble; loved, beloved, regarded with affection" from Proto-Germanic *deurja- (source also of Old Saxon diuri "precious, dear, expensive," Old Norse dyrr, Old Frisian diore "expen

 read 

 Middle English reden, ireden, "to counsel, advise," also "to read," from Old English rædan, gerædan (West Saxon), redan, geredan (Anglian) "to advise, counsel, persuade; discuss, deliberate; rule, guide; arrange, equip; forebode; to read (observe and apprehend the meaning of some

 synagogue 

 late 12c., sinagog, "the regular public worship and religious instruction of the Jews," also a place or building for Hebrew worship, from Old French sinagoge "synagogue, mosque, pagan temple" (11c., Modern French synagogue), from Late Latin synagoga "congregation of Jews," from G

 Share decipher 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/decipher Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/decipher">Etymology of decipher by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of decipher. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/decipher Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of decipher," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/decipher. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of decipher." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/decipher. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of decipher." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/decipher (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near decipher 
 decimal 
 decimalization 
 decimate 
 decimation 
 decimeter 
 decipher 
 decipherable 
 decision 
 decisive 
 decivilize 
 deck 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix