URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/octopus
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:24:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Octopus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Octopus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of octopus 

 octopus (n.) 

 1758, genus name of a type of eight-armed cephalopod mollusks, from Latinized form of Greek oktōpous , literally "eight-foot," from oktō "eight" (see eight ) + pous "foot," from PIE root *ped- "foot."

 The more usual Greek word seems to have been polypous (also pōlyps ), from polys "many" + pous , but Thompson ["Glossary of Greek Fishes," 1947] suggests this word is folk-etymologized and of non-Hellenic origin.

 The modern English representation of the classically correct Greek plural (had the word been so used in ancient Athens) would be octopodes . The common plural octopi (1817) regards the -us in this word as the Latin noun ending that takes -i in plural. As with many modern scientific creature-names, it was coined in Modern Latin from Greek elements, so it might be allowed to partake of Latin grammar in forming the plural. But probably the best policy for common words is to follow the grammar of the living language using them, and octopuses goes best in plain English (unless one wishes also to sanction diplodoci for the dinosaurs).

 Used figuratively since at least 1882 of powers having far-reaching influence (usually as considered harmful and destructive). To the ancients, the octopus was crafty and dangerous, thrifty (stores food in its nest), and proverbial of clever and adaptable men, based on the animal's instinct of changing color when frightened or for disguise.

 It also was thought to be amphibious and to climb trees near shores to steal grapes and olives (the giant ones were said to raid whole warehouses). Thompson writes that "the eggs look remarkably like ripe olives; hence the story." 
 also from 1758 

 Entries linking to octopus 

 eight (num.) 

 "1 more than seven, twice four; the number which is one more than seven; a symbol representing this number;" late 14c., eighte , earlier ehte (c. 1200), from Old English eahta , æhta , from Proto-Germanic *akhto (source also of Old Saxon ahto , Old Frisian ahta , Old Norse atta , Swedish åtta , Dutch acht , Old High German Ahto , German acht , Gothic ahtau ), from PIE *okto(u) "eight" (source also of Sanskrit astau , Avestan ashta , Greek okto , Latin octo , Old Irish ocht-n , Breton eiz , Old Church Slavonic osmi , Lithuanian aštuoni ). From the Latin word come Italian otto , Spanish ocho , Old French oit , Modern French huit . For spelling, see fight (v.).

 Meaning "eight-man crew of a rowing boat" is from 1847. The Spanish piece of eight (1690s) was so called because it was worth eight reals (see piece (n.)). Figure (of) eight as the shape of a race course, etc., attested from c. 1600. To be behind the eight ball "in trouble" (1932) is a metaphor from shooting pool. Eight hours as the ideal length of a fair working day is recorded by 1845.

 octopod 

 1826 (adj.), "eight-footed or eight-armed;" 1835 (n.) "an eight-footed or eight-armed animal," especially an octopus, from Latinized form of Greek oktōpod- , stem of oktōpous (see octopus ).

 *ped- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "foot."

 It might form all or part of: antipodes ; apodal ; Arthropoda ; babouche ; biped ; brachiopod ; cap-a-pie ; centipede ; cephalopod ; cheliped ; chiropodist ; expedite ; expedition ; foot ; foosball ; fetch (v.); fetter ; fetlock ; gastropod ; hexapod ; impair ; impede ; impediment ; impeach ; impeccable ; isopod ; millipede ; octopus ; Oedipus ; ornithopod ; pajamas ; pawn (n.2) "lowly chess piece;" peccadillo ; peccant ; peccavi ; pedal ; pedestrian ; pedicel ; pedicle ; pedicure ; pedigree ; pedology ; pedometer ; peduncle ; pejoration ; pejorative ; peon ; pessimism ; petiole ; pew ; Piedmont ; piepowder ; pilot ; pinniped ; pioneer ; platypus ; podiatry ; podium ; polyp ; pseudopod ; quadruped ; sesquipedalian ; stapes ; talipes ; tetrapod ; Theropoda ; trapezium ; trapezoid ; tripod ; trivet ; vamp (n.1) "upper part of a shoe or boot;" velocipede .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit pad- , accusative padam "foot;" Avestan pad- ; Greek pos , Attic pous , genitive podos ; Latin pes , genitive pedis "foot;" Lithuanian padas "sole," pėda "footstep;" Old English fot , German Fuß , Gothic fotus "foot."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 polyp 

 Old French polype and directly from Latin polypus "cuttlefish," also "nasal tumor," from Greek (Doric, Aeolic) polypos "octopus...The Latin word is the source of French poulpe "octopus," and polyp was used in English from 1580s for "octopus, cuttlefish...

 participle 

 A octopus got me!" Bug: "Phoo! ain’t no octopus is got him!" Pogo: "Mebbe he mean a octopus did got him."...Bug: "A octopus did got him?  Is that grammatiwackle?"...

 succession 

 early 14c., successioun, "fact or right of succeeding someone by inheritance," from Old French succession "inheritance; a following on" (13c.) and directly from Latin successionem (nominative successio) "a following after, a coming into another's place, result," noun of action fr

 bust 

 1690s, "sculpture of upper torso and head," from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto "upper body," from Latin bustum "funeral monument, tomb," originally "funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned," perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus "burned around," past 

 pristine 

 1530s, "pertaining to the earliest period, of a primitive style, ancient," from French pristin and directly from Latin pristinus "former, early, original," from Old Latin pri "before," from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, before, first." Meaning "unspoiled, unto

 purpose 

 c. 1300, purpus, "intention, aim, goal; object to be kept in view; proper function for which something exists," from Anglo-French purpos, Old French porpos "an aim, intention" (12c.), from porposer "to put forth," from por- "forth" (from a variant of Latin pro- "forth;" see pur-)

 loop 

 late 14c., "a fold or doubling of cloth, rope, leather, cord, etc.," of uncertain origin. OED favors a Celtic origin (compare Gaelic lub "bend," Irish lubiam), which in English was perhaps influenced by or blended with Old Norse hlaup "a leap, run" (see leap (v.)). As a feature o

 ambition 

 mid-14c., ambicioun, "eager or inordinate desire for honor or preferment," from Old French ambicion (13c.), or directly from Latin ambitionem (nominative ambitio) "a going around," especially to solicit votes, hence "a striving for favor, courting, flattery; a desire for honor, t

 aftermath 

 1520s, originally "a second crop of grass grown on the same land after the first had been harvested," from after + -math, which is from Old English mæð "a mowing, cutting of grass" (from PIE root *me- (4) "to cut down grass or grain"). Other words for it were aftercrop (1560s), a

 dismay 

 c. 1300, dismaien, "become or be alarmed, upset, or frightened; to confound, break down the courage of by danger or difficulty or fear of calamity, fill with despairing apprehension;" perhaps formed in Anglo-French or Middle English from dis-, here probably intensive (see dis-), 

 Share octopus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/octopus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/octopus">Etymology of octopus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of octopus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/octopus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of octopus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/octopus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of octopus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/octopus. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of octopus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/octopus (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near octopus 
 octo- 
 October 
 Octobrist 
 octogenarian 
 octopod 
 octopus 
 octoroon 
 octuple 
 ocular 
 oculist 
 oculus 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix