URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/white
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:49:45Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: White - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

White - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of white 

 white (adj.) 

 Middle English whit , "of the color of milk or snow, fully luminous and devoid of hue," from Old English hwit "bright, radiant; clear, fair," also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-Germanic *hweit- , according to Watkins from suffixed form of PIE root *kweit- "white; to shine."

 As a surname, originally with reference to fair hair or complexion, it is one of the oldest in English, being well-established before the Conquest. By late 13c. as the color of hair in old age. In early use also the color of lustrous metal, especially "silver," hence such expressions as white the hand "bribe" (early 14c.).

 The meaning "morally pure" was in Old English. In Middle English the figurative use was "gracious, friendly, favorable." The color's association with royalist causes dates to late 18c.

 The slang sense of "honorable, fair" is by 1877, American English, based on race prejudice. The meaning "of those races (chiefly European or of European extraction) characterized by light complexion" is recorded from c. 1600; the meaning "characteristic of or pertaining to white people" is from 1852, American English. White folks for "white people" in Black English is by 1929.

 White supremacy is attested from 1868 [John H. Van Evrie, M.D., "White Supremacy and Negro Subordination," New York, 1868]. White-chauvinism is by 1946. White flight of caucasians out of inner-city areas is attested by 1966, American English. White privilege , "preferential treatment of caucasians" is from 1960, originally in South African contexts, although there is an isolated American use from 1928.

 White way "brightly illuminated street in a big city" is from 1908. The white flag of truce or surrender is attested from c. 1600. White lie is attested from 1741. White Christmas in reference to snow is attested from 1847. White water "river rapids" is recorded from 1580s. White lightning "inferior whiskey" is from 1921.

 White Russian "language of Byelorussia" is recorded from 1850; the mixed drink is by 1968 (with the note of the alternative name Russian Bear .) Astronomical white dwarf is from 1924. White witch , one who uses the power for good, is from 1620s. White House as the name of the U.S. presidential residence is recorded from 1811.

 Germanic cognates include Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit , Old Norse hvitr , Dutch wit , Old High German hwiz , German weiß , Gothic hveits .

 The PIE root is also reconstructed to be the source of Sanskrit svetah "white;" Old Church Slavonic sviteti "to shine," svetu "light;" Lithuanian šviesti "to shine," švaityti "to brighten."

 white (n.) 

 Middle English whit , from Old English hwit "whiteness; opposite of black; white food, white of an egg," from white (adj.). Also in late Old English "white color."

 Figurative of moral purity by c. 1200. By c. 1300 as "white clothing" ( whites as "white garments collectively" as washing is by 1962). By late 14c. as "white wine." The meaning "white part of the eyeball" is from c. 1400. By late 15c. in reference to the player of the white pieces in a game of chess.

 The meaning "white man, person of a race distinguished by light complexion" is from 1670s; white man in this sense is from 1690s. White man's burden is from Kipling's 1899 poem:

 Take up the White Man's burden—

 The savage wars of peace—

 Fill full the mouth of Famine

 And bid the sickness cease;

 And when your goal is nearest

 The end for others sought,

 Watch sloth and heathen Folly

 Bring all your hopes to nought.

 white (v.) 

 "become white, turn white;" also "make white," archaic but preserved in Biblical language, from Old English hwitian , from hwit (see white (adj.)). Related: Whited .

 Entries linking to white 

 black-and-white (n.) 

 "writing, print," by 1650s in phrase be in black and white "be in writing or in print," in reference to black characters on white paper. See black (n.) + white (n.). To be in white-and-black in the same sense is from 1590s; to be in black "written in ink" is by c. 1300.

 In the visual arts, "with no colors but black and white," it is by 1870 of sketches, 1883 of photographs.

 edelweiss (n.) 

 1862, from German Edelweiß , literally "noble white," from Old High German edili "noble" (see atheling ) + German weiss "white" (see white ).

 egg-white 
 lily-white 
 off-white 
 snow-white 
 wheat 
 wheatear 
 white bread 
 white feather 
 white hat 
 white meat 
 white noise 
 whiteboard 
 whitecap 
 white-collar 
 whiteface 
 whitefish 
 white-hot 
 whiten 
 See All Related Words (28) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 snow-white 

 "white as snow, very white," Middle English snou-whit, from Old English snawhwit (glossing Latin niveus), from snow (n.) + white (adj.). Similar formation in Dutch sneeuwwit, Middle Low German snewhit, German schneeweiss, Old Norse snæhvitr, snjo-hvitr, Swedish snöhvit, Danish sn

 wheat 

 Old English hwæte "wheat," from Proto-Germanic *hwaitjaz (source also of Old Saxon hweti, Old Norse hveiti, Norwegian kveite, Old Frisian hwete, Middle Dutch, Dutch weit, Old High German weizzi, German Weizen, Gothic hvaiteis "wheat"), literally "that which is white" (in referenc

 white-collar 

 by 1911, perhaps 1909, from white (adj.) + collar (n.). The white collar men are your clerks; they are your bookkeepers, your cashiers, your office men. We call them the 'white collar men' in order to distinguish them from the men who work with uniform and overalls and carry the

 alb 

 late Old English albe "white linen robe" worn by priests, converts, etc., from Late Latin alba (in tunica alba or vestis...alba "white vestment"), fem. of albus "white," from PIE root *albho- "white" (source also of Greek alphos "white leprosy,..." alphiton "barley meal;" Old High German albiz, Old English elfet "swan," literally "the white bird;" Old Church Slavonic...

 blaze 

 English blase, from Old English blæse "a torch, firebrand; bright glowing flame," from Proto-Germanic *blas- "shining, white..." (source also of Old Saxon blas "white, whitish," Middle High German blas "bald," originally "white, shining," Old High...German blas-ros "horse with a white spot," Middle Dutch and Dutch bles, German Blesse "white spot," blass "pale, whitish"...

 ceruse 

 late 14c., "white lead; a mixture or compound of hydrate and carbonate of lead, produced by exposing in thin plates to the...vapor of vinegar" [Century Dictionary], from Old French ceruse, from Latin cerussa, "white lead."...It is perhaps ultimately from a Greek or Latin word meaning "white wax" (see cere.)...: "Merours beþ y tempered wiþ tyn and white colour þat hatte cerusa....

 blank 

 early 13c., "white, pale, colorless," from Old French blanc "white, shining," from Frankish *blank "white, gleaming," or...some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse blakkr, Old English blanca "white horse;" Old High German blanc, blanch; German...Proto-Germanic *blangkaz "to shine, dazzle," an extended form of PIE root *bhel- (1) "to shine, flash, burn," also "shining white...

 tweed 

 1839, a trade name for a type of woolen fabric: MICHAEL NOWAK, alias John Mazurkiewiez, was indicted for stealing on the 15th of April 2 ¼ yards of woollen cloth, called tweed, value 12s., and 2 ¼ yards of woollen cloth, called doe skin, value 17s., the goods of George Priestley

 Caucasian 

 1807, of or pertaining to the Caucasus Mountains (q.v.), with -ian. Applied to the "white" race 1795 (in Latin) by German anthropologist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1840), who in his pioneering treatise on anthropology distinguished mankind into five races: Mongolian, Ethio

 whitey 

 "'white' person, person of European descent," 1828, also whity, from white (adj.) + -y (2) and -y (3). Earlier as an adjective, and Whitey-brown was a 19c. descriptive color name, used to describe, among other things, mulatto skin. Negro troops doing provost duty in Norfolk; kee

 Share white 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/white Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/white">Etymology of white by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of white. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/white Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of white," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/white. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of white." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/white. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of white." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/white (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near white 
 whistle 
 whistleblower 
 whistler 
 whistling 
 whit 
 white 
 white bread 
 white elephant 
 white feather 
 white hat 
 white hope 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix