URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacerate
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:19:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lacerate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lacerate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lacerate 

 lacerate (v.) 

 "tear roughly," early 15c., laceraten , from Latin laceratus , past participle of lacerare "tear to pieces, mangle," figuratively, "to slander, censure, abuse," from lacer "torn, mangled."

 This is reconstructed (Watkins) to be from PIE root *l ē k- "to rend, tear" (source also of Greek lakis "tatter, rag," lakizein "to tear to pieces;" Latin lacinia "flap of a garment," lancinare "to pierce, stab;" Russian lochma "rag, tatter, scrap;" Albanian l'akur "naked").

 The figurative sense in English, "torture, harrow" (in reference to feelings, etc.) is attested from 1640s. Related: Lacerated ; lacerating; lacerable; lacerant .
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to lacerate 

 laceration (n.) 

 1590s, "act of lacerating;" 1630s, "breach or rend made by tearing;" from French lacération , from Latin lacerationem (nominative laceratio ) "a tearing, rending, mutilation," noun of action from past-participle stem of lacerare "tear to pieces, mangle; slander, abuse" (see lacerate ).

 laciniate (adj.) 

 in botany, "irregularly cut in narrow lobes, jagged," literally "adorned with fringes," 1760, from Latin lacinia "a flap," etc., as of a garment, which is related to lacerare  "tear, mangle" (see lacerate ). Laciniolate , a diminutive form, is "finely fringed."

 lancinate (v.) 

 "to tear, lacerate," c. 1600, from Latin lancinatus , past-participle of lancinare "tear, rend, lacerate," akin to laniare "tear," lacer "torn" (see lacerate (v.)). Related: Lancinating; lancination "sharp, shooting pain."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tear 

 "pull apart," Old English teran "to tear, lacerate" (class IV strong verb; past tense tær, past participle toren), from Proto-Germanic...

 hurt 

 c. 1200, "to injure, wound" (the body, feelings, reputation, etc.), also "to stumble (into), bump into; charge against, rush, crash into; knock (things) together," from Old French hurter "to ram, strike, collide with" (Modern French heurter), a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps f

 Ruth 

 fem. proper name, biblical ancestor of David, from Hebrew Ruth, probably a contraction of reuth "companion, friend, fellow woman." The Old Testament book tells her story....c. 1200, perhaps late Old English, ruthe, "misery, sorrow, grief;" also "pity, compassion, sorrow for the m

 snap 

 1550s, perhaps late 15c., "a quick, sudden bite or cut; an eager seizing," from snap (v.), or, if the earlier date, a noun from Dutch or Low German snappen "to snap," which are probably related to Middle Low German or Middle Dutch snavel "bill, beak," which Watkins traced to a hy

 span 

 [distance between two objects] Middle English spanne, a unit of length, from Old English span "distance between the thumb and the middle or little finger of an extended hand" (as a measure of length, roughly nine inches), probably related to Middle Dutch spannen "to join, fasten,

 bruise 

 Old English brysan "to crush, pound, injure by a blow which discolors the skin," from Proto-Germanic *brusjan, from PIE root *bhreu- "to smash, cut, break up" (source also of Old Irish bronnaim "I wrong, I hurt;" Breton brezel "war," Vulgar Latin *brisare "to break"). It merged b

 bust 

 1690s, "sculpture of upper torso and head," from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto "upper body," from Latin bustum "funeral monument, tomb," originally "funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned," perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus "burned around," past 

 stub 

 Middle English stubbe, from Old English stybb, stubb, stobb "stump of a tree," from Proto-Germanic *stubjaz (source also of Middle Dutch stubbe, Old Norse stubbr), from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) "to push, stick, knock, beat" (see steep (adj.)). Extended generally from 14c. to short, 

 rupture 

 late 14c., in medicine, "act of bursting or breaking," in reference to a vessel, etc. of the body, from Old French rupture and directly from Latin ruptura "the breaking (of a vein), fracture (of an arm or leg)," from past-participle stem of rumpere "to break" (from PIE root *runp

 offend 

 early 14c., offenden, "to disobey or sin against (a person, human or divine)," a sense now obsolete, from Old French ofendre "hit, attack, injure; sin against; antagonize, excite to anger" and directly from Latin offendere "to hit, thrust, or strike against," figuratively "to stu

 Share lacerate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacerate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacerate">Etymology of lacerate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lacerate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacerate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lacerate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacerate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lacerate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacerate. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lacerate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacerate (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lacerate 
 labyrinthine 
 lac 
 lace 
 Lacedaemonian 
 laceman 
 lacerate 
 laceration 
 lacertine 
 lace-up 
 lace-wing 
 lacey 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix