URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sneeze
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:07:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sneeze - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sneeze - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sneeze 

 sneeze (v.) 

 late 15c., snesen , from or replacing fnesen , which is Old English fneosan "to snort, sneeze," from Proto-Germanic *fneusanan . Compare: Middle Dutch fniesen , Dutch fniezen "to sneeze;" Old Norse fnysa "to snort;" Old Norse hnjosa , Swedish nysa "to sneeze;" Old High German niosan , German niesen "to sneeze," all from Proto-Germanic base *fneu-s- "sneeze," which is of imitative origin, as is PIE *pneu- "to breathe" (source of Greek pnein "to breathe").

 Other imitative words for it, perhaps in various ways shaped by one another, include Latin sternuere (source of Italian starnutare , French éternuer , Spanish estornudar ), Breton strevia , Sanskrit ksu- , Lithuanian čiaudėti , Polish kichać , Russian čichat' .

 The Middle English shift to sn- might be due to a misreading of the uncommon digraph fn- (represented in only eight words in the Clark Hall dictionary, mostly words having to do with breathing), or from Norse influence. But OED suggests it wasn't a direct evolution, and that Middle English fnese had been reduced to simple nese by early 15c., and sneeze is a "strengthened form" of this, "assisted by its phonetic appropriateness." Related: Sneezed ; sneezer ; sneezing .

 To sneeze at "show contempt for, regard as of little value" (usually with negative) is attested from 1806. To teach (one) how the cat sneezes apparently was an old phrase for "to dominate, bully."

 Off þat ʒong gentil man was a gret disese

 After a ʒere or two his wyfe he myʒt not pleese

 ... Sche tauʒt hym euer among how the katte did snese.

 [from "Tale of the Basin," c. 1500]
 also from late 15c. 

 sneeze (n.) 

 "act of sneezing, sound made by sneezing," 1640s, from sneeze (v.).
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to sneeze 

 neese (v.) 

 also neeze "sneeze," mid-14c., nesen , probably from Old Norse hnjosa , of imitative origin (compare Old High German niosan , German niesen , Middle Dutch niesen ). It is said to survive in north of England dialect and Scottish. Compare sneeze . Related: Neesing; neezing .

 sneezeweed (n.) 

 also sneeze-weed , common North American plant, by 1807, so called because its powdered leaves were used medicinally to provoke sneezing; see sneeze (v.) + weed (n.). Sneezewort (1590s) is a different plant.

 A new and very important addition to the number of the Errhine medicines has lately been made by the discovery of the properties of a very common North American plant, the Helenium autumnale of Linnæus. The errhine power resides in the leaves and in the flowers, but especially in the latter. This Helenium is known, in some parts of the United States, by the names of "Sneeze weed," and "Snuff Plant." It is eminently deserving of a place in the shops. ["Second Supplement to the Philadelphia Medical and Physical Journal," July 1807]

 sneezy 
 snout 
 sternutation 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 snout 

 early 13c., "trunk or projecting nose of an animal, the nose or jaws when protrusive," not found in Old English, from Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snute "snout," from Proto-Germanic *snut- (source also of German Schnauze, Norwegian snut, Danish snude "snout"). Throughout th

 mucus 

 slippery, slimy," with derivatives referring to wet or slimy substances or conditions (source also of Latin emungere "to sneeze...

 hay fever 

 People are apt to sneeze, in hot weather for example; and people do not die of sneezing now-a-days, as they did in days that...

 expire 

 c. 1400, "to die," from Old French expirer "expire, elapse" (12c.), from Latin expirare/exspirare "breathe out, blow out, exhale; breathe one's last, die," hence, figuratively, "expire, come to an end, cease," from ex "out" (see ex-) + spirare "to breathe" (see spirit (n.)). "Die

 symptom 

 "a departure from normal function or form as an expression or evidence of a disease," late 14c., sinthoma, from Medieval Latin sinthoma "symptom of a disease," altered from Late Latin symptoma, from Greek symptoma "a happening, accident, disease," from stem of sympiptein "to befa

 reflex 

 c. 1500, "reflection of light, image produced by reflection," from a verb reflex meaning "refract, deflect" (late 14c.; compare reflect), from Late Latin reflexus "a bending back," noun use of past participle of reflectere "to bend back, bend backwards, turn away," from re- "back

 Stepin Fetchit 

 type of stereotypical Black roles in Hollywood, or in popular culture generally, from the stage name of popular Black vaudeville actor Lincoln Theodore Perry (1902-1985), who first appeared in films under that name in "In Old Kentucky" (1927). Perry said he took the name from a r

 salmon 

 early 13c., samoun, the North Atlantic salmon, from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem (nominative salmo) "a salmon," probably originally "leaper," from salire "to leap" (see salient (adj.)), though some dismiss this as folk etymolo

 shag 

 1590s, "cloth having a velvet nap on one side," perhaps ultimately from Old English sceacga "rough matted hair or wool," but the word seems to be missing in Middle English. The Old English word is from Proto-Germanic *skagjan (source also of Old Norse skegg, Swedish skägg "beard"

 avarice 

 c. 1300, "inordinate desire of gaining and possessing wealth," fifth of the seven deadly sins, from Old French avarice "greed, covetousness" (12c.), from Latin avaritia "greed, inordinate desire," from avarus "greedy, grasping," adjectival form of avere "crave, long for, be eager

 Share sneeze 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sneeze Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sneeze">Etymology of sneeze by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sneeze. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sneeze Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sneeze," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sneeze. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sneeze." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sneeze. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sneeze." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sneeze (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sneeze 
 SNCF 
 sneak 
 sneaker 
 sneaky 
 sneer 
 sneeze 
 sneezeweed 
 sneezy 
 snell 
 snert 
 Snick 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix