URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pistachio
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:39:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pistachio - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pistachio - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pistachio 

 pistachio (n.) 

 1590s, "nut of the pistachio tree," from Italian pistacchio , from Latin pistacium "pistachio nut," from Greek pistakion "pistachio nut," from pistakē "pistachio tree," from Persian pistah "pistachio." Borrowed earlier in English as pystace , pistace (mid-15c.), from Old French pistace (13c.) and Medieval Latin pistacia , ultimately from the same source.
 also from 1590s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tree 

 Old English treo, treow "tree" (also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake"), from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o-, suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with speci

 vaccination 

 1800, used by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) for the technique he publicized of preventing smallpox by injecting people with the similar but much milder cowpox virus (variolae vaccinae), from vaccine (adj.) "pertaining to cows, from cows" (1798), from Latin vaccinus 

 ABBA 

 Swedish pop music group formed 1972, the name dates from 1973 and is an acronym from the first names of the four band members: Anni-Frid Lyngstad, Björn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson, Agnetha Fältskog....Biblical title of honor, literally "father," used as an invocation of God, from L

 perfunctory 

 "done mechanically or without interest or zeal and merely for the sake of being rid of the duty of doing it; done so as to conform to the letter but not the spirit," 1580s, from Late Latin perfunctorius "careless, negligent," literally "like one who wishes to get through a thing,

 grief 

 early 13c., "hardship, suffering, pain, bodily affliction," from Old French grief "wrong, grievance, injustice, misfortune, calamity" (13c.), from grever "afflict, burden, oppress," from Latin gravare "make heavy; cause grief," from gravis "weighty" (from PIE root *gwere- (1) "he

 virtue 

 c. 1200, vertu, "moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence," from Anglo-French and Old French vertu "force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities" (10c. in Old French), from Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) "moral strength, high character, goodness; 

 holiday 

 1500s, earlier haliday (c. 1200), from Old English haligdæg "holy day, consecrated day, religious anniversary; Sabbath," from halig "holy" (see holy) + dæg "day" (see day); in 14c. meaning both "religious festival" and "day of exemption from labor and recreation," but pronunciati

 fudge 

 "put together clumsily or dishonestly," by 1771 (perhaps from 17c.); perhaps an alteration of fadge "make suit, fit" (1570s), a verb of unknown origin. The verb fudge later had an especial association with sailors and log books. The traditional story of the origin of the interjec

 toilet 

 1530s, earliest in English in an obsolete sense "cover or bag for clothes," from French toilette "a cloth; a bag for clothes," diminutive of toile "cloth, net" (see toil (n.2)). Toilet acquired an association with upper class dressing by 18c., through the specific sense "a fine c

 dragon 

 mid-13c., dragoun, a fabulous animal common to the conceptions of many races and peoples, from Old French dragon and directly from Latin draconem (nominative draco) "huge serpent, dragon," from Greek drakon (genitive drakontos) "serpent, giant seafish," apparently from drak-, str

 Share pistachio 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pistachio Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pistachio">Etymology of pistachio by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pistachio. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pistachio Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pistachio," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pistachio. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pistachio." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pistachio. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pistachio." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pistachio (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pistachio 
 pissant 
 pissed 
 pisser 
 piss-pot 
 pissy 
 pistachio 
 piste 
 pistil 
 pistle 
 pistol 
 pistole 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix