URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/good
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:28:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Good - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Good - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of good 

 good (adj.) 

 Old English gōd (with a long "o") "excellent, fine; valuable; desirable, favorable, beneficial; full, entire, complete;" of abstractions, actions, etc., "beneficial, effective; righteous, pious;" of persons or souls, "righteous, pious, virtuous;" probably originally "having the right or desirable quality," from Proto-Germanic *gōda- "fitting, suitable" (source also of Old Frisian god , Old Saxon gōd , Old Norse goðr , Middle Dutch goed , Dutch goed , Old High German guot , German gut , Gothic goþs ). A word of uncertain etymology, perhaps originally "fit, adequate, belonging together," from PIE root *ghedh- "to unite, be associated, suitable" (source also of Sanskrit gadh- "seize (booty)," Old Church Slavonic godu "favorable time," Russian godnyi "fit, suitable," Lithuanian goda "honor," Old English gædrian "to gather, to take up together").

 Irregular comparative and superlative ( better , best ) reflect a widespread pattern in words for "good," as in Latin bonus , melior , optimus .

 Sense of "kind, benevolent" is from late Old English in reference to persons or God, from mid-14c. of actions. Middle English sense of "holy" is preserved in Good Friday . That of "friendly, gracious" is from c. 1200. Meaning "fortunate, prosperous, favorable" was in late Old English. As an expression of satisfaction, from early 15c. Of persons, "skilled (at a profession or occupation), expert," in late Old English, now typically with at ; in Middle English with of or to . Of children, "well-behaved," by 1690s. Of money, "not debased, standard as to value," from late 14c. From c. 1200 of numbers or quantities, "large, great," of time or distance, "long;" good while "a considerable time" is from c. 1300; good way "a great distance" is mid-15c.

 Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing. ["As You Like It"]

 As good as "practically, virtually" is from mid-14c.; to be good for "beneficial to" is from late 14c. To make good "repay (costs, expenses), atone for (a sin or an offense)" is from late 14c. To have a good mind "have an earnest desire" (to do something) is from c. 1500. Good deed , good works were in Old English as "an act of piety;" good deed specifically as "act of service to others" was reinforced early 20c. by Boy Scouting. Good turn is from c. 1400. Good sport , of persons, is from 1906. The good book "the Bible" attested from 1801, originally in missionary literature describing the language of conversion efforts in American Indian tribes. Good to go is attested from 1989.

 good (n.) 

 Old English god (with a long "o"), "that which is good, a good thing; goodness; advantage, benefit; gift; virtue; property;" from good (adj.). Meaning "the good side" (of something) is from 1660s. Phrase for good "finally, permanently" attested from 1711, a shortening of for good and all (16c.). Middle English had for good ne ylle (early 15c.) "for good nor ill," thus "under any circumstance."

 Entries linking to good 

 best (adj.) 

 Old English beste , reduced by assimilation of -t- from earlier Old English betst "of the highest quality or standing, first, in the best manner." This originally was the superlative of bōt "remedy, reparation" (Middle English bote "advantage, help, profit"), a word now surviving in its simple form only in the expression to boot (see boot (n.2)). Its comparative, better , and superlative, best , have been transferred to good (and in some cases well ).

 Old English bōt is from Proto-Germanic root *bat- , with comparative *batizon and superlative *batistaz . The superlative form is the source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Middle Dutch best , Old High German bezzist , German best , Old Norse beztr , Gothic batists . Also in Old English as an adverb, "in the most excellent manner."

 The best-laid schemes o' mice an' men

     Gang aft agley,

 An' lea'e us nought but grief an' pain,

     For promis'd joy!

 [Burns, from "To a Mouse, on Turning Her Up in Her Nest With the Plough, November, 1785"]

 From late Old English as "of greatest advantage, most suitable." Best-seller as short for "best-selling book" is from 1889, apparently originally in the publishing trade; best friend was in Chaucer (late 14c.). Best girl is attested by 1881, American English; best man is 1814, originally Scottish, replacing groomsman . 

 better (adj., adv.) 

 Middle English bettre , from Old English bettra , earlier betera "of superior quality or excellence," from Proto-Germanic *batizo- , perhaps from PIE *bhad- "good," but Boutkan finds no good IE etymology. For etymology and evolution, see best . Cognate words also have become the comparative adjective of good in the older Germanic languages (Old Frisian betera , Old Saxon betiro , Old Norse betr , Danish bedre , Old High German bezziro , German besser , Gothic batiza ). All are comparatives of a positive (Proto-Germanic *bat ) which is not in use.

 In Middle English the adverbial form commonly was bet , sometimes also used an adjective; bet was displaced by c. 1600. Better is attested from late Old English as "improved in health, more healthy" (adv.); from late 12c. as "more useful or desirable." Better half "wife" is attested from 1570s.

 Good Friday 
 gather 
 god 
 good den 
 good morning 
 good will 
 good-day 
 good-for-nothing 
 good-humored 
 good-looking 
 goodly 
 goodman 
 good-natured 
 goodness 
 good-night 
 goods 
 good-time 
 goodwife 
 See All Related Words (25) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gather 

 Old English gadrian, gædrian "unite, agree, assemble; gather, collect, store up" (transitive and intransitive), used of flowers, thoughts, persons; from Proto-Germanic *gaduron "come or bring together, unite" (source also of Old English gæd "fellowship, companionship," gædeling "

 god 

 also God; Old English god "supreme being, deity; the Christian God; image of a god; godlike person," from Proto-Germanic *guthan (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch god, Old High German got, German Gott, Old Norse guð, Gothic guþ), which is of uncertain origin; perhaps 

 evil 

 Old English yfel (Kentish evel) "bad, vicious, ill, wicked," from Proto-Germanic *ubilaz (source also of Old Saxon ubil, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch evel, Dutch euvel, Old High German ubil, German übel, Gothic ubils), from PIE *upelo-, from root *wap- "bad, evil" (source also of

 Agatha 

 fem. proper name, Latinized form of Greek Agathē, fem. of agathos "good, fit; gentle, noble" (of persons, opposed to kakoi...The Greek adjective grew to include notions of "wealthy, powerful," also "brave, good at fighting" (as qualities attributed...to the chiefs) as well as "good" in a moral sense....Also, of things, "serviceable, useful," and, abstractly, "the good."...

 hap 

 c. 1200, "chance, a person's luck, fortune, fate;" also "unforeseen occurrence," from Old Norse happ "chance, good luck,"...- (source of Old English gehæp "convenient, fit"), from PIE *kob- "to suit, fit, succeed" (source also of Sanskrit kob "good...omen; congratulations, good wishes," Old Irish cob "victory," Norwegian heppa "lucky, favorable, propitious," Old Church...Meaning "good fortune" in English is from early 13c. Old Norse seems to have had the word only in positive senses....

 approve 

 demonstrate, prove," from Old French aprover (Modern French approuver) "approve, agree to," from Latin approbare "to assent to as good..., regard as good," from ad "to" (see ad-) + probare "to try, test something (to find if it is good)," from probus "honest...The meaning was extended by late 14c. to "regard or assent to (something) as good or superior; commend; sanction, endorse...

 benevolence 

 c. 1400, "disposition to do good," from Old French benivolence (Modern French bienveillance) and directly from Latin benevolentia..."good feeling, good will, kindness," from bene "well" (see bene-) + volentem (nominative volens) present participle of velle...forced extra-legal loans or contributions to the crown, first so called 1473 by Edward IV, who "asked" it as a token of good...

 shopping 

 1764, "the act or practice of visiting shops for the purpose of examining and purchasing goods," a verbal noun from shop (v.). The meaning "goods that have been purchased" is attested by 1934. Shopping bag is attested from 1864; shopping cart by 1929. Shopping list, of purchases 

 respectable 

 1580s, "worthy of notice or observation" (a sense now obsolete); 1590s, "worthy of esteem by reason of inherent qualities;" see respect (v.) + -able. Of persons, "having an honest reputation" from 1755; the sense of "moderately well-to-do and deserving respect for morality; occup

 advantage 

 early 14c., avantage, "position of being in advance of another," from Old French avantage "advantage, profit; superiority" (12c.), from avant "before," probably via an unrecorded Late or Medieval Latin *abantaticum, from Latin abante "from before," composed of ab "from" (see ab-)

 Share good 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/good Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/good">Etymology of good by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of good. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/good Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of good," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/good. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of good." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/good. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of good." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/good (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near good 
 gonorrhea 
 gony 
 gonzo 
 goo 
 goober 
 good 
 good den 
 Good Friday 
 good morning 
 good will 
 good-bye 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close