URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitre
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:34:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nitre - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nitre - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nitre 

 nitre (n.) 

 c. 1400, "native sodium carbonate" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French nitre (13c.), from Latin nitrum , from Greek nitron , which is possibly of Eastern origin (compare Hebrew nether "carbonate of soda;" Egyptian ntr ). Originally a word for native soda, but also associated since the Middle Ages with saltpeter (potassium nitrate) for obscure reasons; this became the predominant sense by late 16c.
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to nitre 

 natron (n.) 

 "native carbonate of sodium," 1680s, from French natron (1660s), which is said to be directly from Arabic natrun , itself from Greek nitron , itself possibly of Eastern origin (see nitre ). Medieval Latin and Paracelsus (16c.) had a form anatron , from Arabic with the article assimilated ( an-natron ). It is the source of the chemical symbol Na for sodium and the word-forming element natro- , used in the names of minerals to indicate the presence of sodium.

 niter 

 see nitre .

 nitrate 
 nitric 
 nitrification 
 nitrous 
 nitro- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nitrous 

 c. 1600, "of nitre, pertaining to nitre," from Latin nitrosus, from nitrum (see nitre). The more precise use in chemistry (designating a compound in which the nitrogen has a lower valence than the corresponding nitric compound) is from 1780s. Middle English had nitrose "nitrous i

 saltpeter 

 "potassium nitrate," a chief constituent of gunpowder, c. 1500, earlier salpetre (early 14c.), from Old French salpetre, from Medieval Latin sal petrae "salt of rock," from Latin sal "salt" (from PIE root *sal- "salt") + petra "rock, stone" (see petrous). So called because it loo

 nitrogen 

 The gas was identified in part by analysis of nitre....

 inert 

 1640s, "without inherent force, having no power to act or respond," from French inerte (16c.) or directly from Latin inertem (nominative iners) "unskilled, incompetent; inactive, helpless, weak, sluggish; worthless," used of stagnant fluids, uncultivated pastures, expressionless 

 poverty 

 late 12c., poverte, "destitution, want, need or insufficiency of money or goods," from Old French poverte, povrete "poverty, misery, wretched condition" (Modern French pauvreté), from Latin paupertatem (nominative paupertas) "poverty," from pauper "poor" (see poor (adj.)). From e

 notion 

 late 14c., nocioun, "a general concept, conception," from Latin notionem (nominative notio) "concept, conception, idea, notice," noun of action from past participle stem of noscere "come to know," from PIE root *gno- "to know." Coined by Cicero as a loan-translation of Greek enno

 counsel 

 c. 1200, "advice or instruction given;" c. 1300, "mutual advising or interchange of opinions, consultation," from Old French counseil "advice, counsel; deliberation, thought" (10c.), from Latin consilium "plan, opinion," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + 

 bathroom 

 also bath-room, 1780, from bath + room (n.). Originally a room with apparatus for bathing (the only definition in "Century Dictionary," 1902); it came to be used 20c. in U.S. as a euphemism for a lavatory and often is noted as a word that confuses British travelers. To go to the 

 compassion 

 "feeling of sorrow or deep tenderness for one who is suffering or experiencing misfortune," mid-14c., compassioun, literally "a suffering with another," from Old French compassion "sympathy, pity" (12c.), from Late Latin compassionem (nominative compassio) "sympathy," noun of sta

 restoration 

 late 14c., restoracioun, "a means of healing or restoring health, a cure; renewing of something lost," from Old French restoration (Modern French restauration) and directly from Late Latin restorationem (nominative restoratio) "a restoration, renewal," noun of action from past-pa

 Share nitre 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitre Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitre">Etymology of nitre by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nitre. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitre Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nitre," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitre. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nitre." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitre. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nitre." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitre (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nitre 
 nite 
 niter 
 nitpick 
 nitpicker 
 nitrate 
 nitre 
 nitric 
 nitrification 
 nitro 
 nitro- 
 nitrogen 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close