URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/massage
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Massage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Massage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of massage 

 massage (n.) 

 "application with the hands of pressure and strain upon muscles and joints of the body for therapeutic purposes," 1874, from French massage "friction of kneading" (by 1819), from masser "to massage," possibly from Arabic massa "to touch, feel, handle;" if so, probably the word was picked up in Egypt during the Napoleonic campaign there. Another possibility (suggested by the writings of 18c. French traveler Guillaume Joseph Le Gentil) is that French got it in colonial India from Portuguese amassar "knead," a verb from Latin massa "mass, dough" (see mass (n.1)). Massage parlor first attested 1894, from the start it was a euphemism or disguise name for "house of prostitution."
 also from 1874 

 massage (v.) 

 "apply massage to, treat by means of massage," 1874, from massage (n.). Figurative sense of "manipulate" (data, etc.) is by 1966. Related: Massaged ; massaging .
 also from 1874 

 Entries linking to massage 

 mass (n.1) 

 late 14c., "irregular shaped lump; body of unshaped, coherent matter," from Old French masse "lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot, bar" (11c.), and directly from Latin massa "kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like dough," probably from Greek maza "barley cake, lump, mass, ball," which is related to massein "to knead" (from PIE root *mag- "to knead, fashion, fit").

 The sense in English was extended 1580s to "a large quantity, amount, or number." The meaning "bulk" in general is from c. 1600. As "the 'bulk' or greater part of anything" from 1620s. The strict sense in physics, "quantity of a portion of matter expressed in pounds or grams" is from 1704.

 As an adjective, "of, involving, or composed of masses of people; done on a large scale," from 1733, first attested in American English mass meeting "public assembly persons in mass or of all classes to consider or listen to the discussion of some matter of common interest." Mass murder is attested from 1880; mass movement from 1897. Mass hysteria is attested from 1914 (the notion is older);  mass culture is from 1916 in sociology (earlier in biology); mass grave is from 1918. Mass transit is by 1959, originally of Washington D.C.'s transit system.

 masseur (n.) 

 "man who works giving massages," 1876, from French masseur , masc. agent noun from masser (see massage (n.)). Native massagist (1885), massager (1902) have not displaced it, though the latter is used in purely mechanical and figurative senses.

 masseuse (n.) 

 "woman who works giving massages," 1876, from French masseuse , fem. agent noun from masser (see massage ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 knead 

 Old English cnedan "to knead, manipulate by squeezing or pressing," from Proto-Germanic *knedan (source also of Old Saxon knedan, Middle Dutch cneden, Dutch kneden, Old High German knetan, German kneten, Old Norse knoða "to knead"). Originally a strong verb (past tense cnæd, past

 shampoo 

 1762, "to massage, rub and percuss the surface of (the body) to restore tone and vigor," from Anglo-Indian shampoo, from...

 rub 

 early 14c., rubben, transitive and intransitive, "apply friction on a surface; massage (the body or a part of it)," a word...

 rubber 

 By c. 1600 as "one who applies friction or massage in some process."...

 intervention 

 early 15c., intervencioun, "intercession, intercessory prayer," Late Latin interventionem (nominative interventio) "an interposing, a giving security," literally "a coming between," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin intervenire "to come between, interrupt," from i

 bur 

 "prickly seed vessel of some plants," c. 1300, burre, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish borre, Swedish hard-borre, Old Norse burst "bristle"), from PIE *bhars- (see bristle (n.)). It was transferred 1610s to "rough edge on metal," which might be the source of the sense "

 treat 

 c. 1300, "negotiate, bargain, deal with," from Old French traitier "deal with, act toward; set forth (in speech or writing)" (12c.), from Latin tractare "manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward," originally "drag about, tug, haul, pull violently," frequentative of trahe

 down 

 "in a descending direction, from a higher to a lower place, degree, or condition," late Old English shortened form of Old English ofdune "downwards," originally of dune "off from (the) hill," from dune "from the hill," dative of dun "hill" (see down (n.2)). The "hill" word is gen

 stoop 

 Middle English stoupen, "bend forward and downward," especially of persons "lower the body by bending forward," from Old English stupian "to bow, bend," from Proto-Germanic *stupojanan (source also of Middle Dutch stupen "to bow, bend," Norwegian stupa "fall, drop"), perhaps from

 April 

 fourth month, c. 1300, aueril, from Old French avril (11c.), from Latin (mensis) Aprilis, second month of the ancient Roman calendar, from a stem of uncertain origin and meaning, with month-name suffix -ilis as in Quintilis, Sextilis (the old names of July and August). Perhaps ba

 Share massage 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/massage Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/massage">Etymology of massage by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of massage. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/massage Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of massage," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/massage. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of massage." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/massage. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of massage." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/massage (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near massage 
 masquerade 
 mass 
 massa 
 Massachusetts 
 massacre 
 massage 
 masses 
 masseur 
 masseuse 
 massif 
 massive 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix