URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/female
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:21:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Female - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Female - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of female 

 female (n.) 

 early 14c., female , femele , "woman, human being of the sex which brings forth young," from Old French femelle "woman, female" (12c.), from Medieval Latin femella "a female," from Latin femella "young female, girl," diminutive of femina "woman, a female" ("woman, female," literally "she who suckles," from PIE root *dhe(i)- "to suck").

 The sense in Vulgar Latin was extended from young humans to female of other animals, then to females generally. Compare Latin masculus , also a diminutive (see masculine ). The spelling femele is etymological but in Middle English the word was altered in erroneous imitation of unrelated male .

 In modern use usually an adjective (in which use it is attested from early 14c.). In reference to implements with sockets and corresponding parts from 1660s.

 WHEN the Himalayan peasant meets the he-bear in his pride, 

 He shouts to scare the monster, who will often turn aside. 

 But the she-bear thus accosted rends the peasant tooth and nail. 

 For the female of the species is more deadly than the male. 

 [Kipling] 
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to female 

 male (n.) 

 late 14c., "male human being; male fish or land animal; one of the sex that begets young," from Old French masle (adj.) "masculine, male, adult," also used as a noun (12c., Modern French mâle ), from Latin masculus "masculine, male, worthy of a man" (source also of Provençal mascle , Spanish macho , Italian maschio ), diminutive of mas (genitive maris ) "male person or animal, male."

 Male , matching 
 female , applies to the whole sex among human beings and gender among animals, to the apparel of that sex, and, by figure, to certain things, as plants, rimes, cesuras, screws, joints. 
 Masculine , matching 
 feminine , applies to men and their attributes and to the first grammatical gender; a woman may wear 
 male apparel and have a 
 masculine walk, voice, manner, temperament. [Century Dictionary, 1895]

 masculine (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "belonging to the male grammatical gender;" late 14c., "of men, of male sex," from Old French masculin "of the male sex" (12c.), from Latin masculinus "male, of masculine gender," from masculus "male, masculine; worthy of a man," diminutive of mas (genitive maris ) "male person, male," a word of unknown origin. The diminutive form might be by pairing association with femininus (see feminine ). Meaning "having the appropriate qualities of the male sex, physically or mentally: Manly, virile, powerful" is attested by 1620s. As a noun, "masculine gender," from c. 1500.

 fem 
 femaleness 
 femalist 
 feminine 
 *dhe(i)- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 feminine 

 mid-14c., "of the female sex," from Old French femenin (12c.) "feminine, female; with feminine qualities, effeminate," from Latin femininus "feminine" (in the grammatical sense at first), from femina "woman, female," literally "she who suckles" (from PIE root *dhe(i)- "to suck").

 androgynous 

 1620s, "womanish" (of a man); 1650s, "having two sexes, being both male and female," from Latin androgynus, from Greek androgynos "hermaphrodite, male and female in one; womanish man;" as an adjective (of baths) "common to men and women," from andros, genitive of anēr "male" (fro

 distaff 

 Old English distæf "long, cleft stick that holds flax for spinning," from dis- "bunch of flax" (cognates: Middle Low German dise, Low German diesse "a bunch of flax on a distaff;" compare bedizen) + stæf "stick, staff" (see staff (n.)). Figurative of "women's work" from late 14c.

 governess 

 mid-15c., "female ruler," shortening of governouresse "a woman who rules" (late 14c.), from Old French governeresse "female...In the sense of "a female teacher in a private home" governess it is attested from 1712, probably as a fem. of governor in...

 she 

 "the female person referred to," third person nominative fem. pronoun, used as a substitute for the name of a female or anything...regarded as female, mid-12c., probably evolving from Old English seo, sio (accusative sie), fem. of the demonstrative pronoun...As a noun meaning "a female human being, a woman," she is attested from early 14c....Also used to signify "female" with the names of other creatures (late 14c.; she-wolf, etc.)....

 Moll 

 female proper name, shortened form of Mollie, Molly, itself a familiar of Mary....Used from c. 1600 for "prostitute," but in low slang by early 19c. it also meant "female companion not bound by ties of marriage...word for "woman" in old underworld slang, for instance Moll-buzzer "pickpocket who specializes in women;" Moll-tooler "female...

 heroine 

 1650s, "demigoddess," from Latin heroine, heroina (plural heroinae) "a female hero, a demigoddess" (such as Medea), from...The sense of "principal female character in a drama, poem, etc." is from 1715....

 rebut 

 c. 1300, rebouten, "to thrust back," from Old French reboter, rebuter "to thrust back," from re- "back" (see re-) + boter "to strike, push," from a Germanic source (from Proto-Germanic buttan, from PIE root *bhau- "to strike"). Also in Middle English "assail (someone) with violen

 brute 

 early 15c., "of or belonging to animals, non-human," from Old French brut "coarse, brutal, raw, crude," from Latin brutus "heavy, dull, stupid, insensible, unreasonable" (source also of Spanish and Italian bruto), said to be an Oscan word, from PIE *gwruto-, suffixed form of root

 creature 

 c. 1300, "anything created," hence "a thing" in general, animate or not, but most commonly "a living being," from Old French creature "created being; all creation" (Modern French créature), from Late Latin creatura "a thing created; the creation; a creature," from creatus, past p

 Share female 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/female Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/female">Etymology of female by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of female. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/female Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of female," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/female. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of female." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/female. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of female." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/female (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near female 
 felony 
 felsic 
 felt 
 fem 
 fem. 
 female 
 femaleness 
 femalist 
 feme covert 
 feminine 
 femininity 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix