URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adriatic
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:38:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Adriatic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Adriatic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Adriatic 

 Adriatic 

 sea east of Italy, from Latin Adriaticus , properly Hadriaticus , from town of Atria / Hatria (modern Adria ) in Picenum, near Venice, once a seaport but now more than 12 miles inland. The name is perhaps from atra , neuter of atrum "black," hence "the black city;" or else it represents Illyrian adur "water, sea."

 Entries linking to Adriatic 

 Adrian 

 masc. proper name, from Latin Adrianus , properly Hadrianus , literally "of the Adriatic" (see Adriatic ). A name taken by several popes, including the only English pontiff, Nicholas Brakespear (died 1159). The proper name Adrienne , etc., when not a fem. form of this, is a transposition of Ariadne : Adriane is the usual form of Ariadne in Chaucer ("House of Fame," etc.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Rubicon 

 in the figurative phrase cross (or pass) the Rubicon "take a decisive step," 1620s, a reference to a small stream to the Adriatic...

 Mediterranean 

 "the sea between southern Europe and northern Africa," 1590s, earlier Mediterranie (c. 1400), from Late Latin Mediterraneum mare "Mediterranean Sea" (7c.), from Latin mediterraneus "midland, surrounded by land, in the midst of an expanse of land" (but in reference to the body of 

 trivial 

 "ordinary" (1580s); "insignificant, trifling" (1590s), from Latin trivialis "common, commonplace, vulgar," literally "of or belonging to the crossroads," from trivium "place where three roads meet," in transferred use, "an open place, a public place," from tri- "three" (see three

 salary 

 late 13c., salarie, "compensation, payment," whether periodical, for regular service or for a specific service; from Anglo-French salarie, Old French salaire "wages, pay, reward," from Latin salarium "an allowance, a stipend, a pension," said to be originally "salt-money, soldier

 metaphysics 

 "the science of the inward and essential nature of things," 1560s, plural of Middle English metaphisik, methaphesik (late 14c.), "branch of speculation which deals with the first causes of things," from Medieval Latin metaphysica, neuter plural of Medieval Greek (ta) metaphysika,

 Prussia 

 region in northeastern Germany, late 14c., Prusse (late 13c. as a surname), from Medieval Latin Borussi, Prusi, Latinized forms of the native name of the Lithuanian people who lived in the bend of the Baltic before being conquered 12c. and exterminated by (mostly) German crusader

 binge 

 1854, "drinking bout," also (v.) "drink heavily, soak up alcohol;" dialectal use of binge "soak" (a wooden vessel). Said to have been originally as a dialect word. Binge is noted in Evans' "Leicestershire Words, Phrases and Proverbs" (London, 1848) as a dialect verb for "To soak 

 cybernetics 

 "theory or study of communication and control," coined 1948 by U.S. mathematician Norbert Wiener (1894-1964), with -ics + Latinized form of Greek kybernetes "steersman" (metaphorically "guide, governor"), from kybernan "to steer or pilot a ship, direct as a pilot," figuratively "

 conversation 

 mid-14c., "place where one lives or dwells," also "general course of actions or habits, manner of conducting oneself in the world," both senses now obsolete; from Old French conversacion "behavior, life, way of life, monastic life," and directly from Latin conversationem (nominat

 emblem 

 1580s, "relief, raised ornament on vessels, etc.," from Latin emblema "inlaid ornamental work," from Greek emblema (genitive emblematos) "an insertion," from emballein "to insert," literally "to throw in," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + ballein "to throw" (from 

 Share Adriatic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adriatic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adriatic">Etymology of Adriatic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Adriatic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adriatic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Adriatic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adriatic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Adriatic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adriatic. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Adriatic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adriatic (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Adriatic 
 adown 
 Adrastea 
 adrenal 
 adrenaline 
 Adrian 
 Adriatic 
 adrift 
 adroit 
 adsorb 
 adulate 
 adulation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix