URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fuse
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:23:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fuse - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fuse - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fuse 

 fuse (v.) 

 1680s, "to melt, make liquid by heat" (transitive), back-formation from fusion . Intransitive sense, "to become liquid," attested from 1800. Figurative sense of "blend different things, blend or unite as if by melting together" is recorded by 1817. Intransitive figurative sense "become intermingled or blended" is by 1873. Related: Fused ; fusing .
 also from 1680s 

 fuse (n.) 

 "combustible cord or tube for lighting an explosive device," also fuze , 1640s, from Italian fuso , literally "spindle" (the ignition device so called for its shape, because the originals were long, thin tubes filled with gunpowder), from Latin fusus "a spindle," which is of uncertain origin. Influenced by French cognate fusée "spindleful of hemp fiber," and obsolete English fusee "musket fired by a fuse," which is from French. Meaning "device that breaks an electrical circuit" is first recorded 1884, so named for its shape, but erroneously attributed to fuse (v.) because it melts.
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to fuse 

 fusee (n.) 

 also fuzee , type of light musket, 1660s, from pronunciation of French fusil (see fusilier ). As the name of a type of match used in lighting cigars and pipes by 1832, from fusee as a variant of fuse (n.).

 fusion (n.) 

 1550s, "act of melting by heat," from French fusion or directly from Latin fusionem (nominative fusio ) "an outpouring, effusion," noun of action from fusus , past participle of fundere "to pour, melt" (from nasalized form of PIE root *gheu- "to pour"). Meaning "union or blending of different things; state of being united or blended" is by 1776; used especially in 19c, of politics, in early 20c. of psychology, atoms, and jazz (in nuclear physics sense, first recorded 1947; in musical sense, by 1972).

 defuse 
 fuselage 
 fusiform 
 fuze 
 re-fuse 
 *gheu- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 blend 

 c. 1300, blenden, "to mix in such a way as to become inextinguishable, mingle, stir up a liquid," in Middle English chiefly in northern writers, from or akin to rare Old English blandan "to mix" (Mercian blondan) or Old Norse blanda "to mix," or a combination of the two; from Pro

 flux 

 late 14c., "abnormally copious flow," from Old French flus "a flowing, a rolling; a bleeding" (Modern French flux), or directly from Latin fluxus (adj.) "flowing, loose, slack," past participle of fluere "to flow" (see fluent). Originally "excessive flow" (of blood or excrement),

 mix 

 1530s, transitive, "unite or blend promiscuously into one mass, body, or assemblage," a back-formation from Middle English myxte (early 15c.) "mingled, blended, composed of more than one element, of mixed nature," from Anglo-French mixte (late 13c.), from Latin mixtus, past parti

 smelt 

 "fuse or melt," especially ore, by heat, in a furnace, to separate the metal in it, late 14c....(implied in smelter "one who smelts ore"), from Dutch or Middle Low German smelten "to fuse, smelt, liquefy," from Proto-Germanic...

 short 

 Short fuse in the figurative sense of "quick temper" is attested by 1951....

 combine 

 early 15c., "to associate, unite, join two or more things together" (transitive), from Old French combiner (14c.) and directly from Late Latin combinare "to unite, yoke together," from Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + bini "two by two," adverb from bi- "twice" (from PIE ro

 merge 

 1630s, "to plunge or sink in" (to something), a sense now obsolete, from Latin mergere "to dip, dip in, immerse, plunge," probably rhotacized from *mezgo, from PIE *mezgo- "to dip, to sink, to wash, to plunge" (source also of Sanskrit majjanti "to sink, dive under," Lithuanian ma

 urn 

 late 14c., "large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead," from Latin urna "a jar, vessel of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead" (also used as a ballot box and for drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus "pitcher, jug," and 

 run 

 Old English, "move swiftly by using the legs, go on legs more rapidly than walking," also "make haste, hurry; be active, pursue or follow a course," and, of inanimate things, "to move over a course." The modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which t

 coalesce 

 1540s, "grow together, unite by growing into one body," from Latin coalescere "unite, grow together, become one in growth," from assimilated form of com- "together" (see co-) + alescere "be nourished," hence, "increase, grow up," inchoative of alere "to suckle, nourish," from PIE

 Share fuse 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fuse Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fuse">Etymology of fuse by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fuse. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fuse Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fuse," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fuse. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fuse." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fuse. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fuse." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fuse (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fuse 
 furtively 
 furuncle 
 fury 
 furze 
 fuscous 
 fuse 
 fusee 
 fuselage 
 fusible 
 fusiform 
 fusil 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix