URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mallow
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:41:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mallow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mallow - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mallow 

 mallow (n.) 

 late 14c., spelling alteration of late Old English malwe and directly from Latin malva "mallows" (source also of Modern French mauve , Spanish and Italian malva ), a word from a Mediterranean substrate language. The same lost word apparently yielded Greek malakhe "mallow."
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to mallow 

 malachite (n.) 

 common green ore of copper, a basic carbonate of copper having a beautiful green color, late 14c., from French malachite , ultimately from Greek malachitis (lithos) "mallow (stone)," from malakhe "mallow" (see mallow (n.)); the mineral traditionally so called from the resemblance of its color to that of the leaves of the mallow plant.

 malvaceous (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to the mallow," 1690s, from Late Latin malvaceus , from Latin malva (see mallow ).

 marshmallow 
 mauve 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 marshmallow 

 Old English mersc-mealwe "kind of mallow plant (Althea officinalis) which grows near salt marshes;" from marsh + mallow. The confection (so called from 1877) originally was made from paste from the mucilaginous roots of this plant. The Greek word for the shrub, althaea, is from a

 bush 

 "many-stemmed woody plant," from Old English bysc (found in place names), from West Germanic *busk "bush, thicket" (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with Old French (busche "firewood") and Medieval Latin

 cheese 

 "curd of milk coagulated, separated from the whey, pressed, and used as food," Old English cyse (West Saxon), cese (Anglian) "cheese," from West Germanic *kasjus (source also of Old Saxon kasi, Old High German chasi, German Käse, Middle Dutch case, Dutch kaas), from Latin caseus 

 brush 

 "instrument consisting of flexible material (bristles, hair, etc.) attached to a handle or stock," late 14c., "dust-sweeper, a brush for sweeping," from Old French broisse, broce "a brush" (13c., Modern French brosse), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *bruscia "a bunch of new shoots" (u

 shrub 

 "low-growing bush, a woody plant with stems branched from or near the ground," Middle English shrubbe, from Old English scrybb "brushwood, shrubbery," a rare and late word (but preserved also, perhaps, in Shrewsbury), possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Danish 

 tribulation 

 "a state of affliction or oppression, suffering, distress," c. 1200, from Old French tribulacion (12c.), from Church Latin tribulationem (nominative tribulatio) "distress, trouble, affliction," noun of action from past-participle stem of tribulare "to oppress, afflict," a figurat

 carbohydrate 

 general name for a group of organic compounds consisting of carbon atoms in multiples of 6 and hydrogen and oxygen in the proportion of water, 1851, from carbo-, combining form of carbon, + hydrate (n.), denoting compound produced when certain substances combine with water, from 

 fatigue 

 1660s, "that which causes weariness," from French fatigue "weariness," from fatiguer "to tire" (15c.), from Latin fatigare "to weary, to tire out," originally "to cause to break down," from pre-Latin adjective *fati-agos "driving to the point of breakdown," with first half from O

 Jehovah 

 1530, Tyndale's transliteration of Hebrew Tetragrammaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai "my lord" (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation the lord would have been inc

 watershed 

 "line separating waters flowing into different rivers," 1803, from water (n.1) + shed in a topographical sense of "ridge of high ground between two valleys or lower ground, a divide," for which see shed (n.2). Perhaps a loan-translation of German Wasser-scheide. Figurative sense 

 Share mallow 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mallow Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mallow">Etymology of mallow by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mallow. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mallow Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mallow," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mallow. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mallow." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mallow. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mallow." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mallow (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mallow 
 malleability 
 malleable 
 malleolus 
 mallet 
 malleus 
 mallow 
 malmsey 
 malnourished 
 malnourishment 
 malnutrition 
 malocclusion 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix