URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/shine
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Shine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Shine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of shine 

 shine (v.) 

 Middle English shinen , from Old English scinan "shed, send forth, or give out light; be radiant, be resplendent, illuminate," of persons, "be conspicuous" (class I strong verb; past tense scan , past participle scinen ). This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *skeinanan (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German skinan , Old Norse and Old Frisian skina , Dutch schijnen , German scheinen , Gothic skeinan "to shine, appear"), which perhaps is from a PIE root *skai- "to shine, to gleam" (source also of Old Church Slavonic sinati "to flash up, shine").

 Of smoothed or polished surfaces, "gleam, give off reflected light," late Old English. Of a person, a face, "be fair-skinned, be beautiful," c. 1200. Also used in Middle English of night when cloudless and starlit. The transitive sense of "cause to shine" is from 1580s; the meaning "to black (boots)" is from 1610s. Related: Shined (in the shoe polish sense), otherwise shone ; shining .

 shine (n.) 

 1520s, "brightness, radiance," from shine (v.). Indicating "sunshine," and paired with rain (n.), from 1620s. Meaning "polish given to a pair of boots" is from 1871.

 For the American English slang meaning "a prank, a trick," see monkey-shines . Often also "a fancy, a liking," as in phrases such as take a shine to , "fancy," attested by 1830 in representations of Yankee dialect; shine up to "attempt to please as a suitor by making a brilliant impression" (1882).

 The derogatory meaning "black person" is attested by 1908, perhaps from glossiness of skin or, on another guess, from frequent employment as shoeshines.
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to shine 

 monkey-shines (n.) 

 also monkeyshines , "monkeyish behavior, tricks, pranks, antics," U.S. slang, 1832 (in the "Jim Crow" song), from monkey (n.) + shine (n.) "a caper, trick" (1835), from an American English slang sense perhaps related to the expression cut a shine "make a fine impression" (1819); see slang senses under shine (n.). For sense of the whole word, compare Old French singerie "disreputable behavior," from singe "monkey, ape."

 Also compare monkey business "foolish or deceitful conduct," attested by 1858; one early source from England describes it as a "native Indian term," but the source might be that alluded to in, among other places, this contemporary account given by a professional strongman:

 After Gravesend I came up to London, and went and played the monkey at the Bower Saloon. It was the first time I had done it. There was all the monkey business, jumping over tables and chairs, and all mischievous things; and there was climbing up trees, and up two perpendicular ropes. I was dressed in a monkey's dress; it's made of some their hearth rugs; and my face was painted. It's very difficult to paint a monkey's face. I've a great knack that way, and can always manage anything of that sort. [Mayhew, "London Labour and the London Poor," 1861]

 bleach (v.) 

 Middle English blechen , from Old English blæcan , of cloth or fabric, "to make white by removing color, whiten" (by exposure to chemical agents or the sun), from Proto-Germanic *blaikjan "to make white" (source also of Old Saxon blek , Old Norse bleikr , Dutch bleek , Old High German bleih , German bleich "pale;" Old Norse bleikja , Dutch bleken , German bleichen "to make white, cause to fade"), from PIE root *bhel- (1) "to shine, flash, burn," also "shining white."

 The same root probably produced black (q.v.), perhaps because both black and white are colorless, or because both are associated in different ways with burning. For the contrary senses, compare Old English scimian , meaning both "to shine" and "to dim, grow dusky, grow dark," which is related to the source of shine .

 The intransitive sense of "become white" is from 1610s. Related: Bleached ; bleaching . The past participle in Middle English was sometimes blaught .

 cheetah 
 moonshine 
 outshine 
 scintilla 
 sheen 
 shimmer 
 shiner 
 shining 
 Shinola 
 shiny 
 shoe-shine 
 star-shine 
 sunshine 
 See All Related Words (15) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cheetah 

 "large, spotted cat of India," 1704, from Hindi chita "leopard," from Sanskrit chitraka "hunting leopard, tiger," literally "speckled," from chitra-s "distinctively marked, variegated, many-colored, bright, clear" (from PIE *kit-ro-, from root *skai- "to shine, gleam, be bright;"

 moonshine 

 early 15c., "moonlight, the shining of the moon," from moon (n.) + shine (n.). Similar formation in Dutch maneschijn, German Mondschein, Swedish månsken, Danish maaneskin. In a figurative use, "appearance without substance, pretense, fiction" from late 15c.; perhaps from the noti

 sheen 

 "shining, luster, brightness, splendor" 1602 (in "Hamlet" iii.2), noun use of adjective sheene "beautiful, bright," from Old English scene, sciene "beautiful; bright, brilliant," from Proto-Germanic *skauniz "conspicuous" (source also of Old Frisian skene, Middle Dutch scone, Dut

 glimmer 

 late 14c., "to shine brightly;" early 15c., "to shine dimly," perhaps from or related to Middle Dutch glimmen, Middle Low...Sense shifted 15c. to "shine faintly." Compare Dutch glimmeren, German glimmeren "to shine dimly."...

 fulminate 

 figuratively "to thunder," from fulmen (genitive fulminis) "lightning flash," related to fulgor "lightning," fulgere "to shine..., flash," from PIE *bhleg- "to shine, flash," from root *bhel- (1) "to shine, flash, burn."...

 glow 

 Old English glowan "to glow, shine as if red-hot," from Proto-Germanic *glo- (source also of Old Saxon gloian, Old Frisian...gled "glow, blaze," Old Norse gloa, Old High German gluoen, German glühen "to glow, glitter, shine"), from PIE root *ghel...- (2) "to shine," with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold....

 blush 

 late 14c., bluschen, blischen, "to shine brightly; to look, gaze, stare," probably from Old English blyscan "blush, become...red, glow" (glossing Latin rutilare), akin to blyse "torch," from Proto-Germanic *blisk- "to shine, burn," which also yielded...German (Dutch blozen "to blush") and Scandinavian (Danish blusse "to blaze; to blush"); ultimately from PIE *bhel- (1) "to shine...

 radiance 

 c. 1600, "brilliant light, brightness shooting in diverging rays or beams," from radiant (adj.) or else from Medieval Latin radiantia "brightness," from radiare "to beam, shine" (see radiation). Figurative use, of beauty, joy, etc., is by 1761. Related: Radiancy. Radiance ... is

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 Share shine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/shine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/shine">Etymology of shine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of shine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/shine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of shine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of shine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/shine. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of shine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/shine (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near shine 
 shimmer 
 shimmy 
 shin 
 Shin Bet 
 shindig 
 shine 
 shiner 
 shingle 
 shingles 
 shining 
 shinny 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix