URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stray
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stray - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stray - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stray 

 stray (v.) 

 c. 1300, straien , of animals, "wander away from an enclosure or herd," also figurative, of persons, "wander from the path of justice or rectitude," a shortening of Old French estraier "wander about, roam, drift, run loose," said of animals, especially a horse without a master, also of persons, perhaps literally "go about the streets," from estree "route, highway," from Late Latin via strata "paved road" (see street ).

 On another theory (reprinted in OED), the Old French word is from Vulgar Latin *estragare , a contraction of *estravagare , representing Latin extra vagari "to wander outside" (see extravagant ). Related: Strayed ; straying .
 also from c. 1300 

 stray (n.) 

 "domestic animal found wandering from its enclosure or proper place," early 13c., strai , a legal term, from Anglo-French stray , estray , noun use of Old French estraié "strayed, riderless," past-participle adjective from estraier "to roam, drift, run loose" (see stray (v.), and compare waif ).
 also from early 13c. 

 stray (adj.) 

 c. 1600, of animals; 19c. of persons and things, from stray (n.) and in part a shortening of astray .
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to stray 

 astray (adv.) 

 early 14c., o strai , "away from home; lost, wandering" (of cattle), borrowed and partially nativized from Old French estraie , past participle of estraier "astray, riderless (of a horse), lost," literally "on stray" (see stray (v.)). Figurative use is from late 14c.

 extravagant (adj.) 

 late 14c., in constituciouns extravagaunt , a term in Canon Law for papal decrees not originally included or codified in the Decretals, from Medieval Latin extravagantem (nominative extravagans ), present participle of extravagari "wander outside or beyond," from Latin extra "outside of" (see extra- ) + vagari "wander, roam" (see vague ).

 In 15c. it also could mean "rambling, irrelevant; extraordinary, unusual." Extended sense of "excessive, extreme, exceeding reasonable limits" first recorded 1590s, probably via French; that of "wasteful, lavish, exceeding prudence in expenditure" is from 1711. Related: Extravagantly . Wordsworth ("Prelude") used extravagate (v.).

 street 
 waif 
 *stere- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 street 

 Middle English strete, "road in a city or town," also "road from one city or town to another," from Old English stret (Mercian, Kentish), stræt (West Saxon) "street, high road," from Late Latin strata, used elliptically for via strata "paved road." Latin strata is fem. past parti

 waif 

 late 14c., "unclaimed property, flotsam, stray animal," from Anglo-French waif (13c., Old French guaif) "ownerless property, something lost;" as an adjective, "not claimed, outcast, abandoned," probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veif "waving thing, flag," from 

 roll 

 c. 1200, rolle, "rolled-up piece of parchment or paper, scroll" (especially one inscribed with an official record), from Old French rolle "document, parchment scroll, decree" (12c.), Medieval Latin rotulus "a roll of paper" (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian rullo), from Lati

 rove 

 .); possibly a Midlands dialectal variant of northern English and Scottish rave "to wander, stray," from Middle English raven..."to wander, stray, rove" (late 14c.)....Or it might be from Old French raver, a late 15c. variant of resver "to stray" (see rave (v.))....

 mustang 

 American prairie and pampas," 1808, from Mexican Spanish mestengo "animal that strays" (16c.), from Spanish mestengo "wild, stray..., ownerless," literally "belonging to the mesta," an association of cattle ranchers who divided stray or unclaimed animals...

 vague 

 rambling," figuratively "vacillating, uncertain," perhaps from PIE *Huog-o-  and cognate with Old Norse vakka "to stray...

 wince 

 *wenkjan, from Proto-Germanic *wankjan (source also of Old High German wankon "to stagger, totter," Old Norse vakka "to stray...

 swan 

 large, web-footed swimming bird, stately and graceful in the water, noted for its long neck and white down; Old English swan "swan," from Proto-Germanic *swanaz "singer" (source also of Old Saxon swan, Old Norse svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, 

 cast 

 c. 1200, "throw, throw violently, fling, hurl," from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse kasta "to throw" (cognate with Swedish kasta, Danish kaste, North Frisian kastin), a word of uncertain origin. The meaning "to form in a mold" is late 15c. In the sense of "to throw" it r

 range 

 c. 1200, renge, "row or line of persons" (especially hunters or soldiers), from Old French reng, renge "a row, line, rank," from Frankish *hring or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hringaz "circle, ring, something curved" (from nasalized form of PIE root *sker- (2

 Share stray 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stray Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stray">Etymology of stray by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stray. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stray Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stray," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stray. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stray." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stray. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stray." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stray (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stray 
 stratum 
 stratus 
 straw 
 straw man 
 strawberry 
 stray 
 streak 
 streaking 
 streaky 
 stream 
 streamer 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix