URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Arab
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:39:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Arab - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Arab - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Arab 

 Arab (n.) 

 "one of the native people of Arabia and surrounding regions," late 14c. ( Arabes , a plural form), from Old French Arabi , from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem ), from Greek Araps (genitive Arabos ), from Arabic 'arab , indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally "inhabitant of the desert" and related to Hebrew arabha "desert."

 The meaning "homeless little wanderer, child of the street" is from 1848 ( Arab of the city , but the usual form was city arab ), an allusion to the nomadic ways of the Bedouin. The Arab League was formed in Cairo, March 22, 1945.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to Arab 

 arabesque (n.) 

 1786, "Moorish or Arabic ornamental design," from French arabesque (16c.), from Italian arabesco , from Arabo "Arab" (see Arab ), with reference to Moorish architecture. In reference to an ornamented theme or passage in piano music it is attested by 1853, originally the title given in 1839 by Robert Schumann to one of his piano pieces ("Arabeske in C major"). As a ballet pose, attested by 1830.

 The name 
 arabesque applied to the flowing ornament of Moorish invention is exactly suited to express those graceful lines which are their counterpart in the art of dancing. ["A Manual of the Theory and Practice of Classical Theatrical Dancing," 1922]

 Arabia 

 1711; see Arab + -ia . The older name for "the country of Arabia" was Araby (late 13c.).

 Arabian 
 Arabic 
 Mozarab 
 pan-Arabism 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Bedouin 

 "an Arab of the desert, one of the tribes of nomadic Arabs," c. 1400, from Old French bedüin (12c., Modern French bédouin...

 morris-dance 

 persons in costume, mid-15c., moreys daunce "Moorish dance," from Flemish mooriske dans, from Old French morois "Moorish, Arab...

 Almagest 

 ("Mathematical Composition"), commonly called Megale syntaxis "Great Composition" (Greek megale is the fem. of megas); Arab...

 borage 

 Latin word was held by folk-etymology to be from Arabic abu arak, literally "the father of sweat," supposedly so called by Arab...

 sheik 

 also sheikh, "head of an Arab family," also "head of a Muslim religious order," and later also a general title of respect...

 Ariel 

 (Gesenius would here translate "fire-hearth of God," after Arab. arr; elsewhere in O.T. the same word occurs as a man's name...

 insoluble 

 There might be matters that presented serious difficulties, but if you could lay them before the right man -- some Arab in...

 mount 

 c. 1300, mounten, "to get up on a horse;" mid-14c., "to rise up, rise in amount, ascend; fly," from Old French monter "to go up, ascend, climb, mount," from Vulgar Latin *montare, from Latin mons (genitive montis) "mountain" (from PIE root *men- (2) "to project"). The transitive 

 Semite 

 1847, "a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean" (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French Sémite (1845), from Modern Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem, Greek Sēm "Shem," one of the three sons of Noah (G

 Saracen 

 Middle English Saracene, Sarcene, Sarazyn, Sarasine, "a Turk; an Arab; a Muslim," from Old English (in translations from Latin), from Old French Saracin, Sarrasine or Medieval Latin Saracenus, from Greek sarakenos. This usually is said to be from Arabic sharquiyin, accusative plu

 Share Arab 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Arab Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Arab">Etymology of Arab by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Arab. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Arab Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Arab," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Arab. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Arab." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Arab. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Arab." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Arab (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Arab 
 aquiver 
 ar- 
 *ar- 
 -ar 
 Ara 
 Arab 
 arabesque 
 Arabia 
 Arabian 
 Arabic 
 arable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix