URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchid
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:22:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Orchid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Orchid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of orchid 

 orchid (n.) 

 1845, introduced by John Lindley in the third edition of "School Botany," from Modern Latin Orchideæ (Linnaeus), the plant's family name, from Latin orchis , a kind of orchid, from Greek orkhis (genitive orkheos ) "orchid," literally "testicle," from PIE *h(o)rghi- , the standard Indo-European word for "testicle" (source also of Avestan erezi , Armenian orjik' "testicles," Old Irish uirge, Hittite arki- "testicle," Lithuanian eržilas "stallion").

 The plant so called because of the shape of its root; Greek orkhis also was the name of a kind of olive, also so called for its shape. Earlier in English in Latin form, orchis (1560s), and in Middle English it was ballockwort (c. 1300; see ballocks ). The modern word is marred by an extraneous -d- in an attempt to extract the Latin stem. Related: Orchidaceous .
 also from 1845 

 Entries linking to orchid 

 ballocks (n.) 

 "testicles," from Old English beallucas , plural diminutive, from Proto-Germanic *ball- , from PIE root *bhel- (2) "to blow, swell."

 orb (n.) 

 mid-15c., "sphere, globe, something spherical or circular, orbit of a heavenly body," from Old French orbe "orb, globe" (13c.) and directly from Latin orbem (nominative orbis ) "circle, disk, ring, hoop, orbit," probably related to orbita "wheel track, rut," a word of unknown and much-disputed origin. Watkins suggests a connection with the root of orchid . De Vaan suggests *horbi- "turning thing."

 A three-dimensional extension of a word originally describing two-dimensional shapes. The ancient astronomical sense is in reference to the hollow "spheres" that carried each of the planets and the stars through their heavenly motions in the Ptolemaic system. Used poetically of the earth, sun, or moon from 1590s; used rhetorically of the eye from 1650s. As a verb from c. 1600.

 Orb-weaver in reference to spiders that make webs formed of lines radiating from a central point (as distinguished from tube- or tunnel-weavers ) is recorded from 1889.

 orchidectomy (n.) 

 "a cutting out of one or both of the testicles," 1870, from Latinized form of Greek orkhis "testicle" (see orchid ) + -ectomy "a cutting, surgical removal." Coined by medical men in an attempt to avoid the common word castration .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Johnny 

 Johnny-cocks, a colloquial name for the early purple orchid (Orchis mascula) is attested from 1883....

 lady 

 Lady's slipper as a type of orchid is from 1590s....

 flower 

 c. 1200, flour, also flur, flor, floer, floyer, flowre, "the blossom of a plant; a flowering plant," from Old French flor "flower, blossom; heyday, prime; fine flour; elite; innocence, virginity" (12c., Modern French fleur), from Latin florem (nominative flos) "flower" (source of

 vanilla 

 1660s, "pod of the vanilla plant," from Spanish vainilla "vanilla plant," literally "little pod," diminutive of vaina "sheath," from Latin vagina "sheath of an ear of grain, hull of a plant" (see vagina). So called from the shape of the pods. European discovery 1521 by Hernando C

 plant 

 Old English plante "young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, a shoot or strip recently sprouted from seed," from Latin planta "sprout, shoot, cutting" (source of Spanish planta, French plante), which is perhaps from an unattested verb *plantare "to drive in with the feet, push in

 cosmos 

 c. 1200, "the universe, the world" (but not popular until 1848, when it was taken as the English equivalent to Humboldt's Kosmos in translations from German), from Latinized form of Greek kosmos "order, good order, orderly arrangement," a word with several main senses rooted in t

 geometry 

 early 14c., also gemetrie, gemetry, from Old French geometrie (12c., Modern French géométrie), from Latin geometria, from Greek geometria "measurement of earth or land; geometry," from combining form of gē "earth, land" (see Gaia) + -metria "a measuring of" (see -metry). Old Engl

 jukebox 

 also juke-box, "machine that automatically plays selected recorded music when a coin is inserted," 1939, earlier jook organ (1937), from jook joint "roadhouse, brothel" (1935), African-American vernacular, from juke, joog "wicked, disorderly," a word in Gullah (the creolized Engl

 herald 

 "messenger, envoy," late 13c. (in Anglo-Latin); c. 1200 as a surname, from Anglo-French heraud, Old French heraut, hiraut (12c.), from Frankish *hariwald "commander of an army" or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *harja "army" (from PIE root *koro- "war;" see harry)

 sad 

 Old English sæd "sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of," from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (source also of Old Norse saðr, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High German sat, German satt, Gothic saþs "satiated, sated, full"), from PIE *seto-, from 

 Share orchid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchid">Etymology of orchid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of orchid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of orchid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of orchid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchid. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of orchid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/orchid (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near orchid 
 orchard 
 orchestra 
 orchestral 
 orchestrate 
 orchestration 
 orchid 
 orchidectomy 
 ordain 
 ordeal 
 order 
 orderly 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix