URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/poverty
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Poverty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Poverty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of poverty 

 poverty (n.) 

 late 12c., poverte , "destitution, want, need or insufficiency of money or goods," from Old French poverte, povrete "poverty, misery, wretched condition" (Modern French pauvreté ), from Latin paupertatem (nominative paupertas ) "poverty," from pauper "poor" (see poor (adj.)).

 From early 13c. in reference to deliberate poverty as a Christian act. Figuratively from mid-14c., "dearth, scantiness;" of the spirit, "humility," from the Beatitudes.

 Seeing so much poverty everywhere makes me think that God is not rich. He gives the appearance of it, but I suspect some financial difficulties. [Victor Hugo, 
 "Les Misérables," 1862]

 Poverty line "estimated minimum income for maintaining the necessities of life" is attested from 1891; poverty trap "situation in which any gain in income is offset by a loss of state benefits" is from 1966; poverty-stricken "reduced to a state of poverty" is by 1778.

 Poverty is a strong word, stronger than 
 being poor ; 
 want is still stronger, indicating that one has not even the necessaries of life ; 
 indigence is often stronger than want, implying especially, also, the lack of those things to which one has been used and that befit one's station ; 
 penury is poverty that is severe to abjectness ; 
 destitution is the state of having absolutely nothing .... [Century Dictionary]
 also from late 12c. 

 Entries linking to poverty 

 poor (adj.) 

 c. 1200, "lacking money or resources, destitute of wealth; needy, indigent;" also "small, scanty," also voluntarily and deliberately, "devoid of possessions in conformity with Christian virtues," from Old French povre "poor, wretched, dispossessed; inadequate; weak, thin" (Modern French pauvre ), from Latin pauper "poor, not wealthy," from pre-Latin *pau-paros "producing little; getting little," a compound from the roots of paucus "little" (from PIE root *pau- (1) "few, little") and parare "to produce, bring forth" (from PIE root *pere- (1) "to produce, procure").

 It replaced Old English earm (from Proto-Germanic *arma- , which is of disputed origin). Late 13c. as "unfortunate, to be pitied or regretted." In contemptuous use, "morally inferior, miserable, wretched," by early 15c. Used figuratively ("spiritually poor") from early 14c. (to be poor in spirit is to be "spiritually humble"). Meaning "deficient in desirable or essential qualities" is from c. 1300. In reference to inhabited places from c. 1300; of soil, etc., from late 14c. In modest or apologetic use, "humble, slight, insignificant," from early 15c.

 The poor boy sandwich, made of simple but filling ingredients, was invented and named in New Orleans in 1921. To poor mouth "deny one's advantages" is from 1965 (to make a poor mouth "whine" is Scottish dialect from 1822). Slang poor man's ________ "the cheaper alternative to _______," is from 1854. Poor relation "relative or kinsman in humble circumstances" is by 1720.

 *pau- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "few, little."

 It might form all or part of: catchpoll ; encyclopedia ; filly ; foal ; few ; hypnopedia ; impoverish ; orthopedic ; Paedophryne ; paraffin ; parvi- ; parvovirus ; paucity ; Paul ; pauper ; pedagogue ; pederasty ; pedo- ; pedophilia ; poco ; poltroon ; pony ; pool (n.2) "game similar to billiards;" poor ; poulterer ; poultry ; poverty ; puericulture ; puerile ; puerility ; puerperal ; pullet ; pullulate ; Punch ; Punchinello ; pupa ; pupil (n.1) "student;" pupil (n.2) "center of the eye;" puppet ; pusillanimous ; putti .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit potah "a young animal," putrah "son;" Avestan puthra- "son, child;" Greek pauros "few, little," pais (genitive paidos ) "child," pōlos "foal;" Latin paucus "few, little," paullus "little," parvus "little, small," pauper "poor," puer "child, boy," pullus "young animal;" Oscan puklu "child;" Old English feawe "not many, a small number," fola "young horse;" Old Norse fylja "young female horse;" Old Church Slavonic puta "bird;" Lithuanian putytis "young animal, young bird;" Albanian pele "mare."

 -ty (2) 

 suffix of Latin origin, via Old French, used in forming abstract nouns denoting quality or condition from adjectives derived from Latin ( safety , surety , loyalty , poverty ; in city it is hardly recognizable); Middle English -tie , -te , from Old French -te (Modern French -té ).

 This is from Latin -tatem (nominative -tas , genitive -tatis ), cognate with Greek -tes , Sanskrit -tati- . The cognate suffix in Spanish is -dad . So commonly preceded by a stem-vowel in -i- that -ity has become a living English formative.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 penurious 

 1590s, "in want, needy, poverty-stricken," a sense now obsolete, from penury + -ous, or else from Medieval Latin penuriosus...Penurious means literally in penury, but always feeling and acting as though one were in poverty, saving beyond reason; the...

 difficulty 

 perplexing," from Anglo-French difficulté and directly from Latin difficultatem (nominative difficultas) "difficulty, distress, poverty...

 aporia 

 rhetoric, "professed doubt as to where to begin," from Latin, from Greek aporia "difficulty, perplexity, want of means, poverty...

 ruin 

 The financial sense of "reduce to poverty, wreck the finances of" is attested from 1650s. Related: Ruined; ruining....

 nun 

 Old English nunne "woman devoted to religious life under vows of celibacy, poverty, and obedience to a superior," also "vestal...

 destitution 

 Meaning "absence of means or resources, indigence, poverty" is from c. 1600....

 impotence 

 early 15c., "physical weakness," also "poverty," from Old French impotence "weakness" (13c.), from Latin impotentia "lack...

 indigence 

 late 14c., from Old French indigence "indigence, need, privation" (13c.), from Latin indigentia "need, want; insatiable desire," from indigentem (nominative indigens) "in want of, needing," present participle of indigere "to need, stand in need of," from indu "in, within" (from P

 privation 

 late 14c., privacioun, "condition of being without (something);" mid-15c., "act of depriving, act of removing or destroying property;" from Old French privacion and directly from Latin privationem (nominative privatio) "a taking away," noun of action from past-participle stem of 

 deprivation 

 mid-15c., "removal from ecclesiastical office, rank, or position," from Medieval Latin deprivationem (nominative deprivatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of deprivare, from de- "entirely" (see de-) + Latin privare "to deprive, rob, strip" of anything; "to deliver fro

 Share poverty 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/poverty Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/poverty">Etymology of poverty by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of poverty. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/poverty Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of poverty," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poverty. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of poverty." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/poverty. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of poverty." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/poverty (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near poverty 
 pouring 
 pourpoint 
 pousette 
 pout 
 pouty 
 poverty 
 pow 
 powder 
 powder-horn 
 powder-puff 
 powdery 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix