URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nard
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:24:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nard 

 nard (n.) 

 name of an East Indian plant as well as a precious aromatic unguent prepared from it, c. 1200, from Old French narde (Modern French nard ) and directly from Latin nardus , from Greek nardos , a word of borrowed from a Semitic language (compare Hebrew ner'd , plural n'radim ; Arabic and Persian nardin ,) ultimately from Sanskrit narada, nalada , name of the plant and of an aromatic balsam. Related: Nardine .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to nard 

 spikenard (n.) 

 c. 1300, "aromatic substance from an Indian plant, famous perfumed unguent of the ancients," Old French spicanarde and directly from Medieval Latin spica nardi (see spike (n.2) + nard (n.), which is probably ultimately from the Sanskrit name of the plant), rendering Greek nardou stakhys .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 emollient 

 "softening, making soft or supple," 1640s, from French émollient (16c.), from Latin emollientem (nominative emolliens), present participle of emollire "to make soft, soften," from assimilated form of ex "out" (see ex-) + mollire "soften," from mollis "soft" (from PIE root *mel- (

 cream 

 early 14c., creyme, "the rich and buttery part of milk," from Old French cresme, craime, creme "chrism, holy oil" (13c., Modern French crème). This word is a blend of Late Latin chrisma "ointment" (from Greek khrisma "unguent;" from PIE root *ghrei- "to rub") and Late Latin cramu

 panic 

 "sudden mass terror," especially an exaggerated fright affecting a number of persons without visible cause or inspired by trifling cause or danger, 1708, from an earlier adjective (c. 1600, modifying fear, terror, etc.), from French panique (15c.), from Greek panikon, literally "

 month 

 "one-twelfth part of a year; one of the twelve parts into which the calendar year is arbitrarily divided," Old English monað, from Proto-Germanic *menoth- (source also of Old Saxon manoth, Old Frisian monath, Middle Dutch manet, Dutch maand, Old High German manod, German Monat, O

 whiskey 

 1715, from Gaelic uisge beatha "whisky," literally "water of life," from Old Irish uisce "water" (from PIE *ud-skio-, suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet") + bethu "life" (from PIE *gwi-wo-tut-, suffixed form of *gwi-wo-, from root *gwei- "to live"). According to Barnhart

 retrieve 

 early 15c., retreven, "find or discover again," originally in reference to dogs finding lost game, from retruev-, stem of Old French retreuver (Modern French retrouver) "find again, recover, meet again, recognize," from re- "again" (see re-) + trouver "to find," probably from Vul

 spick-and-span 

 also spic-and-span, "very neat, clean, and trim," 1660s, from spick-and-span-new "new and fresh" (1570s), literally "new as a recently made spike and wood-chip." It seems to be an elaboration, with spick "nail" (see spike (n.1)), of older span-new "very new," in reference to some

 father 

 Middle English fader, from Old English fæder "he who begets a child, nearest male ancestor;" also "any lineal male ancestor; the Supreme Being," and by late Old English, "one who exercises parental care over another," from Proto-Germanic *fader (source also of Old Saxon fadar, Ol

 contemplation 

 c. 1200, contemplacioun, "religious musing," from Old French contemplation and directly from Latin contemplationem (nominative contemplatio) "act of looking at," noun of action from past-participle stem of contemplari "to gaze attentively, observe; consider, contemplate," origina

 antibiotic 

 "destructive to micro-organisms," 1894, from French antibiotique (c. 1889), from anti- "against" (see anti-) + biotique "of (microbial) life," from Late Latin bioticus "of life" (see biotic). As a noun, attested 1941 in works of U.S. microbiologist Selman Waksman (1888-1973), dis

 Share nard 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nard Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nard">Etymology of nard by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nard. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nard Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nard," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nard. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nard." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nard. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nard." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nard (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nard 
 narco- 
 narcolepsy 
 narcomania 
 narcosis 
 narcotic 
 nard 
 nare 
 nares 
 narghile 
 nark 
 narrable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix