URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Darius
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Darius - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Darius - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Darius 

 Darius 

 name of three Persian rulers, notably Darius the Great, Persian emperor 521-485 B.C.E., from Greek Darius , from Old Persian Darayavaus , probably literally "he who holds firm the good," from PIE root *dher- "to hold firmly, support."

 Entries linking to Darius 

 *dher- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to hold firmly, support." 

 It might form all or part of: affirm ; confirm ; Darius ; dharma ; farm ; fermata ; firm (adj.); firm (n.); firmament ; furl ; infirm ; infirmary ; terra firma ; throne .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dharmah "custom, statute, law," dharayati "holds;" Prakrit dharaṇa "a holding firm;" Iranian dāra‑ "holding;" Greek thronos "seat;" Latin firmus "strong, steadfast, enduring, stable;" Lithuanian diržnas "strong;" Welsh dir "hard," Breton dir "steel."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 satyr 

 late 14c., satire, "one of a type of woodland deities part human or animal; demigod or spirit of the air or woods, companion of Bacchus," from Old French satire and directly from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, a word of unknown origin. "The etymology of [satyros] is unknown. 

 access 

 early 14c., "an attack of fever," from Old French acces "onslaught, attack; onset (of an illness)," from Latin accessus "a coming to, an approach; way of approach, entrance," noun use of past participle of accedere "to approach," from assimilated form of ad "to" (see ad-) + ceder

 mean 

 "intend, have in mind;" Middle English mēnen, from Old English mænan "intend (to do something), plan; indicate (a certain object) or convey (a certain sense) when using a word," from Proto-West Germanic *menjojanan (source also of Old Frisian mena "to signify," Old Saxon menian "

 Prometheus 

 in Greek mythology, a demigod (son of the Titan Iapetus) who made man from clay and stole fire from heaven and taught mankind its use, for which he was punished by Zeus by being chained to a rock in the Caucasus, where a vulture came every day and preyed on his liver. The name is

 vehement 

 early 15c., from Old French vehement, veement "impetuous, ardent" (12c.), from Latin vehementem (nominative vehemens) "impetuous, eager, violent, furious, ardent, carried away," perhaps [Barnhart] from a lost present middle participle of vehere "to carry" (from PIE root *wegh- "t

 resign 

 late 14c., "give up (something), surrender, abandon, submit; relinquish (an office, position, right, claim)," from Old French resigner "renounce, relinquish" (13c.), from Latin resignare "to check off, annul, cancel, give back, give up," from re-, here perhaps denoting "opposite"

 typhoon 

 Tiphon "violent storm, whirlwind, tornado," 1550s, from Greek typhon "whirlwind," personified as a giant, father of the winds, probably [Beekes] from or related to typhein "to smoke" (see typhus), but according to Watkins from PIE *dheub- "deep, hollow," via notion of "monster fr

 sincere 

 1530s, "pure, unmixed, unadulterated;" also "free from pretense or falsehood," from French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus, of things, "whole, clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed," figuratively "sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful" (unadulterated by deceit), a word of un

 anecdote 

 1670s, "secret or private stories," from French anecdote (17c.) or directly from Medieval Latin anecdota, from Greek anekdota "things unpublished," neuter plural of anekdotos, from an- "not" (see an- (1)) + ekdotos "published," from ek- "out" (see ex-) + didonai "to give" (from P

 cirrhosis 

 "chronic inflammation of connective tissue," originally and especially of the liver, 1827, coined in Modern Latin by French physician René-Théophile-Hyacinthe Laennec with -osis and Greek kirros "red-yellow, yellow-brown, tawny," which is of unknown origin. The form is erroneous,

 Share Darius 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Darius Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Darius">Etymology of Darius by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Darius. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Darius Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Darius," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Darius. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Darius." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Darius. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Darius." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Darius (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Darius 
 Dardanelles 
 dare 
 daredevil 
 Darfur 
 daring 
 Darius 
 Darjeeling 
 dark 
 darken 
 darkener 
 darkling 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix