URL: https://www.ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=mate
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:47:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: American Heritage Dictionary Entry: mate

American Heritage Dictionary Entry: mate 

 HOW TO USE THE DICTIONARY
 To look up an entry in The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, use the search window above. For best results, after typing in the word, click on the “Search” button instead of using the “enter” key.
 Some compound words (like bus rapid transit, dog whistle, or identity theft ) don’t appear on the drop-down list when you type them in the search bar. For best results with compound words, place a quotation mark before the compound word in the search window.
 guide to the dictionary 

 THE USAGE PANEL
 The Usage Panel is a group of nearly 200 prominent scholars, creative writers, journalists, diplomats, and others in occupations requiring mastery of language. Annual surveys have gauged the acceptability of particular usages and grammatical constructions.
 The Panelists 

 NEED HELP SOLVING A CROSSWORD PUZZLE?

 Go to our Crossword Puzzle Solver and type in the letters that you know, and the Solver will produce a list of possible solutions.

-->
 AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY APP
 The new American Heritage Dictionary app is now available for 
 iOS and Android. 

 THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY BLOG
 The articles in our blog examine new words, revised definitions, interesting images from the fifth edition, discussions of usage, and more.

 OPEN DICTIONARY PROJECT

 Share your ideas for new words and new meanings of old words!

 Start Sharing Now! 

 --> See word lists from the best-selling 100 Words Series!
 Find out more! 

 INTERESTED IN DICTIONARIES?
 Check out the Dictionary Society of North America at http://www.dictionarysociety.com 

 mate  1 (m ā t) 
 Share: 

 Tweet 

 n. 1. One of a matched pair: the mate to this glove. 
 2. A spouse or romantic partner.
 3. a. Either of a pair of birds or other animals that associate in order to propagate.
 b. Either of a pair of animals brought together for breeding.
 c. Either of a pair of plants, fungi, or other organisms that engage in sexual reproduction or conjugation with each other.

 4. a. A person with whom one is in close association; an associate.
 b. Chiefly British A good friend or companion.
 c. A person with whom one shares living quarters. Often used in combination: advertised for a new flatmate. 

 5. A deck officer on a merchant ship ranking next below the master.
 6. A US Navy petty officer who is an assistant to a warrant officer.

 v. mat·ed , mat·ing , mates 
 v. tr. 1. To join closely or combine: an engine that is mated to a four-speed transmission. 
 2. To cause to be united in marriage or a romantic sexual relationship.
 3. To cause (organisms) to breed or bring (organisms) into close proximity for breeding.

 v. intr. 1. To become joined in marriage or a romantic sexual relationship.
 2. a. To be paired for reproducing; breed.
 b. To engage in sexual reproduction or conjugation.

 [Middle English, from Middle Low German gemate, mate , messmate.]

 The American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fifth Edition copyright ©2022 by HarperCollins Publishers. All rights reserved.

 mate  2 (m ā t) 
 Share: 

 Tweet 

 n. A checkmate.

 tr. & intr.v. mat·ed , mat·ing , mates To checkmate or achieve a checkmate.

 [Middle English, from Old French mat , checkmated, from Arabic m ā t , he has died; see CHECKMATE .]

 The American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fifth Edition copyright ©2022 by HarperCollins Publishers. All rights reserved.

 ma·te  3 (mä  t ā ) also ma·té (mä-t ĕ  ) 
 Share: 

 Tweet 

 n. 1. An evergreen shrub or small tree (Ilex paraguariensis) of South America, widely cultivated for its leaves, which are used to prepare a tealike beverage.
 2. A tealike beverage, popular in South America, made from the dried leaves of this plant.Also called Paraguay tea , yerba mate .
 3. An oval or rounded container or cup, traditionally made from a hollow calabash, in which this tea is prepared and served.

 [American Spanish , from Quechua mati , calabash container.]
 (click for a larger image) 
 mate 3 bombilla (foreground) and mate cup(background) 

 The American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fifth Edition copyright ©2022 by HarperCollins Publishers. All rights reserved.

 Indo-European & Semitic Roots Appendices
 Thousands of entries in the dictionary include etymologies that trace their origins back to reconstructed proto-languages. You can obtain more information about these forms in our online appendices:
 Indo-European Roots 
 Semitic Roots 
 The Indo-European appendix covers nearly half of the Indo-European roots that have left their mark on English words. A more complete treatment of Indo-European roots and the English words derived from them is available in our Dictionary of Indo-European Roots .

 American Heritage Dictionary Products
 The American Heritage Dictionary, 5th Edition

 The American Heritage Dictionary of Idioms

 The American Heritage Roget's Thesaurus

 Curious George's Dictionary

 The American Heritage Children's Dictionary

 CONTACT US 
 Customer Service 
 Make Me An Author 
 Ebooks Help with Glose Reader 
 ABOUT US 
 Company Profile 
 Leadership Team 
 Corporate Social Responsibility 
 HarperCollins Careers 
 HarperCollins Imprints 
 HarperGreen 
 Social Media Directory 
 Accessibility 
 FOR READERS 
 Browse Reading Guides 
 FOR AUTHORS 
 Submit a Manuscript 
 Report Piracy 
 Agent Portal 
 MEDIA 
 Publicity Contacts 
 Press Room 
 SERVICES 
 HarperCollins Speakers Bureau 
 Library Services 
 Academic Services 
 Desk & Exam Copies 
 Review Copies 
 OpenBook API 
 Marketing Partnerships 
 COVID-19 RESOURCES & PERMISSIONS 
 Permissions for Adult Online Readings 
 Permissions for Kids Online Readings 
 SALES & RIGHTS 
 Booksellers & Retailer Ordering 
 HarperCollins Catalogs 
 Permissions 
 Subsidiary Rights 
 Media Rights and Content Development 
 GLOSE APP 
 iPhone 
 Android 

 GLOBAL DIVISIONS 
 HarperCollins US 
 HarperCollins Canada 
 HarperCollins Christian 
 HarperCollins Australia 
 HarperCollins India 
 HarperCollins UK 

 Terms of Use  • 

 Terms of Sale  • 

 Your Ad Choices  • 

 Privacy Policy  • 

 California Privacy Policy 
 Do Not Sell My Personal Information 
 Copyright 2022 HarperCollins Publishers All rights reserved.
 *This website is best viewed in Chrome, Firefox, Microsoft Edge, or Safari. Some characters in pronunciations and etymologies cannot be displayed properly in Internet Explorer.