URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/paraffin
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Paraffin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Paraffin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of paraffin 

 paraffin (n.) 

 colorless, tasteless fatty crystalline substance obtained from petroleum, etc., by 1832, from German Paraffin , coined c. 1830 by German chemist Karl von Reichenbach (1788-1869), who first obtained it as a waxy substance from wood tar, irregularly from Latin parum "not very, too little," which probably is related to parvus "little, small" (from PIE root *pau- (1) "few, little") + affinis "associated with" (see affinity ).

 So called "in reference to the unreactive nature of the substance" [Flood].

 In chemischer Hinsicht zeichnet sich das Paraffin durch eine merkwürdige Indifferenz aus; daher auch sein Name (von parum affinis 
 ).  [J.C. Poggendorff, 
 "Annalen der Physik und Chemie," Leipzig, 1832] 

 [ 
 From a chemical point of view, paraffin is characterized by a strange indifference; hence its name (from parum affinis 
 ). ] 

 The liquid form (originally paraffin oil ) Reichenbach called eupion , but this was the standard meaning of paraffin in English by 1860.
 also from 1838 

 Entries linking to paraffin 

 affinity (n.) 

 c. 1300, "relation by marriage" (as opposed to consanguinity ), from Old French afinite "relationship, kinship; neighborhood, vicinity" (12c., Modern French affinité ), from Latin affinitatem (nominative affinitas ) "relationship by marriage; neighborhood," noun of state from affinis "adjoining, adjacent," also "kin by marriage," literally "bordering on," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + finis "a border, a boundary" (see finish (v.)).

 The spelling was re-Latinized in early Modern English. It has been used figuratively in English since c. 1600 of structural relationships in chemistry, philology, geometry, etc. The meaning "natural liking or attraction, a relationship as close as family between persons not related by blood" is from 1610s.

 *pau- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "few, little."

 It might form all or part of: catchpoll ; encyclopedia ; filly ; foal ; few ; hypnopedia ; impoverish ; orthopedic ; Paedophryne ; paraffin ; parvi- ; parvovirus ; paucity ; Paul ; pauper ; pedagogue ; pederasty ; pedo- ; pedophilia ; poco ; poltroon ; pony ; pool (n.2) "game similar to billiards;" poor ; poulterer ; poultry ; poverty ; puericulture ; puerile ; puerility ; puerperal ; pullet ; pullulate ; Punch ; Punchinello ; pupa ; pupil (n.1) "student;" pupil (n.2) "center of the eye;" puppet ; pusillanimous ; putti .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit potah "a young animal," putrah "son;" Avestan puthra- "son, child;" Greek pauros "few, little," pais (genitive paidos ) "child," pōlos "foal;" Latin paucus "few, little," paullus "little," parvus "little, small," pauper "poor," puer "child, boy," pullus "young animal;" Oscan puklu "child;" Old English feawe "not many, a small number," fola "young horse;" Old Norse fylja "young female horse;" Old Church Slavonic puta "bird;" Lithuanian putytis "young animal, young bird;" Albanian pele "mare."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ch 

 digraph used in Old French for the "tsh" sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French "tsha." This was introduced to English after the Norman Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste, charity, chief (

 wax 

 Old English weax "substance made by bees," from Proto-Germanic *wahsam (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German wahs, Old Norse vax, Dutch was, German Wachs), from PIE root *wokso- "wax" (source also of Old Church Slavonic voskŭ, Lithuanian vaškas, Polish wosk, Russian vosk "wa

 anime 

 c. 1985, Japanese for "animation," a word that seems to have arisen in Japan in the 1970s, said in Japanese sources to be an abbreviation of English animation. Manga (q.v.) is Japanese for "comic book, graphic novel," but anime largely are based on manga and until 1970s, anime we

 Maine 

 U.S. state, probably ultimately from French Maine, region in France (named for the river that runs through it, which has a name of Gaulish origin). The name was applied to that part of coastal North America by French explorers. The Maine law in late 19c.-early 20c. prohibitionist

 oil 

 late 12c., "olive oil," from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile "oil" (12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum "oil, olive oil" (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from Greek elaion "olive tree," from elaia (see olive). Nearly all the European 

 series 

 1610s, "a number or set of things of one kind arranged in a line, a continued succession of similar things," also of events following in order, from Latin series "row, chain, series, sequence, succession," from serere "to join, link, bind together, arrange, attach, put; join in s

 dyslexia 

 "a difficulty in reading due to a condition of the brain," 1885, from German dyslexie (1883), from Greek dys- "bad, abnormal, difficult" (see dys-) + lexis "word" (taken as "reading"), from legein "speak" (from PIE root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives meaning "to

 slang 

 1756, "special vocabulary of tramps or thieves" or any set of persons of low character, later "jargon of a particular profession" (1801). The sense of "very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty" is by 1818. Anatoly Liberman writes here an extensive account of 

 Share paraffin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/paraffin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/paraffin">Etymology of paraffin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of paraffin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/paraffin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of paraffin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/paraffin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of paraffin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/paraffin. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of paraffin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/paraffin (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near paraffin 
 parados 
 paradox 
 paradoxical 
 paradoxology 
 paraesthesia 
 paraffin 
 paragon 
 paragraph 
 Paraguay 
 parakeet 
 paralanguage 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix