URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/climate
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:00:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Climate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Climate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of climate 

 climate (n.) 

 late 14c., "horizontal zone of the earth's surface measured by lines parallel to the equator," from Old French climat "region, part of the earth," from Latin clima (genitive climatis ) "region; slope of the earth," from Greek klima "region, zone," literally "an inclination, slope," thus "slope of the earth from equator to pole," from a suffixed form of PIE root *klei- "to lean."

 Ancient geographers divided the earth into zones based on the angle of sun on the slope of the earth's surface and the length of daylight. Some reckoned 24 or 30 climates between Meroe on the upper Nile in Sudan and the mythical Riphaean Mountains which were supposed to bound the Arctic; a change of climate took place, going north, at a place where the day was a half hour longer or shorter, according to season, than the starting point. Others counted 7 (each dominated by a particular planet) or 12 (dominated by zodiac signs).

 Change of temperature gradually came to be considered more important, and by late 14c. the word was being used in the sense "a distinct region of the earth's surface considered with respect to weather." The sense shift to "combined results of weather associated with a region, characteristic condition of a country or region with reference to the variation of heat, cold, rainfall, wind, etc.," is attested by c. 1600. Figuratively, of mental or moral atmosphere, from 1660s.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to climate 

 acclimate (v.) 

 1792, "habituate (something) to a new climate," from French acclimater , verb formed from à "to" (see ad- ) + climat (see climate ). Intransitive sense "adapt to a new climate" is from 1861. Related: Acclimated ; acclimating . The extended form acclimatize is now more common in the older sense of this word (generally in reference to plants or animals), leaving to this word the intransitive sense, which more often refers to humans.

 climate change (n.) 

 1983, in the modern "human-caused global warming" sense. See climate (n.) + change (n.). Climatic change in a similar sense was in use from 1975.

 climatic 
 climatography 
 climatology 
 clime 
 microclimate 
 *klei- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mood 

 "emotional condition, state of mind as regards passion or feeling," c. 1300, from Old English mod "heart, frame of mind, spirit; courage, arrogance, pride; power, violence" (also used to translate Latin animus, mens), from Proto-Germanic *mōda- (source also of Old Saxon mod "mind

 clemency 

 Meaning "mildness of weather or climate" is 1660s (a sense also in Latin); clement (adj.) is older in both senses (late 15c...

 celestial 

 heavenly, sky-blue," from Latin caelestis "heavenly, pertaining to the sky," from caelum "heaven, sky; abode of the gods; climate...

 Boeotian 

 Athenians, who thought Boeotia "a canton hopelessly behind the times, a slow canton, as the nimble Attics would say, a glorious climate...

 lucus a non lucendo 

 Migration, change of climate, or felling of the woods might have shifted the meaning....

 concord 

 "Concord Hymn"] The Concord grape was so called by 1853, from the Massachusetts town, where it was bred for the local climate...

 status 

 1670s, "height" of a situation or condition, later "legal standing of a person" (1791), from Latin status "condition, position, state, manner, attitude," from past-participle stem of stare "to stand" (from PIE root *sta- "to stand, make or be firm"). In law, the meaning "legal st

 doom 

 Middle English doome, from Old English dom "a law, statute, decree; administration of justice, judgment; justice, equity, righteousness," from Proto-Germanic *domaz (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian dom, Old Norse domr, Old High German tuom "judgment, decree," Gothic doms

 condition 

 mid-14c., condicioun, "particular mode of being of a person or thing," also "a requisite or prerequisite, a stipulation," from Old French condicion "stipulation; state; behavior; social status" (12c., Modern French condition), from Medieval Latin conditionem (nominative conditio)

 touch 

 late 13c., "make deliberate physical contact with," from Old French tochier "to touch, hit, knock; mention, deal with" (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare "to knock, strike" as a bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative orig

 Share climate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/climate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/climate">Etymology of climate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of climate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/climate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of climate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/climate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of climate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/climate. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of climate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/climate (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near climate 
 cliff 
 cliff-hanger 
 Clifford 
 climacteric 
 climactic 
 climate 
 climate change 
 climatic 
 climatography 
 climatological 
 climatologist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix