URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/degree
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:24:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Degree - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Degree - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of degree 

 degree (n.) 

 c. 1200, "a step, a stair," also "a position in a hierarchy," and "a stage of progress, a single movement toward an end," from Old French degré (12c.) "a step (of a stair), pace, degree (of relationship), academic degree; rank, status, position," which is said to be from Vulgar Latin *degradus "a step," from Latin de- "down" (see de- ) + gradus "a step; a step climbed;" figuratively "a step toward something, a degree of something rising by stages" (from PIE root *ghredh- "to walk, go").

 A word of wide use in Middle English; in 14c. it also meant "way, manner; condition, state, standing." Most extended senses in Middle English are from the notion of a hierarchy of steps. Genealogical sense of "a certain remove in the line of blood" is from mid-14c.; educational sense of "an academic rank conferred by diploma" is from late 14c. By degrees "gradually, by stages" is from late 14c.

 Other transferred senses are from the notion of "one of a number of subdivisions of something extended in space or time," hence "intensive quality, measure, extent." The meaning "1/360th of a circle" is from late 14c. (The division of the circle into 360 degrees was known in Babylon and Egypt; the number is perhaps from the daily motion of the sun through the zodiac in the course of a year.) From 1540s as "a measure of heat;" the specific use as a unit of temperature on a thermometer is by 1727. In reference to crime, by 1670s as "one of certain distinctions of culpability;" in U.S. use by 1821 as "one of the phases of the same kind of crime."
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to degree 

 de- 

 active word-forming element in English and in many verbs inherited from French and Latin, from Latin de "down, down from, from, off; concerning" (see de ), also used as a prefix in Latin, usually meaning "down, off, away, from among, down from," but also "down to the bottom, totally" hence "completely" (intensive or completive), which is its sense in many English words.

 As a Latin prefix it also had the function of undoing or reversing a verb's action, and hence it came to be used as a pure privative — "not, do the opposite of, undo" — which is its primary function as a living prefix in English, as in defrost (1895), defuse (1943), de-escalate (1964), etc. In some cases, a reduced form of dis- .

 *ghredh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to walk, go." 

 It might form all or part of: aggress ; aggression ; aggressive ; centigrade ; congress ; degrade ; degree ; degression ; digress ; digression ; egress ; gradation ; grade ; gradual ; graduate ; grallatorial ; gravigrade ; ingredient ; ingress ; plantigrade ; progress ; progression ; regress ; regression ; retrograde ; retrogress ; tardigrade ; transgress ; transgression .

 It might also be the source of: Latin gradus "a step, a pace, gait," figuratively "a step toward something, a degree of something rising by stages;" gradi "to walk, step, go;" Lithuanian gridiju, gridyti "to go, wander;" Old Church Slavonic gredo "to come;" Old Irish in-greinn "he pursues."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 level 

 mid-14c., "tool to indicate a horizontal line," from Old French livel "a level" (13c.), ultimately from Latin libella "a balance, level" (also a monetary unit), diminutive of libra "balance, scale, unit of weight" (see Libra). Spanish nivel, Modern French niveau are from the same

 stage 

 mid-13c., "horizontal division of a structure, floor or story of a building;" early 14c., "raised platform used for public display" (also of the platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage "building, dwelling place; stage for performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey

 point 

 c. 1200, pointe, "minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc.," a merger of two words, both ultimately from Latin pungere "to prick, pierce," from a nasalized form of PIE root *peuk- "to prick." The Latin neuter past participle punctum was used as a noun, me

 least 

 phrase at least "not to say more than is certainly true" is Middle English æt læstan, from the notion of "at the lowest degree...As a noun, "smallest admissible quantity or degree," from early 12c.; as an adverb, Old English læst "in the least degree...

 baccalaureate 

 1620s, "university degree of a bachelor," from Modern Latin baccalaureatus, from baccalaureus "student with the first degree...," an alteration of Medieval Latin baccalarius "one who has attained the lowest degree in a university, an advanced student...This is from the word's adjectival sense of "pertaining to the university degree of bachelor."...

 grade 

 1510s, "degree of measurement," from French grade "grade, degree" (16c.), from Latin gradus "a step, a pace, gait; a step...climbed (on a ladder or stair);" figuratively "a step toward something, a degree of something rising by stages," from gradi...It replaced Middle English gree "a step, degree in a series," from Old French grei "step," from Latin gradus....

 extreme 

 early 15c., "outermost, farthest;" also "utter, total, in greatest degree" (opposed to moderate), from Old French extreme...(13c.), from Latin extremus "outermost, utmost, farthest, last; the last part; extremity, boundary; highest or greatest degree...

 acme 

 "highest point," 1560s, from Greek akmē "(highest) point, edge; peak of anything," hence "prime (of life, etc.), the best time" (from PIE *ak-ma-, suffixed form of root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce"). In English it was written in Greek letters until c. 1620. The 

 mace 

 "heavy one-handed metal weapon, often with a spiked head, for striking," c. 1300, from Old French mace "a club, scepter" (Modern French massue), from Vulgar Latin *mattea (source also of Italian mazza, Spanish maza "mace"), from Latin mateola (in Late Latin also matteola) "a kind

 climax 

 1580s, in the rhetorical sense ("a chain of reasoning in graduating steps from weaker to stronger"), from Late Latin climax (genitive climacis), from Greek klimax "propositions rising in effectiveness," literally "ladder," from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- "to lean." Original

 Share degree 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/degree Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/degree">Etymology of degree by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of degree. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/degree Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of degree," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/degree. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of degree." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/degree. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of degree." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/degree (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near degree 
 deglutition 
 degradable 
 degradation 
 degrade 
 degrease 
 degree 
 degression 
 degustation 
 dehire 
 dehiscence 
 dehorn 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix