URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/accumulate
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:40:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Accumulate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Accumulate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of accumulate 

 accumulate (v.) 

 1520s, "to heap up" (transitive), from Latin accumulatus , past participle of accumulare "to heap up, amass," from ad "to," here perhaps emphatic (see ad- ), + cumulare "heap up," from cumulus "heap" (from suffixed form of PIE root *keue- "to swell"). From 1759 in intransitive sense of "grow in size or number." Related: Accumulated ; accumulating .
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to accumulate 

 accumulated (adj.) 

 "collected into a mass or quantity," 1690s, past-participle adjective from accumulate (v.). The earlier adjective was accumulate (1530s, from Latin past participle accumulatus ).

 accumulative (adj.) 

 "tending to accumulation; cumulative," 1650s, from Latin stem accumulat- (see accumulate ) + -ive . Related: Accumulatively ; accumulativeness .

 ad- 
 *keue- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 conglomerate 

 "gathered into a ball or rounded mass," 1570s, from Latin conglomeratus, past participle of conglomerare "to roll together, concentrate, heap up," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + glomerare "to gather into a ball, collect," from glomus (genitive glomeris

 gather 

 Old English gadrian, gædrian "unite, agree, assemble; gather, collect, store up" (transitive and intransitive), used of flowers, thoughts, persons; from Proto-Germanic *gaduron "come or bring together, unite" (source also of Old English gæd "fellowship, companionship," gædeling "

 collect 

 early 15c., "gather into one place or group" (transitive), from Old French collecter "to collect" (late 14c.), from Latin collectus, past participle of colligere "gather together," from assimilated form of com "together" (see com-) + legere "to gather," from PIE root *leg- (1) "t

 exaggerate 

 1530s, "to pile up, accumulate," from Latin exaggeratus, past participle of exaggerare "heighten, amplify, magnify," literally..."to heap, pile, load, fill," from ex, here probably "thoroughly" (see ex-), + aggerare "heap up, accumulate," figuratively...

 acquire 

 Modern French acquérir), from Vulgar Latin *acquaerere, corresponding to Latin acquirere/adquirere "to get in addition to, accumulate...

 construct 

 the parts of in their proper place and order," from Latin constructus, past participle of construere "pile up together, accumulate...

 congregate 

 (implied in congregated), "accumulate," originally of fluids in the body, from Latin congregatus, past participle of congregare...

 able 

 "having sufficient power or means," early 14c., from Old French (h)able "capable; fitting, suitable; agile, nimble" (14c.), from Latin habilem, habilis "easily handled, apt," verbal adjective from habere "to hold" (from PIE root *ghabh- "to give or receive"). "Easy to be held," h

 bale 

 "large bundle or package of merchandise prepared for transportation," early 14c., from Old French bale "rolled-up bundle" (13c., Modern French balle), from Frankish or some other Germanic source (such as Old High German balla "ball"), from Proto-Germanic *ball- (from PIE root *bh

 scratch 

 c. 1400, scracchen, transitive, "mark or wound slightly on the surface by a scraping or tearing action with something rough, sharp, or pointed," probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning "to scratch," both of uncertain origin. Also compare scr-. Relat

 Share accumulate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/accumulate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/accumulate">Etymology of accumulate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of accumulate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/accumulate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of accumulate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/accumulate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of accumulate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/accumulate. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of accumulate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/accumulate (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near accumulate 
 accretion 
 accrual 
 accrue 
 acculturate 
 acculturation 
 accumulate 
 accumulated 
 accumulation 
 accumulative 
 accuracy 
 accurate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix