URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lady
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lady - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lady - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lady 

 lady (n.) 

 c. 1200, lafdi , lavede , from Old English hlæfdige (Northumbrian hlafdia , Mercian hlafdie ), "mistress of a household, wife of a lord," apparently literally "one who kneads bread," from hlaf "bread" (see loaf (n.)) + -dige "maid," which is related to dæge "maker of dough" (which is the first element in dairy ; see dey (n.1)). Also compare lord (n.)). Century Dictionary finds this etymology "improbable," and OED rates it "not very plausible with regard to sense," but no one seems to have a better explanation.

 The medial -f- disappeared 14c. (compare woman , head , had ). The word is not found outside English except where borrowed from it. The sense of "woman of superior position in society" is c. 1200; that of "woman whose manners and sensibilities befit her for high rank in society" is from 1861 ( ladylike suggesting this sense is attested from 1580s, and ladily from c. 1400). The meaning "woman chosen as an object of chivalrous love" is from early 14c. Used commonly as an address to any woman since 1890s.

 Applied since Old English to the Holy Virgin, hence many extended usages in plant names, place names, etc., from genitive singular hlæfdigan , which in Middle English merged with the nominative, so that lady- often represents (Our) Lady's , as in ladybug .

 Lady Day (late 13c.) was the festival of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary (March 25). Ladies' man "one fond of the society of women and zealous in paying them petty attentions" is by 1690s (Shadwell, "The Volunteers"); lady-killer "man supposed to be dangerously fascinating to women" is from 1811. Lady of pleasure recorded from 1640s. Lady's slipper as a type of orchid is from 1590s.
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to lady 

 dey (n.1) 

 Old English dæge "female servant, woman who handles food in a household, housekeeper," from Proto-Germanic *daigjon (source also of Old Norse deigja "maid, female servant," Swedish deja "dairymaid"), from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build." Now obsolete (though OED says, "Still in living use in parts of Scotland"), it forms the first element of dairy and the second of lady .

 OED says the ground sense of the ancient word seems to be "kneader, maker of bread;" it would have then advanced via Old Norse deigja and Middle English daie to mean "female servant, woman employed in a house or on a farm." By c. 1200 it had acquired the specific sense of "woman in charge of milking and making butter and cheese, dairy-maid." Dæge as "servant" is the second element in many surnames ending in -day (such as Faraday , and perhaps Doubleday, if it means "servant of the Twin," etc.).

 had 

 past tense and past participle of have , from Old English gehæfd . Assimilation of -f- to a following consonant is typical (as also in woman , lord , lady , head (n.), leman ). Used since late Old English as an auxiliary to make pluperfect tense-phrases. You never had it so good (1946) was said to be the stock answer to any complaints about U.S. Army life.

 head 
 ladybug 
 ladylike 
 loaf 
 lord 
 woman 
 ladies 
 ladify 
 ladybird 
 ladyfinger 
 lady-love 
 ladyship 
 landlady 
 *dheigh- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 loaf 

 late 13c., from Old English hlaf "a portion of bread baked in a mass of definite form," from Proto-Germanic *khlaibuz, the common Germanic word for "bread" (source also of Old Norse hleifr, Swedish lev, Old Frisian hlef, Old High German hleib, German Laib, Gothic hlaifs "bread, l

 lord 

 mid-13c., laverd, loverd, from Old English hlaford "master of a household, ruler, feudal lord, superior; husband," also "God," translating Latin dominus, Greek kyrios in the New Testament, Hebrew yahweh in the Old (though Old English dryhten was more frequent). Old English hlafor

 frau 

 "married woman," 1813, from German Frau "woman, wife," from Middle High German vrouwe "lady, mistress," from Old High German...frouwa "mistress, lady" (9c.), from Proto-Germanic *frowo "lady" (source also of Old English freo "woman, lady," Middle...Swedish fru, Danish frue are ultimately from Dutch; the proper Scandinavian form is preserved in Old Norse freyja "lady,"...

 madonna 

 1580s, Italian title of address or courtesy, equivalent to madam; from c. 1600 as a noun, "an Italian lady," from Italian...madonna, from Old Italian ma donna (Italian mia donna) "my lady," from ma "my" + donna "lady," from Latin domina "lady,...

 damsel 

 damisele, "young, unmarried woman," especially a maiden of gentle birth, also "maid in waiting, handmaiden assisting a lady...," from Anglo-French damaisele and Old French dameisele "woman of noble birth" (Modern French demoiselle "young lady"), modified...(by association with dame) from earlier donsele, from Gallo-Roman *domnicella, diminutive of Latin domina "lady" (see dame...

 prima donna 

 also primadonna, 1782, "principal female singer in an opera," from Italian prima donna "first lady," from Latin prima, fem.... of primus "first" (see prime (adj.)) + domina "lady" (see dame)....

 madam 

 c. 1300, formal term of address to a lady (a woman of rank or authority, or the mistress of a household), from Old French ma dame, literally "my lady," from Latin mea domina (see Donna, and compare madonna). It became a conventional term of address to women of any degree (but chi

 dame 

 c. 1200, "a mother," also "a woman of rank or high social position; superior of a convent," and an address for a woman of rank or position, used respectfully to other ladies, from Old French dame "lady, mistress, wife," from Late Latin domna, from Latin domina "lady, mistress of 

 made 

 late 14c., "created, wrought, fabricated, constructed" (of words, stories, etc.), from Middle English maked, from Old English macod "made," past participle of macian "to make" (see make (v.)). From 1570s as "artificially produced, formed independently of natural development." To 

 Share lady 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lady Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lady">Etymology of lady by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lady. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lady Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lady," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lady. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lady." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lady. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lady." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lady (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lady 
 ladify 
 Ladin 
 lading 
 Ladino 
 ladle 
 lady 
 ladybird 
 ladybug 
 ladyfinger 
 ladylike 
 lady-love 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix