URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/agent
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:37:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Agent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Agent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of agent 

 agent (n.) 

 late 15c., "one who acts," from Latin agentem (nominative agens ) "effective, powerful," present participle of agere "to set in motion, drive forward; to do, perform; keep in movement" (from PIE root *ag- "to drive, draw out or forth, move").

 The meaning "any natural force or substance which produces a phenomenon" is from 1550s. The meaning "deputy, representative" is from 1590s. The sense of "spy, secret agent" is attested by 1916.
 also from late 15c. 

 agent (adj.) 

 "acting, sustaining action," 1610s, from agent (n.).
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to agent 

 Agent Orange (n.) 

 powerful defoliant used by U.S. military in the Vietnam War, reported to have been used from 1961; so called from the color strip on the side of the container, which distinguished it from Agent Blue , Agent White , etc., other herbicides used by the U.S. military; see agent (n.). Banned from April 1970.

 double agent (n.) 

 "spy who works for two mutually hostile countries," but usually is loyal to only one of them, by 1920, from double (adj.) + agent (n.).

 reagent 
 *ag- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 factor 

 early 15c., "commercial agent, deputy, one who buys or sells for another," from French facteur "agent, representative" (Old French factor, faitor "doer, author, creator"), from Latin factor "doer, maker, performer," in Medieval Latin, "agent," agent noun from past participle stem

 broker 

 mid-14c. (mid-13c. in surnames), "commercial agent, factor," also "an agent in sordid business," from Anglo-French brocour "small trader," from abrokur "retailer of wine, tapster;" perhaps from Portuguese alborcar "barter," but more likely from Old French brocheor, from brochier 

 procurator 

 "steward or manager of a household;" also "a provider" (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French procuratour "attorney, agent..., proxy, spokesman" (13c., Modern French procurateur) and directly from Latin procurator "manager, overseer, agent, deputy...," agent noun from past-participle stem of procurare "to manage, take care of" (see procure)....

 motor 

 which imparts motion," mid-15c., "controller, prime mover (in reference to God);" from Late Latin motor, literally "mover," agent...Sense of "agent or force that produces mechanical motion" is first recorded 1660s; that of "machine that supplies motive...

 receiver 

 goods); person who knowingly harbors criminals," also "government official appointed to collect or receive money due," agent...noun from receive, or from Old French recevere (Modern French receveur), agent noun from recievere....

 publicist 

 [The Nation, Nov. 22, 1917] Meaning "press agent" is from 1925 (publicity agent attested by 1900); publicitor also was tried...

 Realtor 

 1916, "real estate agent," American English, as though an agent noun from realty, coined by real estate agent Charles N....

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 bleach 

 Middle English blechen, from Old English blæcan, of cloth or fabric, "to make white by removing color, whiten" (by exposure to chemical agents or the sun), from Proto-Germanic *blaikjan "to make white" (source also of Old Saxon blek, Old Norse bleikr, Dutch bleek, Old High German

 proxy 

 early 15c., procusie, proccy, prokecye, "agency of one who acts instead of another, office or authority of a substitute; letter of power of attorney," contraction of Anglo-French procuracie (c. 1300), from Medieval Latin procuratia "administration," from Latin procuratio "a carin

 Share agent 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/agent Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/agent">Etymology of agent by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of agent. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/agent Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of agent," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/agent. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of agent." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/agent. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of agent." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/agent (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near agent 
 ageism 
 ageless 
 agency 
 agenda 
 agendum 
 agent 
 Agent Orange 
 agential 
 age-old 
 aggie 
 agglomerate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close