URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dim
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:36:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dim - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dim - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dim 

 dim (adj.) 

 Old English dimm "dark, gloomy, obscure; not clearly seen, indistinct," from Proto-Germanic *dimbaz (source also of Old Norse dimmr , Old Frisian dim , Old High German timber "dark, black, somber"). Not known outside Germanic.

 Of eyes, "not seeing clearly," early 13c. Of sound from early 14c.; of light, "not bright, faintly luminous," from early 14c. Modern slang sense of "dull of apprehension, stupid" is from 1892; the sense of "dull-witted" also was in Middle English (mid-13c.). Related: Dimly ; dimness .

 dim (v.) 

 early 13c., dimmen , of eyes, "become unable to see clearly," perhaps in Old English, from the source of dim (adj.). Sense of "become dim, faint, or obscure, fade" is from early 14c. Transitive sense of "to make dim, faint, or obscure" is from late 14c. Related: Dimmed ; dimming .

 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to dim 

 bedim (v.) 

 "make dim, obscure, darken," 1560s, from be- + dim . Related: Bedimmed ; bedimming .

 dimmer (n.) 

 "one who or that which makes dim," 1822, agent noun from dim (v.). Of mechanisms for reducing the brightness of electric lights, from 1905.

 dimmish 
 dimwit 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 slur 

 "deliberate slight, disparaging remark," c. 1600, from dialectal slur "thin or fluid mud" (Middle English slore, mid-15c.), which is of obscure origin. It seems to be cognate with continental Germanic words having to do with muddy sloppiness, such as Middle Low German sluren, Mid

 blind 

 Old English blind "destitute of sight," also "dark, enveloped in darkness, obscure; unintelligent, lacking mental perception," probably from Proto-Germanic *blindaz "blind" (source also of Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Dutch and German blind, Old Norse blindr, Gothic blinds "blind"), p

 dip 

 Old English dyppan "to plunge or immerse temporarily in water, to baptize by immersion," from Proto-Germanic *daupejanan (source also of Old Norse deypa "to dip," Danish døbe "to baptize," Old Frisian depa, Dutch dopen, German taufen, Gothic daupjan "to baptize"), related to Old 

 sfumato 

 denoting a style of painting in which tones are blended and outlines blurred and dim, giving a misty or smoky appearance,...

 Leo 

 The dim constellation Leo Minor was introduced 1690 by Hevelius....

 sandblind 

 also sand-blind, "half-blind, partially blind, dim-sighted," c. 1400, probably altered (by influence of unrelated sand (n...

 tarnish 

 tarnished; discolor," from Old French terniss-, present-participle stem of ternir "dull the luster or brightness of, make dim...

 darken 

 c. 1300, derken, "to make dark or darker, deprive of light;" early 14c. (intransitive), "to grow or become dark," from dark (adj.) + -en (1). The more usual verb in Middle English in both senses was simply dark, as it is in Chaucer and Shakespeare, and darken did not predominate 

 focus 

 1640s, "point of convergence," from Latin focus "hearth, fireplace" (also, figuratively, "home, family"), which is of unknown origin. Used in post-classical times for "fire" itself; taken by Kepler (1604) in a mathematical sense for "point of convergence," perhaps on analogy of t

 obliterate 

 "blot out, cause to disappear, remove all traces of, wipe out," c. 1600, from Latin obliteratus, past participle of obliterare "cause to disappear, blot out (a writing), erase, efface," figuratively "cause to be forgotten, blot out a remembrance," from ob "against" (see ob-) + li

 Share dim 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dim Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dim">Etymology of dim by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dim. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dim Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dim," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dim. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dim." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dim. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dim." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dim (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dim 
 dilute 
 dilution 
 diluvial 
 diluvian 
 diluvium 
 dim 
 dim sum 
 dime 
 dimension 
 Dimetrodon 
 diminish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix