URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alley
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alley - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alley - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alley 

 alley (n.1) 

 mid-14c., "passage in a house; open passage between buildings; walkway in a garden," from Old French alee (13c., Modern French allée ) "a path, passage, way, corridor," also "a going," from fem. of ale , past participle of aler "to go," which is of uncertain origin. It might be a contraction of Latin ambulare "to walk" (Watkins, see amble (v.)), or it might be from Gallo-Roman allari , a back-formation from Latin allatus "having been brought to" [Barnhart]. Compare sense evolution of gate .

 Applied by c. 1500 to "long narrow enclosure for playing at bowls, skittles, etc." Used in place names from c. 1500. "In U.S. applied to what in London is called a Mews " [OED], and in American English especially of a back-lane parallel to a main street (1729). To be up someone's alley "in someone's neighborhood" (literally or figuratively) is from 1931; alley-cat (n.) is attested by 1890.
 also from mid-14c. 

 alley (n.2) 

 also ally , type of large playing marble (generally one of stone as opposed to terra cotta), 1720, said to be a shortening of alabaster .
 also from 1720 

 Entries linking to alley 

 alabaster (n.) 

 "translucent, whitish, marble-like mineral used for vases, ornaments, and busts," late 14c., from Old French alabastre (12c., Modern French albâtre ), from Latin alabaster "colored rock used to make boxes and vessels for unguents," from later Greek alabastros (earlier albastos ) "vase for perfumes," probably a foreign word, perhaps from Egyptian 'a-labaste "vessel of the goddess Bast." Used figuratively for whiteness and smoothness from 1570s. "The spelling in 16-17th c. is almost always alablaster ..." [OED].

 amble (v.) 

 "to move easily and gently without hard shocks," as a horse does when it first lifts the two legs on one side and then the two on the other, early 14c., from Old French ambler , in reference to a horse or other quadruped, "go at a steady, easy pace" (12c.), from Latin ambulare "to walk, to go about, take a walk," perhaps a compound of ambi- "around" (from PIE root *ambhi- "around") and -ulare , from a Proto-Italic *ala- "to wander," from PIE root *el- "to go" (source also of Greek ale "wandering," alaomai "wander about;" Latvian aluot "go around or astray"), as per de Vaan. Until 1590s used only of horses or persons on horseback. Related: Ambled ; ambling .

 gate 
 mews 
 alleyway 
 allons 
 pis aller 
 *ambhi- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gate 

 "opening, entrance," Old English geat (plural geatu) "gate, door, opening, passage, hinged framework barrier," from Proto-Germanic *gatan (source also of Old Norse gat "opening, passage," Old Saxon gat "eye of a needle, hole," Old Frisian gat "hole, opening," Dutch gat "gap, hole

 mews 

 "stables grouped around an open yard," 1630s, from Mewes, name of the royal stables at Charing Cross, built 1534 on the site of the former royal mews (attested from late 14c.), where the king's hawks were kept (see mew (n.2)). Extended by 1630s to "an alley or court in a large to

 impasse 

 1763, "blind alley, dead end," from French impasse "impassable road; blind alley; impasse" (18c.), from assimilated form...

 mall 

 James's Park, London (so called from 1670s, earlier Maill, 1640s), which was so called because it formerly was an open alley...This was a once-popular game played with a wooden ball in a kind of smooth alley boarded in at each side, in which the ball...was struck with a mallet to send it through an iron arch placed at the end of the alley....

 Skee-Ball 

 1909, proprietary name (Skee-Ball Alley Company, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.), the first element said to represent the old alternative...

 gamer 

 Quite a few of the gamers we've encountered during our monthly strolls down "Arcade Alley" suffer the same chronic frustration...

 labyrinth 

 But Beekes finds this "speculative" and compares laura "narrow street, narrow passage, alley, quarter," also identified as...

 tester 

 "one who tests, puts to trial, or assays," 1660s, agent noun from test (v.). Earlier "a crucible" for trying metals by heating them (mid-15c.)...."canopy over a four-post bed," mid-14c., from Medieval Latin testerium, from testera "head-stall" of the bridle of a horse, extended u

 street 

 Middle English strete, "road in a city or town," also "road from one city or town to another," from Old English stret (Mercian, Kentish), stræt (West Saxon) "street, high road," from Late Latin strata, used elliptically for via strata "paved road." Latin strata is fem. past parti

 lean 

 c. 1200, from Old English hlinian "to recline, lie down, rest; bend or incline" (Mercian hleonian, Northumbrian hlionian), from Proto-Germanic *hlinen (source also of Old Saxon hlinon, Old Frisian lena, Middle Dutch lenen, Dutch leunen, Old High German hlinen, German lehnen "to l

 Share alley 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alley Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alley">Etymology of alley by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alley. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alley Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alley," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alley. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alley." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alley. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alley." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alley (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alley 
 allergic 
 allergist 
 allergy 
 alleviate 
 alleviation 
 alley 
 alleyway 
 all-fired 
 allgates 
 alliance 
 allied 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix