URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/architect
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:18:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Architect - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Architect - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of architect 

 architect (n.) 

 "person skilled in the art of building, one who plans and designs buildings and supervises their construction," 1560s, from French architecte , from Latin architectus , from Greek arkhitekton "master builder, director of works," from arkhi- "chief" (see archon ) + tekton "builder, carpenter" (from PIE root *teks- "to weave," also "to fabricate").

 Old English used heahcræftiga "high-crafter" as a loan-translation of Latin architectus . Middle English had architectour "superintendent." Extended sense of "one who plans or contrives" anything is from 1580s.

 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to architect 

 archon (n.) 

 one of the nine chief magistrates of ancient Athens, 1650s, from Greek arkhon "ruler, commander, chief, captain," noun use of present participle of arkhein "be the first," thence "to begin, begin from or with, make preparation for;" also "to rule, lead the way, govern, rule over, be leader of," a word of uncertain origin.

 architectonic (adj.) 

 1640s ( architectonical is from 1590s), "pertaining to architecture," from Latin architectonicus , from Greek arkhitektonikos "pertaining to a master builder," from arkhitekton "chief workman" (see architect ). The metaphysical sense, "pertaining to systematization of knowledge," is from 1801.

 architecture 
 *teks- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 architecture 

 1560s, "the art of building," especially of fine or beautiful building; "tasteful application of scientific and traditional rules of good construction to the materials at hand," from French architecture, from Latin architectura, from architectus "master builder, chief workman" (s

 designer 

 1640s, "one who schemes or plots;" agent noun from design (v.). In manufacturing or the fine arts, "one who makes an artistic design or a construction plan" is from 1660s. In fashion, as an adjective, "bearing the label of a famous clothing designer" (thus presumed to be expensiv

 engineer 

 mid-14c., enginour, "constructor of military engines," from Old French engigneor "engineer, architect, maker of war-engines...

 canoe 

 THEY have a very expressive term at the West, in speaking of a man who would be the architect of his own fortune, that he...

 hansom 

 Hansom (1803-1882), English architect who designed such a vehicle c. 1834....

 brownstone 

 [The American Architect, Dec. 8, 1920]...

 creator 

 c. 1300, "the Supreme Being, God considered as the creator of the universe" (also "the communion elements; a crucifix"), from Anglo-French creatour, Old French creator (12c., academic and liturgical, alongside popular creere, Modern French créateur), from Latin creator "creator, 

 wont 

 "accustomed," Middle English contraction of Old English wunod, past participle of wunian "to dwell, inhabit, exist; be accustomed, be used to," from Proto-Germanic *wunen "to be content, to rejoice" (source also of Old Saxon wunon, Old Frisian wonia "to dwell, remain, be used to,

 town 

 Old English tun "enclosure, garden, field, yard; farm, manor; homestead, dwelling house, mansion;" later "group of houses, village, farm," from Proto-Germanic *tunaz, *tunan "fortified place" (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian tun "fence, hedge," Middle Dutch tuun 

 algorithm 

 1690s, "Arabic system of computation," from French algorithme, refashioned (under mistaken connection with Greek arithmos "number") from Old French algorisme "the Arabic numeral system" (13c.), from Medieval Latin algorismus, a mangled transliteration of Arabic al-Khwarizmi "nati

 Share architect 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/architect Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/architect">Etymology of architect by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of architect. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/architect Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of architect," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/architect. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of architect." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/architect. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of architect." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/architect (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near architect 
 arch-fiend 
 Archibald 
 Archilochian 
 Archimedean 
 archipelago 
 architect 
 architectonic 
 architectural 
 architecture 
 architrave 
 archival 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix