URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/match
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Match - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Match - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of match 

 match (n.1) 

 "stick for striking fire." Late 14c., macche , "wick of a candle or lamp," a sense now obsolete, from Old French meiche "wick of a candle," from Vulgar Latin *micca/*miccia (source also of Catalan metxa , Spanish mecha , Italian miccia ), which is of uncertain origin, probably ultimately from Latin myxa , from Greek myxa "lamp wick," originally "mucus," based on notion of wick dangling from the spout of a lamp like snot from a nostril, from PIE root *meug- "slimy, slippery" (see mucus ). English snot also had a secondary sense from late 14c. of "snuff of a candle, burnt part of a wick," surviving at least to late 19c. in northern dialects.

 The modern spelling is from mid-15c. The meaning "piece of cord or tow soaked in sulfur, used for lighting fires, lamps, candles, etc." is from 1530. It was used by 1830 for the modern type of sulfur-tipped wooden friction match, which were perfected about that time, and competed with lucifer for much of 19c. as the name for this invention. An earlier version consisted of a thin strip of wood tipped with combustible matter that required contact with phosphorous carried separately in a box or vial.

 In the manufacture of matches much trouble has been occasioned by the use of phosphorous .... In some of the small and poorly-managed factories the men and children are never free from the fumes; their clothes and breath are luminous in the dark, and in the daytime white fumes may be seen escaping from them whenever they are seated by the fire. ... The danger arising from the use of matches was magnified, because they could sometimes be seen in the dark, were liable to ignite on a warm shelf, and were poisonous to such an extent that children had been killed by using them as playthings. [John A. Garver, "Matches," in The Popular Science Monthly, August 1877]

 match (n.2) 

 "one of a pair, an equal." Middle English macche , from Old English mæcca "companion, mate, one of a pair, wife, husband, one suited to another, an equal," from gemæcca , from Proto-Germanic *gamakon "fitting well together" (source also of Old Saxon gimaco "fellow, equal," Old High German gimah "comfort, ease," Middle High German gemach "comfortable, quiet," German gemach "easy, leisurely"), from PIE root *mag- "to knead, fashion, fit."

 Meaning "person or thing that exactly corresponds to another" is from c. 1400. Middle English sense of "matching adversary, person able to contend with another" (c. 1300) led to sporting meaning "contest," which is attested from 1540s. Meaning "a matrimonial compact" is from 1570s.

 match (v.) 

 mid-14c., macchen , "be able to compete with, be an adequate opponent for;" late 14c., "to join one to another" (originally especially in marriage), from match (n.2). Meaning "to place (one) in conflict with (another)" is from c. 1400. That of "to pair with a view to fitness, find or provide something to agree or harmonize with" is from 1520s; that of "to be equal to" is from 1590s. Related: Matched ; matching .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to match 

 Lucifer 

 Old English Lucifer "Satan," also "morning star, Venus in the morning sky before sunrise," also an epithet or name of Diana, from Latin Lucifer "morning star," noun use of adjective, literally "light-bringing," from lux (genitive lucis ) "light" (from PIE root *leuk- "light, brightness") + ferre "to carry, bear," from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear children." Venus in the evening sky was Hesperus .

 Belief that it was the proper name of Satan began with its use in Bible to translate Greek Phosphoros , which translates Hebrew Helel ben Shahar in Isaiah xiv.12 — "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!" [KJV] Because of the mention of a fall from Heaven, the verse was interpreted spiritually by Christians as a reference to Satan, even though it is literally a reference to the King of Babylon (see Isaiah xiv.4). Sometimes rendered daystar in later translations.

 As "friction match," 1831, short for Lucifer match (1831). Among the 16c. adjectival forms were luciferian , luciferine. Also luciferous , which Blount (1656) defines as "that bringeth or causeth light" but Cockeram (1623) has as "Haughtie, proud."

 There was a noted Bishop Lucifer of Cagliari in Sardinia in the 4th century, a strict anti-Arian regarded locally as a saint.

 mucus (n.) 

 "viscid fluid secreted by the mucous membranes of animals," 1660s (replacing Middle English mucilage ), from Latin mucus "slime, mold, mucus of the nose, snot," from PIE root *meug- "slippery, slimy," with derivatives referring to wet or slimy substances or conditions (source also of Latin emungere "to sneeze out, blow one's nose," mucere "be moldy or musty," Greek myssesthai "to blow the nose," myxa "mucus;" Sanskrit muncati "he releases"). Old English had horh , which may be imitative.

 snot 
 match-board 
 match-book 
 matchbox 
 match-girl 
 match-head 
 matchless 
 matchlock 
 matchmaker 
 match-wood 
 mismatch 
 overmatch 
 rematch 
 unmatched 
 *mag- 
 See All Related Words (17) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 snot 

 late 14c., snotte, from Old English gesnot "nasal mucus," from Proto-Germanic *snuttan (source also of Old Frisian snotta, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snotte, Middle Low German snute), from the same base as snout (q.v.). Old English had also a verb snite "wipe or pick one'

 fit 

 1680s, "process of fitting," from fit (v.). From 1823 as "the fitting of one thing to another;" 1831 as "the way something fits."..."paroxysm, sudden attack" (as of anger), 1540s, probably via Middle English fit (n.) "painful, exciting experience" (early 14c.), from Old English f

 correspond 

 1520s, "to be in agreement, to be in harmony with," from French correspondre (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin correspondere "correspond, harmonize, reciprocate," from assimilated form of com "together, with (each other)" (see com-) + respondere "to answer" (see respond). Or

 carousel 

 1640s, "tilting match, playful tournament of knights in chariots or on horseback," from French carrousel "a tilting match...

 hippodrome 

 In old U.S. sporting slang, "a fixed match or race."...

 comparison 

 mid-14c., "equal, match, resemblance, similarity," from Old French comparaison "comparison" (12c.), from Latin comparationem...

 charivari 

 a mock-serenade intended as annoyance or insult," especially as a community way of expressing disapproval of a marriage match...

 rime 

 "hoarfrost, white frost," Old English hrim, from Proto-Germanic *khrima- (source also of Old Norse hrim, Dutch rijm, German Reif). Old French rime is of Germanic origin. Rare in Middle English and usually there as rime-frost; after c. 1500 it seems to have survived mainly in Scot

 render 

 late 14c., rendren, rendre, "repeat, say again, recite; translate," from Old French rendre "give back, present, yield" (10c.) and Medieval Latin rendere, from Vulgar Latin *rendere, a variant of Latin reddere "give back, return, restore," from red- "back" (see re-) + combining fo

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 Share match 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/match Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/match">Etymology of match by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of match. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/match Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of match," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/match. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of match." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/match. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of match." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/match (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near match 
 masturbator 
 -mat 
 mat 
 Mata Hari 
 matador 
 match 
 match-board 
 match-book 
 matchbox 
 matchcoat 
 match-girl 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix