URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tabor
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:15:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tabor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tabor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tabor 

 tabor (n.) 

 also tabour , "small drum resembling a tamborine," c. 1300, from Old French tabour , tabur "drum; din, noise, commotion" (11c.), probably from Persian tabir "drum;" compare tambourine .

 The earlier name of the drum; in later use (esp. since the introduction of the name 
 drum in the 16th 
 c. , A small kind of drum, used chiefly as an accompaniment to the pipe or trumpet .... [OED 2nd ed., 1989] 

 Also in Middle English as a verb, "beat a drum" (late 14c.). Taborner "drummer" is attested from late 13c. as a surname. Middle English had tabortete "a small drum."
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to tabor 

 tambourine (n.) 

 "parchment-covered hoop with pieces of metal attached used as a drum," 1782; earlier "small drum" (1570s), apparently from French tambourin , which meant "long narrow drum used in Provence," but the modern sense is that of French tambour de basque (see below). It is a diminutive of tambour "drum," a word altered from Old French tabour (see tabor ) by influence of Arabic tunbur , the name of a kind of lute or guitar.

 The Arabic word itself turns up in English as tamboura (1580s), the name of a long-necked lute of the Balkans and Near East. The sense evolution presents some difficulty, and in 17c. and early 18c. it is sometimes difficult to say what sort of instrument is intended.

 Earlier names in English for it were tambour de basque (1680s), also timbre and timbrel . Tambour itself is attested in English from late 15c., and Shakespeare has tabourine .

 drum (n.) 

 early 15c., drom , "percussive musical instrument consisting of a hollow wooden or metallic body and a tightly stretched head of membrane," probably from Middle Dutch tromme "drum," a common Germanic word (compare German Trommel , Danish tromme , Swedish trumma ) and probably imitative of the sound of one.

 Not common before 1570s; the slightly older, and more common at first, word was drumslade , apparently from Dutch or Low German trommelslag "drum-beat," "though it does not appear how this name of the action came to be applied to the instrument" [OED], and the English word might be a shortening of this. Other earlier words for it were tabour (c. 1300, ultimately from Persian; see tabor ) and timpan (Old English; see tympanum ).

 In machinery, the word was applied to various contrivances resembling a drum from 1740. In anatomy, "the tympanum of the ear," 1610s. Meaning "receptacle having the form of a drum" is by 1812. Drum-major (1590s) originally was "chief or first drummer of a military regiment;" later "one who directs the evolutions of a marching corps."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stigma 

 1590s (earlier stigme, c. 1400), "mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron," from Latin stigma (plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) "mark of a pointed instrument, puncture, tattoo-mark, brand," which is related to stizein "to mark, tattoo" (from PIE root 

 focus 

 1640s, "point of convergence," from Latin focus "hearth, fireplace" (also, figuratively, "home, family"), which is of unknown origin. Used in post-classical times for "fire" itself; taken by Kepler (1604) in a mathematical sense for "point of convergence," perhaps on analogy of t

 scalper 

 1650s as a type of surgical instrument; 1760 as "one who takes or removes scalps," agent noun from scalp (v.). The meaning "person who re-sells tickets at unauthorized prices for a profit" is by 1869 in American English; the earliest reference is to theater tickets, but it more o

 wait 

 c. 1200, "to watch with hostile intent, lie in wait for, plot against," from Anglo-French and Old North French waitier "to watch" (Old French gaitier "defend, watch out, be on one's guard; lie in wait for;" Modern French guetter), from Frankish *wahton or another Germanic source,

 understand 

 Old English understandan "to comprehend, grasp the idea of, receive from a word or words or from a sign the idea it is intended to convey; to view in a certain way," probably literally "stand in the midst of," from under + standan "to stand" (see stand (v.)). If this is the meani

 hamper 

 late 14c., hampren "surround, imprison, confine; pack in a container; impede in motion or progress," of uncertain origin; probably from hamper (n.1), unless it is somehow connected to Middle English hamelian "to maim." Related: Hampered; hampering...."large basket," early 14c., h

 proud 

 late Old English prud, prute "excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, having or cherishing a high opinion of one's own merits; guilty of the sin of Pride," from Old French prud, oblique case of adjective prouz "brave, valiant" (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme "brave

 zodiac 

 late 14c., from Old French zodiaque, from Latin zodiacus "zodiac," from Greek zodiakos (kyklos) "zodiac (circle)," literally "circle of little animals," from zodiaion, diminutive of zoion "animal" (from PIE root *gwei- "to live"). Libra is not an animal, but it was not a zodiac c

 mimosa 

 genus of leguminous shrubs, 1731, coined in Modern Latin (1619) from Latin mimus "mime" (see mime (n.)) + -osa, adjectival suffix (fem. of -osus). So called because some species (including the common Sensitive Plant) fold leaves when touched, seeming to mimic animal behavior. As 

 maroon 

 "very dark red or crimson color," 1791 (marone), from French couleur marron, the color of a marron "chestnut," the large sweet chestnut of southern Europe (maroon in that sense was used in English from 1590s), from the dialect of Lyons, ultimately from a word in a pre-Roman langu

 Share tabor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tabor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tabor">Etymology of tabor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tabor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tabor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tabor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tabor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tabor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tabor. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tabor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tabor (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tabor 
 tablet 
 table-top 
 tableware 
 tabloid 
 taboo 
 tabor 
 Tabriz 
 tabula rasa 
 tabular 
 tabulate 
 tabulation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix