URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/crystal
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:21:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Crystal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Crystal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of crystal 

 crystal (n.) 

 formerly also cristal , and, erroneously, chrystal , Old English cristal "clear ice; clear, transparent mineral," from Old French cristal (12c., Modern French crystal ), from Latin crystallus "crystal, ice," from Greek krystallos , from kryos "frost," from PIE root *kreus- "to begin to freeze, form a crust."

 The spelling adopted the Latin form 15c.-17c. The mineral has been so-called since Anglo-Saxon times; it was regarded by the ancients as a sort of petrified ice. In the specific sense in chemistry, "body with a molecular structure that causes it to take the form of a regular solid enclosed by a certain number of plane surfaces," from 1620s.

 Crystall is a brighte stone and clere with watry colour. Men trowe that it is of snowe or yse made harde in space of many yeres. Therfore the Grekes yave a name therto. It is gendred in Asia and in Cipres, and namely in the northe moutaynes where the sonne is mooste feruent in somer. [John of Trevisa, translation (late 14c.) of Bartholomew Glanville's  
 "De proprietatibus rerum" ] 

 A top-20 name for girls born in the U.S. between 1978 and 1984. As a shortened form of crystal-glass it dates from 1590s. As an adjective, from late 14c. Crystal ball is from 1794.  Rock-crystal is the general name for transparent crystals of quartz. Crystal Palace was the name of the large building, made chiefly of glass and iron, for the universal exhibition of 1851 in London's Hyde Park.
 also from 12c. 

 Entries linking to crystal 

 crystalline (adj.) 

 late 14c., "made of or like crystal;" c. 1400, "resembling crystal, pure, clear, transparent," from Old French cristalin "like crystal" (Modern French crystallin ) and directly from Latin crystallinus , from Greek krystallinos "of crystal," from krystallos (see crystal ). Related: Crystallinity. 

 crystallize (v.) 

 1590s, "convert into crystal;" 1660s "form into crystals;" from crystal + -ize . Intransitive sense of "be converted into crystals" is from 1640s. Figurative use, of opinions, love, etc., that are at first indeterminate, "assume a definite form and fixity," is from 1660s. Related: Crystallized ; crystallizing .

 crystallography 
 crystallomancy 
 Kristallnacht 
 *kreus- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 crystallomancy 

 "divination by means of crystals," 1610s; see crystal + -mancy. The operator first muttered over the crystal (a beryl was preferred) certain formulas of prayer, and then gave it into the hands of a young man or a virgin, who thereupon, by oral communication from spirits in the c

 quartz 

 common form of native silica or silicon dioxide, 1756, from German Quarz, Zwarc "rock crystal," from Middle High German twarc, probably from a West Slavic source, compare Czech tvrdy, Polish twardy "quartz," noun uses of an adjective meaning "hard," from Old Church Slavonic tvrud

 mesomorph 

 Related: Mesomorphic (attested from 1923 in chemistry, a separate coinage in reference to a state of a liquid crystal)....

 exposition 

 The meaning "public display" is attested by 1851 in reference to the Crystal Palace Exposition in London....

 ladies 

 more truly "the best ever" than the ladies' night of the Paint, Oil and Varnish Club of Chicago, which was given in the Crystal...

 juror 

 exhibition" is from 1851; this particular use seems to have arisen with the great Industrial Exhibition held that year at the Crystal...

 beryl 

 In Medieval Latin berillus was applied to any precious stone of a pale green color, to fine crystal, and to eyeglasses (the...

 flake 

 "thin flat piece of snow; a particle," early 14c., also flauke, flagge, which is of uncertain origin, possibly from Old English *flacca "flakes of snow," or from cognate Old Norse flak "flat piece," from Proto-Germanic *flakaz (source also of Middle Dutch vlac, Dutch vlak "flat, 

 onset 

 1530s, "attack, assault, a rushing or setting upon," from on + set (n.); compare verbal phrase to set (something) on (someone), c. 1300, originally "sic (a dog) on." Weaker sense of "beginning, start" is recorded from 1560s. Figurative use in reference to a calamity, disease, etc

 stone 

 "discrete piece of rock," especially not a large one, Old English stan, which was used of common rocks, precious gems, concretions in the body, memorial stones, from Proto-Germanic *stainaz (source also of Old Norse steinn, Danish steen, Old Saxon sten, Old Frisian sten, Dutch st

 Share crystal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/crystal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/crystal">Etymology of crystal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of crystal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/crystal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of crystal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crystal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of crystal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crystal. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of crystal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/crystal (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near crystal 
 cryptograph 
 cryptography 
 cryptology 
 cryptonym 
 cryselephantine 
 crystal 
 crystalline 
 crystallisation 
 crystallization 
 crystallize 
 crystallized 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix