URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/error
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:45:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Error - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Error - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of error 

 error (n.) 

 also, through 18c., errour ; c. 1300, "a deviation from truth made through ignorance or inadvertence, a mistake," also "offense against morality or justice; transgression, wrong-doing, sin;" from Old French error "mistake, flaw, defect, heresy," from Latin errorem (nominative error ) "a wandering, straying, a going astray; meandering; doubt, uncertainty;" also "a figurative going astray, mistake," from errare "to wander; to err" (see err ). From early 14c. as "state of believing or practicing what is false or heretical; false opinion or belief, heresy." From late 14c. as "deviation from what is normal; abnormality, aberration." From 1726 as "difference between observed value and true value."

 Words for "error" in most Indo-European languages originally meant "wander, go astray" (for example Greek plane in the New Testament, Old Norse villa , Lithuanian klaida , Sanskrit bhrama- ), but Irish has dearmad "error," from dermat "a forgetting."
 also from 18c. 

 Entries linking to error 

 err (v.) 

 c. 1300, from Old French errer "go astray, lose one's way; make a mistake; transgress," from Latin errare "wander, go astray," figuratively "be in error," from PIE root *ers- (1) "be in motion, wander around" (source also of Sanskrit arsati "flows;" Old English ierre "angry; straying;" Old Frisian ire "angry;" Old High German irri "angry," irron "astray;" Gothic airziþa "error; deception;" the Germanic words reflecting the notion of anger as a "straying" from normal composure). Related: Erred ; erring .

 errorless (adj.) 

 1823, from error + -less .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mistake 

 mid-14c., "to commit an offense;" late 14c., "to misunderstand, misinterpret, take in a wrong sense," from mis- (1) "badly, wrongly" + take (v.) or from a cognate Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mistaka "take in error, miscarry." Perhaps a blend of both words. The more lite

 fault 

 late 13c., faute, "deficiency," from Old French faute, earlier falte, "opening, gap; failure, flaw, blemish; lack, deficiency" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *fallita "a shortcoming, falling," from Latin falsus "deceptive, feigned, spurious," past participle of fallere "deceive, disap

 culpable 

 French coupable), from Latin culpabilis "worthy of blame," from culpare "to blame," from culpa "crime, fault, blame, guilt, error...According to his sources, "The original meaning of culpa is 'a state of error' rather than 'an error committed'."...

 mako 

 History of Japan," English translation of Engelbert Kaempfer's German manuscript; however this is claimed by some to be an error...If the 1727 citation is an error, the earliest attested use is 1820, from a book on New Zealand languages....

 dwell 

 Old English dwellan "to lead into error, deceive, mislead," related to dwelian "to be led into error, go wrong in belief...It had a noun form in Old English, gedweola "error, heresy, madness."...

 peccadillo 

 corrupt form peccadilian, 1520s), from Spanish pecadillo, diminutive of pecado "a sin," from Latin peccatum "a sin, fault, error...the word for 'foot', but rather by 'walking.' " He finds a derivation from the root *pet- "to fall" via *pet-ko- "a fall, error...

 renege 

 1540s, renegue, "deny, renounce, abandon" (archaic), from Medieval Latin renegare, from Latin re-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see re-), + negare "to refuse" (from PIE root *ne- "not"). The meaning "change one's mind, go back on (one's word or promise)" is by 1784. OED iden

 distortion 

 1580s, "action of distorting; state of being twisted out of shape," from Latin distortionem (nominative distortio), noun of action from past-participle stem of distorquere "to twist different ways, distort," from dis- "completely" (see dis-) + torquere "to twist" (from PIE root *

 blot 

 late 14c., "a spot or stain of ink;" also "a moral stain or blemish, a disgrace, a sin;" a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Old Norse blettr "blot, stain," or from Old French blot, variant of bloc "block." The Middle English Compendium compares, hesitantly, Old French blo(s

 Share error 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/error Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/error">Etymology of error by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of error. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/error Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of error," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/error. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of error." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/error. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of error." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/error (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near error 
 errant 
 errata 
 erratic 
 erratum 
 erroneous 
 error 
 errorless 
 ersatz 
 Erse 
 erstwhile 
 eructate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix