URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ethnic
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:05:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ethnic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ethnic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ethnic 

 ethnic (adj.) 

 late 15c. (earlier ethnical , early 15c.) "pagan, heathen," from Late Latin ethnicus , from Greek ethnikos "of or for a nation, national," by some writers (Polybius, etc.) "adopted to the genius or customs of a people, peculiar to a people," and among the grammarians "suited to the manners or language of foreigners," from ethnos "band of people living together, nation, people, tribe, caste," also used of swarms or flocks of animals, properly "people of one's own kind," from PIE *swedh-no- , suffixed form of root *s(w)e- , third person pronoun and reflexive, also forming words referring to the social group (see idiom ). Earlier in English as a noun, "a heathen, pagan, one who is not a Christian or Jew" (c. 1400). In modern noun use, "member of an ethnic group," from 1945.

 In Septuagint, Greek ta ethne translates Hebrew goyim , plural of goy "nation," especially of non-Israelites, hence especially "gentile nation, foreign nation not worshipping the true God" (see goy ), and ethnikos is used by ecclesiastical writers in a sense of "savoring of the nature of pagans, alien to the worship of the true God," and as a noun "the pagan, the gentile." The classical sense of "peculiar to a race or nation" in English is attested from 1851, a return to the word's original meaning; that of "different cultural groups" is 1935; and that of "racial, cultural or national minority group" is American English 1945. Ethnic cleansing is attested from 1991.

 Although the term 'ethnic cleansing' has come into English usage only recently, its verbal correlates in Czech, French, German, and Polish go back much further. [Jerry Z. Muller, "Us and Them: The Enduring Power of Ethnic Nationalism," Foreign Affairs, March/April 2008]
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to ethnic 

 goy (n.) 

 "a gentile, a non-Jew" (plural goyim ), 1815, from Hebrew goy "people, nation;" in Mishnaic and Modern Hebrew, also "gentile" (compare gentile ). The fem. form of the Hebrew word entered French as gouge "a wench" (15c.).

 idiom (n.) 

 1580s, "form of speech peculiar to a people or place;" meaning "phrase or expression peculiar to a language" is from 1620s; from French idiome (16c.) and directly from Late Latin idioma "a peculiarity in language."

 This is from Greek idi ō ma "peculiarity, peculiar phraseology" (Fowler writes that "A manifestation of the peculiar" is "the closest possible translation of the Greek word"), from idioumai "to appropriate to oneself," from idios "personal, private" (as opposed to dēmosios "public); properly "particular to oneself, one's own" (as opposed to allotrios ).

 This is from PIE *swed-yo- , suffixed form of root *s(w)e- , pronoun of the third person and reflexive (referring back to the subject of a sentence), also used in forms denoting the speaker's social group, "(we our-)selves" (source also of Sanskrit svah , Avestan hva- , Old Persian huva "one's own," khva-data "lord," literally "created from oneself;" Greek hos "he, she, it;" Latin suescere "to accustom, get accustomed," sodalis "companion;" Old Church Slavonic svoji "his, her, its," svojaku "relative, kinsman;" Gothic swes "one's own;" Old Norse sik "oneself;" German Sein ; Old Irish fein "self, himself").

 [G]rammar & idiom are independent categories; being applicable to the same material, they sometimes agree & sometimes disagree about particular specimens of it; the most can be said is that what is idiomatic is far more often grammatical than ungrammatical, but that is worth saying, because grammar & idiom are sometimes treated as incompatibles .... [Fowler]

 ethnarch 
 ethnicity 
 gentile 
 holethnos 
 polyethnic 
 ethno- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gentile 

 "one who is not a Jew," c. 1400; earlier "one who is not a Christian, a pagan" (late 14c.), from Late Latin noun use of Latin gentilis "of the same family or clan, of or belonging to a Roman gens," from gens (genitive gentis) "race, clan" (from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget,

 heathen 

 Old English hæðen "not Christian or Jewish," also as a noun, "heathen man, one of a race or nation which does not acknowledge the God of the Bible" (especially of the Danes), merged with Old Norse heiðinn (adj.) "heathen, pagan," from Proto-Germanic *haithana- (source also of Old

 pagan 

 c. 1400, perhaps mid-14c., "person of non-Christian or non-Jewish faith," from Late Latin paganus "pagan," in classical Latin "villager, rustic; civilian, non-combatant" noun use of adjective meaning "of the country, of a village," from pagus "country people; province, rural dist

 assimilationist 

 "one who advocates racial or ethnic integration," 1900, originally in reference to Hawaii and possessions obtained by the...

 tribe 

 twelve divisions of the ancient Hebrews," from Old French tribu or directly from Latin tribus "one of the three political/ethnic...Extension to modern ethnic groups or races of people is from 1590s, specifically "a division of a barbarous race of people...

 nationality 

 Meaning "a racial or ethnic group" is by 1832. Related: Nationalities. But I do love a country that loves itself....

 Myanmar 

 Reasons given for the change include casting off a relic of colonialism, or downplaying the connection to the Burman ethnic...

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 cultural 

 1813, "of or pertaining to the raising of plants or animals," from Latin cultura "tillage, a cultivating, agriculture," figuratively "care, culture, an honoring," from past participle stem of colere "to tend, guard; to till, cultivate" (see colony). With -al (1). Figurative sense

 person 

 c. 1200, persoun, "an individual, a human being," from Old French persone "human being, anyone, person" (12c., Modern French personne) and directly from Latin persona "human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character," originally "a mask, a false face," such a

 Share ethnic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ethnic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ethnic">Etymology of ethnic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ethnic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ethnic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ethnic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ethnic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ethnic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ethnic. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ethnic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ethnic (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ethnic 
 ethics 
 Ethiop 
 Ethiopia 
 Ethiopian 
 ethnarch 
 ethnic 
 ethnicity 
 ethno- 
 ethnocentric 
 ethnogenesis 
 ethnography 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix