URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mucus
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:43:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mucus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mucus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mucus 

 mucus (n.) 

 "viscid fluid secreted by the mucous membranes of animals," 1660s (replacing Middle English mucilage ), from Latin mucus "slime, mold, mucus of the nose, snot," from PIE root *meug- "slippery, slimy," with derivatives referring to wet or slimy substances or conditions (source also of Latin emungere "to sneeze out, blow one's nose," mucere "be moldy or musty," Greek myssesthai "to blow the nose," myxa "mucus;" Sanskrit muncati "he releases"). Old English had horh , which may be imitative.
 also from 1660s 

 Entries linking to mucus 

 match (n.1) 

 "stick for striking fire." Late 14c., macche , "wick of a candle or lamp," a sense now obsolete, from Old French meiche "wick of a candle," from Vulgar Latin *micca/*miccia (source also of Catalan metxa , Spanish mecha , Italian miccia ), which is of uncertain origin, probably ultimately from Latin myxa , from Greek myxa "lamp wick," originally "mucus," based on notion of wick dangling from the spout of a lamp like snot from a nostril, from PIE root *meug- "slimy, slippery" (see mucus ). English snot also had a secondary sense from late 14c. of "snuff of a candle, burnt part of a wick," surviving at least to late 19c. in northern dialects.

 The modern spelling is from mid-15c. The meaning "piece of cord or tow soaked in sulfur, used for lighting fires, lamps, candles, etc." is from 1530. It was used by 1830 for the modern type of sulfur-tipped wooden friction match, which were perfected about that time, and competed with lucifer for much of 19c. as the name for this invention. An earlier version consisted of a thin strip of wood tipped with combustible matter that required contact with phosphorous carried separately in a box or vial.

 In the manufacture of matches much trouble has been occasioned by the use of phosphorous .... In some of the small and poorly-managed factories the men and children are never free from the fumes; their clothes and breath are luminous in the dark, and in the daytime white fumes may be seen escaping from them whenever they are seated by the fire. ... The danger arising from the use of matches was magnified, because they could sometimes be seen in the dark, were liable to ignite on a warm shelf, and were poisonous to such an extent that children had been killed by using them as playthings. [John A. Garver, "Matches," in The Popular Science Monthly, August 1877]

 moist (adj.) 

 late 14c., "slightly wet; well-irrigated, characterized by moistness," from Old French moiste "damp, wet, soaked" (13c., Modern French moite ), which is of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *muscidus "moldy," also "wet," from Latin mucidus "slimy, moldy, musty," from mucus "slime" (see mucus ). Alternative etymology [Diez] is from Latin musteus "fresh, green, new," literally "like new wine," from musteum "new wine" (see must (n.1)). If this wasn't the source, it influenced the form of the other word in Old French. Related: Moistly ; moistness (mid-14c.).

 mold 
 mucilage 
 mucous 
 muggy 
 smock 
 myxo- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mold 

 also mould, "hollow pattern of a particular form by which something is shaped or made," c. 1200, originally in a figurative sense, "fashion, form; nature, native constitution, character," metathesized from Old French modle "model, plan, copy; way, manner" (12c., Modern French mou

 smock 

 Middle English smok, "women's undergarment, shift," from from Old English smoc "garment worn by women," corresponding to the men's shirt, from Proto-Germanic *smukkaz (source also of Old Norse smokkr "a smock," but this perhaps is from Old English; Old High German smoccho "smock,

 coryza 

 It is traditionally compared to Germanic words for "mucus," such as Old English hrot, Old High German (h)roz "mucus" which...

 snivel 

 English, from Old English *snyflan "run at the nose" (implied in snyflung "running of the nose"), verb from snofl "nasal mucus...As a noun, "nasal mucus," from mid-14c. Melville coined snivelization (1849)....

 blenny 

 gattorugine and allied species) are little fishes common in the rock pools, often called Butterfishes from the slime or mucus...

 clay 

 Compared words include Latin gluten "glue, beeswax;" Greek gloios "sticky matter;" Lithuanian glitus "sticky," glitas "mucus...;" Old Church Slavonic glina "clay," glenu "slime, mucus;" Old Irish glenim "I cleave, adhere;" Old English cliða "plaster...

 glue 

 from Latin gluten "glue, beeswax," from PIE *gleit- "to glue, paste" (source also of Lithuanian glitus "sticky," glitas "mucus...

 phlegm 

 late 14c., fleem, fleume, "viscid mucus, discharge from a mucous membrane of the body," also the name of one of the four bodily humors, from Old French fleume (13c., Modern French flegme), from Late Latin phlegma, one of the four humors of the body, from Greek phlegma "morbid, cl

 snot 

 late 14c., snotte, from Old English gesnot "nasal mucus," from Proto-Germanic *snuttan (source also of Old Frisian snotta, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snotte, Middle Low German snute), from the same base as snout (q.v.). Old English had also a verb snite "wipe or pick one'

 heathen 

 Old English hæðen "not Christian or Jewish," also as a noun, "heathen man, one of a race or nation which does not acknowledge the God of the Bible" (especially of the Danes), merged with Old Norse heiðinn (adj.) "heathen, pagan," from Proto-Germanic *haithana- (source also of Old

 Share mucus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mucus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mucus">Etymology of mucus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mucus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mucus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mucus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mucus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mucus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mucus. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mucus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mucus (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mucus 
 muck-a-muck 
 muckluck 
 muck-raker 
 mucose 
 mucous 
 mucus 
 mud 
 mud-bath 
 mudder 
 muddle 
 muddle-headed 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix