URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/anneal
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:01:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Anneal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Anneal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of anneal 

 anneal (v.) 

 Middle English anelen , from Old English onælan "to set on fire, kindle; inspire, incite," from on- "on" (see an- (1)) + ælan "to burn, bake," from Proto-Germanic *ailan , "probably" [Watkins] from the same PIE root meaning "to burn" that is the source of ash (n.1). It is related to Old English æled "fire, firebrand," Old Norse eldr , Danish ild "fire."

 The -n- was doubled after c. 1600 by analogy of Latinate words ( annex , etc.; compare accursed , afford , allay ). Meaning "to treat by heating and gradually cooling" (of glass, earthenware, metals, etc., to toughen them) was in late Old English. Related: Annealed ; annealing .

 Entries linking to anneal 

 accursed (adj.) 

 also accurst , early 13c., acursede "being under a curse," past-participle adjective from obsolete verb acursen "pronounce a curse upon, excommunicate" (late 12c.), from a- intensive prefix (see a- (1)) + cursein "to curse" (see curse (v.)). The unetymological -c- is 15c., a mistaken Latinism in imitation of words in acc- . The weakened sense of "worthy of a curse, damnable" is from 1590s. Related: Accursedly ; accursedness .

 afford (v.) 

 Middle English aforth , from Old English geforðian "to put forth, contribute; further, advance; carry out, accomplish," from ge- completive prefix (which in Middle English regularly reduces to a- ; see a- (1)) + forðian "to further," from forð "forward, onward" (see forth ).

 The prefix shift to af- took place 16c. under mistaken belief that it was a Latin word in ad- ; change of -th- to -d- took place late 16c. (and also transformed burthen , spither , murther , etc. into their modern forms).

 The notion of "accomplish" (late Old English) gradually became "be able to bear the expense of, have enough money" to do something (late 14c.), and the original senses became obsolete. Of things, "be capable of yielding," 1580s, which is the sense in afford (one) an opportunity . Related: Afforded ; affording .

 allay 
 ash 
 neal 
 an- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 allay 

 "put down, quiet, assuage, pacify," Middle English alegen, from Old English alecgan "to put, place, put down; remit, give up, suppress, abolish; diminish, lessen," from a- "down, aside" (see a- (1)) + lecgan "to lay" (see lay (v.)). A common Germanic compound (cognates: Gothic us

 ash 

 "powdery remains of fire," Middle English asshe, from Old English æsce "ash," from Proto-Germanic *askon (source also of Old Norse and Swedish aska, Old High German asca, German asche, Middle Dutch asche, Gothic azgo "ashes"), from PIE root *as- "to burn, glow." Spanish and Portu

 temper 

 late Old English temprian "to moderate, bring to a proper or suitable state, to modify some excessive quality, to restrain within due limits," from Latin temperare "observe proper measure, be moderate, restrain oneself," also transitive, "mix correctly, mix in due proportion; reg

 psyche 

 1640s, "animating spirit, the human spirit or mind," from Latin psyche, from Greek psykhē "the soul, mind, spirit; life, one's life, the invisible animating principle or entity which occupies and directs the physical body; understanding, the mind (as the seat of thought), faculty

 fashion 

 c. 1300, fasoun, "physical make-up or composition; form, shape; appearance," from Old French façon, fachon, fazon "face, appearance; construction, pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature" (12c.), from Latin factionem (nominative factio) "a making or do

 warrant 

 c. 1200, "protector, defender," from Old North French warant "defender; surety, pledge; justifying evidence" (Old French garant), from Frankish *warand, from Proto-Germanic *war- "to warn, guard, protect" (source also of Old High German werento "guarantor," noun use of present pa

 Arab 

 "one of the native people of Arabia and surrounding regions," late 14c. (Arabes, a plural form), from Old French Arabi, from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem), from Greek Araps (genitive Arabos), from Arabic 'arab, indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally "inhabitant of the

 Anglo-Saxon 

 Old English Angli Saxones (plural), from Latin Anglo-Saxones, in which Anglo- is an adjective, thus literally "English Saxons," as opposed to those of the Continent (now called Old Saxons). Properly in reference to the Saxons of ancient Wessex, Essex, Middlesex, and Sussex. I am

 resilience 

 1620s, "act of rebounding or springing back," often of immaterial things, from Latin resiliens, present participle of resilire "to rebound, recoil," from re- "back" (see re-) + salire "to jump, leap" (see salient (adj.)). Compare result (v.). In physical sciences, the meaning "el

 negotiation 

 early 15c., negotiacioun, "a dealing with people, trafficking," from Old French negociacion "business, trade," and directly from Latin negotiationem (nominative negotiatio) "business, traffic," noun of action from past participle stem of negotiari "carry on business, do business,

 Share anneal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/anneal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/anneal">Etymology of anneal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of anneal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/anneal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of anneal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anneal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of anneal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anneal. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of anneal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/anneal (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near anneal 
 annalist 
 annalize 
 annals 
 Annam 
 Anne 
 anneal 
 annelid 
 annex 
 annexation 
 Annie 
 annihilate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix