URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/assassin
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:19:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Assassin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Assassin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of assassin 

 assassin (n.) 

 1530s (in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c.), via medieval French and Italian Assissini, Assassini , from Arabic hashīshīn (12c.), an Arabic nickname, variously explained, for the Nizari Ismaili sect in the Middle East during the Crusades, plural of hashishiyy , from the source of hashish (q.v.).

 They were a fanatical Muslim sect in the mountains of Lebanon at the time of the Crusades, under leadership of the "Old Man of the Mountains" (which translates Arabic shaik-al-jibal , name applied to Hasan ibu-al-Sabbah). In Western European minds 12c.-13c. they had a reputation for murdering opposing leaders after intoxicating themselves by eating hashish, but there is no evidence that the medieval Ismailis used hashish.

 The plural suffix -in was mistaken in Europe for part of the word (compare Bedouin ). Middle English had the word as hassais (mid-14c.), from Old French hassasis , assasis , which is from the Arabic word.

 The generalization of the sect's nickname to the meaning of any sort of assassin happened in Italian at the start of the 14th century. The word with the generalized meaning was often used in Italian in the 14th and 15th centuries. In the mid 16th century the generalized Italian word entered French, followed a little later by English. ["English Words of Arabic Ancestry"]
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to assassin 

 Bedouin (n.) 

 "an Arab of the desert, one of the tribes of nomadic Arabs," c. 1400, from Old French bedüin (12c., Modern French bédouin ), from colloquial Arabic badawin "desert-dwellers," plural of badawi , from badw "desert, camp." The Arabic plural suffix was mistaken for part of the word. A word from the Crusades, it probably was lost in English and then reborrowed from French c. 1600. As an adjective from 1844.

 hashish (n.) 

 also hasheesh , 1590s, from Arabic hashīsh "powdered hemp, hemp," extended from sense "herbage, dry herb, rough grass, hay."

 Its earliest record as a nickname for cannabis drug is in 13th century Arabic. Its earliest in English is in a traveller's report from Egypt in 1598. It is rare in English until the 19th century. The wordform in English today dates from the early 19th century. The word entered all the bigger Western European languages in the early to mid 19th century if you don't count occasional mentions in travellers' reports before then. ["English Words of Arabic Ancestry"]

 assassinate (v.) 

 1610s, from past participle stem of Medieval Latin assassinare (see assassin ). "Assassinate means to kill wrongfully by surprise, suddenly, or by secret assault" [Century Dictionary]. Of reputations, characters, etc., from 1620s. Related: Assassinated ; assassinating . Cockeram's "Dictionarie" (1623) has assassinous "murderous."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share assassin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/assassin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/assassin">Etymology of assassin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of assassin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/assassin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of assassin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/assassin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of assassin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/assassin. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of assassin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/assassin (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near assassin 
 asquat 
 asquint 
 ass 
 assail 
 assailant 
 assassin 
 assassinate 
 assassination 
 assault 
 assay 
 assemblage 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix