URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/acrobat
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:16:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Acrobat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Acrobat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of acrobat 

 acrobat (n.) 

 1845, from French acrobate "tightrope-walker" (14c.) and directly from a Latinized form of Greek akrobatēs "rope dancer, gymnastic performer," which is related to akrobatos "going on tip-toe, climbing up high," from akros "topmost, at the point end" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce") + Greek agential element -batēs "one that goes, one that treads (in some manner), one that is based," from -batos , verbal adjective from stem of bainein "to go, walk, step" (from PIE root *gwa- "to go, come").
 also from 1845 

 Entries linking to acrobat 

 acrobatic (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to an acrobat or an acrobat's performances," 1848; see acrobat + -ic , probably modeled on French acrobatique . Related: Acrobatically .

 *ak- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce."

 It might form all or part of: acacia ; acanthus ; accipiter ; acer ; acerbic ; acerbity ; acervate ; acervulus ; acescent ; acetic ; acid ; acicular ; acme ; acne ; acrid ; acridity ; acrimony ; acro- ; acrobat ; acromegaly ; acronym ; acrophobia ; acropolis ; acrostic ; acrylic ; acuity ; aculeate ; acumen ; acupressure ; acupuncture ; acute ; aglet ; ague ; Akron ; anoxic ; awn ; coelacanth ; dioxin ; deoxy- ; eager ; ear (n.2) "grain part of corn;" edge (n.); egg (v.) "to goad on, incite;" eglantine ; epoxy ; ester ; exacerbation ; hammer ; hypoxia ; mediocre ; oxalic ; oxide ; oxy- ; oxygen ; oxymoron ; paragon ; pyracanth ; paroxysm ; selvage ; vinegar .

 It might also be the source of: Greek akros "at the end, at the top, outermost; consummate, excellent," akis "sharp point," akē "point of an iron tool," akantha "thorn," akmē "summit, edge," oxys "sharp, bitter;" Sanskrit acri- "corner, edge," acani- "point of an arrow," asrih "edge;" Oscan akrid (ablative singular) "sharply;" Latin acer (fem. acris ) "sharp to the senses, pungent, bitter, eager, fierce," acutus "sharp, pointed," acuere "to sharpen," acerbus "harsh, bitter," acere "be sharp, be bitter," acus "a needle, pin," ocris "jagged mountain;" Lithuanian ašmuo "sharpness," akstis "sharp stick;" Old Lithuanian aštras , Lithuanian aštrus "sharp;" Old Church Slavonic ostru , Russian óstryj "sharp;" Old Irish er "high;" Welsh ochr "edge, corner, border;" Old Norse eggja "goad;" Old English ecg "sword;" German Eck "corner."

 *gwa- 

 *gwā- , also *gwem- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to go, come."

 It might form all or part of: acrobat ; adiabatic ; advent ; adventitious ; adventure ; amphisbaena ; anabasis ; avenue ; base (n.) "bottom of anything;" basis ; become ; circumvent ; come ; contravene ; convene ; convenient ; convent ; conventicle ; convention ; coven ; covenant ; diabetes ; ecbatic ; event ; eventual ; hyperbaton ; hypnobate ; intervene ; intervenient ; intervention ; invent ; invention ; inventory ; juggernaut ; katabatic ; misadventure ; parvenu ; prevenient ; prevent ; provenance ; provenience ; revenant ; revenue ; souvenir ; subvention ; supervene ; venire ; venue ; welcome .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit gamati "he goes," Avestan jamaiti "goes," Tocharian kakmu "come," Lithuanian gemu, gimti "to be born," Greek bainein "to go, walk, step," Latin venire "to come," Old English cuman "come, approach," German kommen , Gothic qiman .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tumbler 

 mid-14c., "acrobat," agent noun from tumble (v.). Compare Old English tumbere "tumbler, dancer."...

 sailor 

 ), and its later appearance is perhaps to avoid confusion with common Middle English saillour, sailer "dancer, tumbler, acrobat...

 athlete 

 early 15c. (Chauliac), "competitor in athletic games and contests," from Latin athleta "a wrestler, athlete, combatant in public games," from Greek athlētēs "prizefighter, contestant in the games," agent noun from athlein "to contest for a prize," which from athlos "a contest," e

 funambulist 

 "tightrope-walker," 1793, coined from Latin funis "a rope, line, cord," + ambulare "to walk" (see amble (v.)). Earlier was funambulant (1660s), funambule (1690s from Latin funambulus, the classical name for a performer of this ancient type of public entertainment), and pseudo-Ita

 diamond 

 mid-14c., diamaunt, diamond, "extremely hard and refractive precious stone made of pure or nearly pure carbon," from Old French diamant, from Medieval Latin diamantem (nominative diamas), from Vulgar Latin *adiamantem (which was subsequently altered by influence of the many Greek

 consume 

 late 14c., "to destroy by separating into parts which cannot be reunited, as by burning or eating," hence "destroy the substance of, annihilate," from Old French consumer "to consume" (12c.) and directly from Latin consumere "to use up, eat, waste," from assimilated form of com-,

 diligence 

 mid-14c., "constant and earnest effort to accomplish what is undertaken," from Old French diligence "attention, care; haste, speed" and directly from Latin diligentia "attentiveness, carefulness," from diligentem (nominative diligens) "attentive, assiduous, careful," present-part

 hilarity 

 mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) "cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment," from hilaris "cheerful, merry," from Greek hilaros "cheerful, merry, joyous," related to hilaos "graceful, kindly," hilaskomai "to propitiate, appease, reconcile,"and probably from a suffix

 auditorium 

 "part of a public building where people gather to hear speeches, etc.," 1727, from Latin auditorium "a lecture-room," literally "place where something is heard," in Medieval Latin especially "a reception room in a monastery," noun use of neuter of auditorius (adj.) "of or for hea

 premium 

 c. 1600, "reward given for a specific act or a particular line of conduct," from Latin praemium "reward, profit derived from booty," from prae "before" (see pre-) + emere "to buy," originally "to take" (from PIE root *em- "to take, distribute"). The sense of "amount to be paid by

 Share acrobat 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/acrobat Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/acrobat">Etymology of acrobat by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of acrobat. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/acrobat Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of acrobat," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/acrobat. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of acrobat." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/acrobat. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of acrobat." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/acrobat (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near acrobat 
 acrid 
 acridity 
 acrimonious 
 acrimony 
 acro- 
 acrobat 
 acrobatic 
 acrobatics 
 acromegaly 
 acronym 
 acrophobe 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix