URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stuff
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:20:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stuff - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stuff - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stuff 

 stuff (n.) 

 early 14c., stuffe , "quilted material worn under chain mail," from Old French estoffe "quilted material, furniture, provisions" (Modern French étoffe ), from estoffer "to equip or stock," which is of obscure origin; according to French sources it is from Old High German stopfon "to plug, stuff," or from a related Frankish word (see stop (v.)), but OED finds this "open to strong objections."

 The sense was extended to material for working with in various trades (c. 1400), also "military stores and supplies" (early 15c.), then "goods or possessions generally, movable property" (mid-15c.), also "provisions or articles of food."

 As a general designation for "substance or matter of an unspecified kind, physical or abstract" it is attested by mid-15c. It is by 1550s in the figurative sense of "what a person is 'made of;' " the sense of "substance (physical or abstract) of which a thing is made or consists" is by 1580s.

 From 1570s as "worthless ideas," often in stuff and nonsense (by 1749, Fielding). The meaning "narcotic, dope, drug" is attested from 1929. To know (one's) stuff "have a grasp on a subject" is recorded from 1927.
 also from early 14c. 

 stuff (v.) 

 mid-14c., "furnish" (a place, with goods, provisions, etc.), also "reinforce" (a castle, etc., with troops), from Old French estofer "pad, upholster, fit out" (Modern French étoffer ), from estoffe , and probably also in part from stuff (n.). Related: Stuffed ; stuffing .

 It is attested from late 14c. as "fill (a mattress, etc.) with padding, line with padding;" also in the cookery sense, in reference to filing the interior of a pastry or the cavity of a fowl or beast with suitable material (in reference specifically to a turkey by 1747).

 It is attested by c. 1400 in the broad sense of "fill, cram full with loose material;" especially "fill (the belly) with food or drink, gorge." From early 15c. as "to clog" (the sinuses, etc.). By 1550s as "fill the prepared skin of an animal in taxidermy." The ballot-box sense is attested from 1854, American English. In expressions of contempt and suggestive of bodily orifices, it dates from 1952.
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to stuff 

 stop (v.) 

 Middle English stoppen , "obstruct (a passage) with a physical barrier; close up by filling, stuffing, or plugging," from Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian "to stop up, stifle"), a general West Germanic word, cognate with Old Saxon stuppon , West Frisian stopje , Middle Low German stoppen , Old High German stopfon , German stopfen "to plug, stop up," Old Low Frankish (be)stuppon "to stop (the ears)." Related: Stopped ; stopping .

 These words are said by many sources to be a Germanic borrowing of Vulgar Latin *stuppare "to stop or stuff with tow or oakum" (source of Italian stoppare , French étouper "to stop with tow"), from Latin stuppa "coarse part of flax, tow." In support of this theory, it is said that plugs made of tow were used from ancient times in the Rhine valley. Century Dictionary says this "suits phonetically," but "is on grounds of meaning somewhat doubtful." Barnhart, for one, proposes the whole Germanic group might be native, from a native base *stoppon .

 Senses having to do with "bring or come to a halt; discontinue or cause to cease from a course or action" developed in 15c. in English (but have been adopted in other languages). They extend from the notion of "prevent a flow by blocking a hole," and in some cases the sense might have been influenced by Latin stupere "be stunned, be stupefied."

 The transitive sense of "hinder from progress or procedure, put a stop to" (a thief, a clock, conception) is by late 14c., as is that of "hold (someone or something) back from a specified course or purpose." By c. 1400 stop could mean "shut (someone in something), confine, shut away from." By 1400 stop also was used as "prevent the continuance of" and by 1520s intransitively as "cease from forward motion, come to a stand."

 The transitive meaning "leave off, desist" is by 1520s; the intransitive meaning "check oneself" is 1680s. Of travelers, "make a halt or stay, tarry," by 1711. Of immaterial things, "discontinue, cease, come to an end," by 1733. In reference to the ears "to plug or cover," early 14c.

 stuffed (adj.) 

 mid-15c., in reference to garments, "padded with stuffing," past-participle adjective from stuff (v.). Hence stuffed shirt "pompous, ineffectual, conservative person" (1913). Of foods, "filled with stuffing," by 1729; stuffed-pepper is by 1864.

 stuffing 
 foodstuff 
 overstuffed 
 stifle 
 stuffy 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stifle 

 late 14c., stuflen, "have difficulty breathing, choke, suffocate; drown, suffocate by drowning," a word of of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Old French estouffer "to stifle, smother" (Modern French étouffer), itself of uncertain etymology but perhaps from a Germanic 

 stuffy 

 1550s, "full of stuff, full of substance" (a sense now obsolete), from stuff (n.) + -y (2). In reference to rooms, buildings, "poorly ventilated, musty from closeness," by 1831. The figurative sense, of persons, is by 1813, originally "dull, lacking in freshness;" the meaning "po

 farce 

 late 14c., "force-meat, stuffing;" 1520s, in the dramatic sense "ludicrous satire; low comedy," from French farce "comic interlude in a mystery play" (16c.), literally "stuffing," from Old French farcir "to stuff," (13c.), from Latin farcire "to stuff, cram," which is of uncertai

 toy 

 Compare Middle Dutch toy, Dutch tuig "tools, apparatus; stuff, trash," in speeltuig "play-toy, plaything;" German Zeug "stuff..., matter, tools," Spielzeug "plaything, toy;" Danish tøj, Swedish tyg "stuff, gear."...

 truck 

 American English: "Truck at first meant market-garden produce; then it came to mean stuff in general, including 'doctor-stuff...

 Don Juan 

 "philanderer, womanizer," from the legendary dissolute Spanish nobleman whose rakish exploits formed the stuff of popular...

 mettle 

 forms of the word were used interchangeably (by Shakespeare and others) in the literal sense and in the figurative one of "stuff...

 recent 

 early 15c., "recently made," of foods, etc., "fresh, newly made," from Latin recentem (nominative recens) "lately done or made, of recent origin, new, fresh, young," from re- (see re-) + PIE root *ken- "fresh, new, young" (source also of Greek kainos "new;" Sanskrit kanina- "youn

 center 

 late 14c., "middle point of a circle; point round which something revolves," from Old French centre (14c.), from Latin centrum "center," originally the fixed point of the two points of a drafting compass (hence "the center of a circle"), from Greek kentron "sharp point, goad, sti

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 Share stuff 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stuff Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stuff">Etymology of stuff by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stuff. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stuff Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stuff," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stuff. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stuff." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stuff. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stuff." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stuff (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stuff 
 studied 
 studio 
 studious 
 studly 
 study 
 stuff 
 stuffed 
 stuffing 
 stuffy 
 Stuka 
 stultification 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix