URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pustule
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:04:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pustule - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pustule - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pustule 

 pustule (n.) 

 "small, inflammatory sore or tumor containing pus," late 14c., from Old French pustule (13c.) and directly from Latin pustula "blister, pimple" (from PIE imitative root *pu- (1) "blow, swell," on notion of "inflated area;" source also of Sanskrit pupphusah "lung," Greek physa "breath, blast, wind, bubble," Lithuanian pučiu, pūsti "to blow, swell," Old Church Slavonic puchati "to blow"). Compare emphysema . Related: Pustulant ; pustulate; pustulation .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to pustule 

 emphysema (n.) 

 1660s, "distention with air or other gasses," from Modern Latin, from Greek emphysema "swelling, inflation" (of the bowels, etc.), from emphysan "to blow in, inflate; to play the flute," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + physan "to blow," from physa "breath, blast" (see pustule ). Related: Emphysematous (adj.).

 pustular (adj.) 

 "of the nature of a pustule," 1739; see pustule + -ar .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pebble 

 Some sources compare Latin papula "pustule, pimple, swelling."...

 aggregation 

 early 15c., aggregacioun, originally in medicine (Chauliac), "formation of a pustule," from Medieval Latin aggregationem...

 push 

 An earlier Middle English noun push "a pustule, pimple, boil" probably is from pus by influence of push....

 boil 

 Compare Old Irish bolach "pustule," Gothic ufbauljan "to puff up," Icelandic beyla "hump."...

 hangnail 

 Compare Old English angnes "anxiety, trouble, pain, fear;" angset "eruption, pustule."...

 spring 

 Late Old English spring meant "carbuncle, pustule."...

 bristle 

 "stiff, coarse hair of certain animals," especially those set along the backs of hogs, Old English byrst "bristle," with metathesis of -r-, from Proto-Germanic *bursti- (source also of Middle Dutch borstel, German borste, Danish börste), from PIE *bhrsti- from root *bhars- "point

 indignation 

 c. 1200, from Old French indignacion "fury, rage; disrespect," or directly from Latin indignationem (nominative indignatio) "indignation, displeasure; a provocation, cause for indignation," noun of action from past participle stem of indignari "regard as unworthy, be angry or dis

 corner 

 late 13c., "place where streets or walls meet;" early 14c., "intersection of any two converging lines or surfaces; an angle," from Anglo-French cornere (Old French corner, corniere), from Old French corne "horn; corner," from Vulgar Latin *corna, from Latin cornua, plural of corn

 sanctuary 

 early 14c., seintuarie, sentwary, etc., "consecrated place, building set apart for holy worship; holy or sacred object," from Anglo-French sentuarie, Old French saintuaire "sacred relic, holy thing; reliquary, sanctuary," from Late Latin sanctuarium "a sacred place, shrine" (espe

 Share pustule 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pustule Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pustule">Etymology of pustule by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pustule. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pustule Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pustule," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pustule. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pustule." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pustule. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pustule." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pustule (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pustule 
 pussy 
 pussy-cat 
 pussyfoot 
 pussy-willow 
 pustular 
 pustule 
 put 
 putative 
 put-down 
 put-on 
 put-out 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close