URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/trade
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:12:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Trade - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Trade - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of trade 

 trade (n.) 

 late 14c., "path, track; course of action," senses now obsolete, a word introduced via the Hanse merchants from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German trade "a track, a trace, course" (presumably here in reference to a ship), which is cognate with Old English tredan (see tread (v.)). There are nautical uses of trade in Anglo-French apparently in reference to sheltered passages along the Brittany coast.

 The sense shifts dramatically from mid-16c., and the connection to tread is obscure now. As "one's habitual business" by 1540s, specifically "occupation, the craft or business one has learned and carries on for profit or a living," developed from the notion of "way, customary course of action, manner of life" (mid-15c.). The sense of "the buying and selling or exchange of commodities" is from 1550s.

 The meaning "an act of trading" is from 1829. Hence trades "handicrafts," as distinguished from liberal arts or learned professions. By 1650s trade was used in reference to anything practiced for a livelihood. The Trade has been "the London booksellers" since 1697 (it also has meant "prostitution" and "submarine service of the Royal Navy"). 

 In North American sports, "an exchange of players between clubs," by 1913. T rade-route is from 1873; trade-war is from 1899. Trade wind (1640s) has nothing to do with commerce, but preserves the obsolete sense of "in a habitual or regular course." Jack-of-all-trades  "person handy at any kind of work or business" is from 1610s ( Tom of all trades  is by 1630s).
 also from late 14c. 

 trade (v.) 

 1540s, "tread a path," from trade (n.). The modern intransitive sense of "engage in trade; carry on commerce; purchase or sell goods, wares or merchandise" developed from 1560s; for sense development see the noun.

 The general meaning "occupy oneself (in something)" is recorded from c. 1600. The sense of "to barter" is attested by 1793. The U.S. sports team sense of "to exchange one player for another" is attested by 1899. Related: Traded ; trading .

 To trade down "buy or sell cheaper goods, usually in larger quantities" is attested from 1942; trade up is by 1959. To trade places "exchange situations, swap circumstances" is from 1917. Trading post in the U.S. frontier sense is attested by 1796. Trading stamp , given by merchants and exchangeable for goods, is from 1897.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to trade 

 tread (v.) 

 Middle English treden (past tense trad , past participle troden ), from Old English tredan "go by feet, walk; step on, trample; traverse, pass through or over" (class V strong verb; past tense træd , past participle treden ), from Proto-Germanic *tred- (source also of Old Saxon tredan , Old Frisian treda , Middle Dutch treden , Old High German tretan , German treten , Gothic trudan , Old Norse troða ). This is said by Watkins to be from PIE *der- (1) "assumed base of roots meaning 'to run, walk, step.' " Related: Trod ; treaded ; treading .

 Especially "crush with the feet, thresh grain, press grapes" (late 14c.). In reference to a male bird, especially a domestic cock, "to copulate, cover (a female)," early 14c.; hence treader , treading-fowl , treadfowl , "vigorously sexual male bird," also used of men. 

 To tread a measure "dance" is from 1590s. To tread water in swimming, "move the feet and hands regularly up and down while keeping the body in an erect position in order to keep the head above the water," is attested by 1764. To tread the stage "perform in a drama" is by 1690s (as tread the boards by 1858). To tread (one's) shoe amiss , said of a woman, was an old euphemism for "be unchaste" (late 14c.).

 jack-of-all-trades (n.) 

 "person handy at any kind of work or business," often implying a lack of thorough expertness, 1610s, see jack (n.1) + trade (n.). Tom of all trades is attested by 1630s.

 slave-trade 
 tradable 
 trade union 
 trade-in 
 trademark 
 trade-name 
 trade-off 
 trader 
 tradesman 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 trademark 

 also trade-mark, 1838 (the thing itself is attested continuously from 14c., apparently the originals were watermarks on paper), from trade (n.) + mark (n.1) in a specialized sense of "stamp, seal, brand, etc. placed upon an article top indicate ownership or origin" (mid-13c.). Fi

 craft 

 Old English cræft (West Saxon, Northumbrian), -creft (Kentish), "power, physical strength, might," from Proto-Germanic *krab-/*kraf- (source also of Old Frisian kreft, Old High German chraft, German Kraft "strength, skill;" Old Norse kraptr "strength, virtue"). The ultimate etymo

 deal 

 "a part or portion," Middle English del, from from Old English dæl "a part of a whole, a share;" with qualification (great, etc.), "an extent, degree, quantity, amount," from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (source also of Old Norse deild, Old Frisian del "part; juridical district," Dutch

 commerce 

 1530s, "social intercourse;" 1580s, "interchange of goods or property, trade," especially trade on a large scale by transportation...between countries or different parts of the same country, from French commerce (14c.), from Latin commercium "trade, trafficking...

 merchandise 

 goods or commodities for profit;" mid-14c., "commodities of commerce; wares, movable objects, and articles for sale or trade...," from Anglo-French marchaundise, Old French marcheandise "goods, merchandise; trade, business" (12c.), from marchaunt "...

 Ritz 

 Lawyers representing the holder of the trade mark name ask that ritzy be deleted entirely from the dictionary, but "may be...able to tolerate Ritz (only) being listed, provided that in accordance with s.99A of the UK Trade Marks Act 1994, a revised...definition that makes it clear that it is a trade mark and therefore can only be used by The Ritz London, to alleviate our...

 handle 

 Cognate with Old Norse höndla "to seize, capture," Danish handle "to trade, deal," Old High German hantalon "feel, touch;...manage," German handeln "to bargain, trade."...The commercial sense "to trade or deal in" was weaker in English than in some other Germanic languages, but it strengthened...

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 urn 

 late 14c., "large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead," from Latin urna "a jar, vessel of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead" (also used as a ballot box and for drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus "pitcher, jug," and 

 run 

 Old English, "move swiftly by using the legs, go on legs more rapidly than walking," also "make haste, hurry; be active, pursue or follow a course," and, of inanimate things, "to move over a course." The modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which t

 Share trade 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/trade Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/trade">Etymology of trade by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of trade. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/trade Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of trade," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trade. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of trade." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trade. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of trade." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/trade (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near trade 
 tractive 
 tractor 
 tractor-trailer 
 trad 
 tradable 
 trade 
 trade union 
 trade-in 
 trademark 
 trade-name 
 trade-off 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix