URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/flute
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:38:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Flute - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Flute - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of flute 

 flute (n.) 

 early 14c., floute , "(musical) flute, shepherd's pipe," from Old French flaut , flahute , fleute (12c.), from Old Provençal flaut , which is of uncertain origin. Perhaps imitative or from Latin flare "to blow" (according to Watkins, from PIE root *bhle- "to blow"); perhaps influenced by Provençal laut "lute." Other Germanic words (such as German flöte ) likewise are borrowings from French.

 Ancient flutes were direct, blown straight through a mouthpiece but held away from the player's mouth; the modern transverse or German flute developed 18c. The older style then sometimes were called flûte-a-bec (French, literally "flute with a beak"). The modern design and key system of the concert flute were perfected 1834 by Theobald Boehm.

 The architectural sense of "furrow in a pillar" (1650s) is from fancied resemblance to the inside of a flute split down the middle. The meaning "tall, slender wine glass" is by 1640s.
 also from early 14c. 

 flute (v.) 

 late 14c., flouten , "play upon the flute," from flute (n.). The meaning "to make (architectural) flutes" is from 1570s. Related: Fluted ; fluting .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to flute 

 fluted (adj.) 

 "grooved, furrowed, ornamented," 1610s, past-participle adjective from flute (v.) in the architectural sense.

 flautist (n.) 

 1827, from Italian flautista , from flauto "flute" (from Late Latin flauta ; see flute (n.)) + Greek-derived suffix -ista .

 flutist 
 *bhle- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 piccolo 

 "small flute sounding an octave higher than the ordinary flute," 1830, from piccolo flute (1809), from French piccolo, from...Italian flauto piccolo "small flute," from piccolo "small," perhaps a children's made-up word, or from picca "point," or...The Octave Flute is frequently miscalled a Piccolo, whereas it is merely an octave higher in pitch than the concert flute...

 carol 

 Perhaps from Medieval Latin choraula "a dance to the flute," from Latin choraules "flute-player," from Greek khoraulēs "flute...player who accompanies the choral dance," from khoros "chorus" (see chorus) + aulein "to play the flute," from aulos "reed...

 pyrrhic 

 pyrrhicha, from Greek pyrrikhē orkhēsis, the war-dance of ancient Greece, in quick and light measure, accompanied by the flute...

 susurration 

 reduplication of a PIE imitative *swer- "to buzz, whisper" (source also of Sanskrit svarati "sounds, resounds," Greek syrinx "flute...

 alveolus 

 alvus "belly, stomach, paunch, bowels; hold of a ship," from PIE root *aulo- "hole, cavity" (source also of Greek aulos "flute...

 Muse 

 the nine Muses are: Calliope (epic poetry), Clio (history), Erato (love poetry, lyric art), Euterpe (music, especially flute...

 recorder 

 name, and the device, were rarely heard by mid-1800s (it is marked "obsolete" in Century Dictionary, 1895), ousted by the flute...

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic *widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu- "tree, wood" (source als

 fief 

 also feoff, 1610s, from French fief (12c.) "a 'feud,' possession, holding, domain; feudal duties, payment," from Medieval Latin feodum "land or other property whose use is granted in return for service," widely said to be from Frankish *fehu-od "payment-estate," or a similar Germ

 fife 

 1550s, from German Pfeife "fife, pipe," from Old High German pfifa; the English word is perhaps via French fifre (15c.) from the same Old High German word. Ultimately imitative (see pipe (n.1)). German musicians provided music for most European courts in those days. As a verb fro

 Share flute 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/flute Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/flute">Etymology of flute by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of flute. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/flute Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of flute," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/flute. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of flute." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/flute. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of flute." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/flute (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near flute 
 flush 
 flusher 
 Flushing 
 fluster 
 flustrated 
 flute 
 fluted 
 flutist 
 flutter 
 fluvial 
 flux 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix