URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cement
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:58:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cement - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cement - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cement 

 cement (n.) 

 kind of mortar or other substance that hardens as it dries, used to bind, c. 1300, from Old French ciment "cement, mortar, pitch," from Latin cæmenta "stone chips used for making mortar" (singular caementum ), from caedere "to cut down, chop, beat, hew, fell, slay" (from PIE root *kae-id- "to strike"). The sense evolution from "small broken stones" to "powdered stones used in construction" took place before the word reached English. Cement-mixer is from 1875.

 The term properly includes papier maché, gums, glues, mucilages, limes, mortars, and a great number of compounds of such nature as to admit of their assuming, under certain conditions, sticky, tenacious, or stone-like consistency. [Century Dictionary]
 also from c. 1300 

 cement (v.) 

 c. 1400, "to bind (solid bodies) together with or as with cement," from cement (n.) or Old French cimenter . The figurative sense "to unite firmly" is from c. 1600. Related: Cemented ; cementing .
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to cement 

 cementation (n.) 

 "process of producing cohesion," 1590s, from cement (v.) + noun ending -ation .

 *kae-id- 

 *kaə-id- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to strike."

 It might form all or part of: abscise ; avicide ; biocide ; caesarian ; caesura ; cement ; chisel ; -cide ; circumcise ; circumcision ; concise ; decide ; decision ; deicide ; excise (v.); excision ; felicide ; feticide ; filicide ; floricide ; fratricide ; fungicide ; gallinicide ; genocide ; germicide ; herbicide ; homicide ; incise ; incision ; incisor ; infanticide ; insecticide ; legicide ; liberticide ; libricide ; matricide ; parricide ; patricide ; pesticide ; precise ; precision ; prolicide ; scissors ; senicide ; spermicide ; suicide ; uxoricide ; verbicide .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit skhidati "beats, tears;" Latin caedere "to strike down, fell, slay;" Lithuanian kaišti "shave;" Armenian xait'em "to stab;" Albanian qeth "to shave;" Middle Dutch heien "to drive piles," Old High German heia "wooden hammer," German heien "beat."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Portland 

 Portland cement (1720) was named by its inventor, English mason Joseph Aspdin, from resemblance of the color to the popular...

 putty 

 1630s, "type of plasterer's fine paste or cement," from French potée "polishing powder" (12c.), originally "pot-full, contents...

 rubber 

 Rubber cement "adhesive compound containing rubber" is attested from 1856 (from 1823 as India-rubber cement)....

 lutose 

 Hence also English lute (n.) as a type of tenacious clay or cement used to stop holes, seal joints, etc....

 quarry 

 coal are taken ; from quarries are taken all the various materials used for building, as marble, freestone, slate, lime, cement...

 lime 

 "chalky, sticky mineral used in making mortar," from Old English lim "sticky substance, birdlime;" also "mortar, cement,...

 seal 

 In reference to jars or other containers, "to close up with wax, lead, cement, etc.," attested from 1660s, from the notion...

 concrete 

 late 14c., "actual, solid; particular, individual; denoting a substance," from Latin concretus "condensed, hardened, stiff, curdled, congealed, clotted," figuratively "thick; dim," literally "grown together;" past participle of concrescere "to grow together," from assimilated for

 fasten 

 Old English fæstnian "make fast, make firm, fix, secure," also "ratify, betroth, confirm," from Proto-Germanic *fastinon "to make firm or fast" (source also of Old Frisian festnia "to make firm, bind fast," Old Saxon fastnon, Old High German fastnion, German festnen, Old Norse fa

 surface 

 1610s, "the bounding or limiting parts of a body," from French surface "an outermost boundary, outside part" (16c.), from Old French sur- "above" (see sur-) + face (see face (n.)). The French words is patterned on Latin superficies "surface, upper side, top" (see superficial). Th

 Share cement 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cement Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cement">Etymology of cement by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cement. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cement Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cement," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cement. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cement." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cement. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cement." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cement (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cement 
 cellulose 
 Celsius 
 celt 
 Celt-Iberian 
 Celtic 
 cement 
 cementation 
 cemetery 
 cenacle 
 -cene 
 cenobite 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix