URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/swastika
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:41:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Swastika - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Swastika - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of swastika 

 swastika (n.) 

 "Greek cross with arms bent at right angles," 1871, from Sanskrit svastika-s , literally "being fortunate," from svasti-s "well-being, luck," from su- "well" (from PIE *(e)su- "good," originally a suffixed form of root *es- "to be") + as- , root of asti "(he) is," which also is from PIE root *es- "to be."

 Also known as a gammadion (Byzantine), a cross cramponnee (heraldry), Thor's hammer , and, perhaps, fylfot . The sign was originally an ancient cosmic or religious symbol thought to bring good luck. Use of the word in English in reference to the Nazi emblem is by 1932. The German word was Hakenkreuz , literally "hook-cross."
 also from 1871 

 Entries linking to swastika 

 fylfot (n.) 

 supposedly a native name for the swastika (used as a decorative device), but only attested in a single, damaged c. 1500 manuscript, and in that it might rather refer to any sort of device used to fill the bottom ( foot ) of a design. "[I]t is even possible that it may have been a mere nonce-word" [OED].

 gammadion (n.) 

 ornamental figure formed of four capital gammas , Medieval Greek gammadion , diminutive of Greek gamma (see gamma ).

 Hakenkreuz 
 *es- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 emblem 

 1580s, "relief, raised ornament on vessels, etc.," from Latin emblema "inlaid ornamental work," from Greek emblema (genitive emblematos) "an insertion," from emballein "to insert," literally "to throw in," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + ballein "to throw" (from 

 allegory 

 "figurative treatment of an unmentioned subject under the guise of another similar to it in some way," late 14c., allegorie, from Old French allegorie (12c.), from Latin allegoria, from Greek allegoria "figurative language, description of one thing under the image of another," li

 cross 

 Old English cros "instrument of Christ's crucifixion; symbol of Christianity" (mid-10c.), probably from Old Norse or another Scandinavian source, picked up by the Norse from Old Irish cros, from Latin crux (accusative crucem, genitive crucis) "stake, cross" on which criminals wer

 hammer 

 Old English hamor "hammer," from Proto-Germanic *hamaraz (source also of Old Saxon hamur, Middle Dutch, Dutch hamer, Old High German hamar, German Hammer). The Old Norse cognate hamarr meant "stone, crag" (it's common in English place names), and suggests an original sense of the

 engage 

 early 15c., engagen, "to pledge" (something, as security for payment), from Old French engagier "bind (by promise or oath), pledge; pawn" (12c.), from phrase en gage "under pledge," from en "in" (see en- (1)) + gage "pledge," through Frankish from Proto-Germanic *wadiare "pledge"

 press 

 c. 1300, presse, "a crowd, throng, company; crowding and jostling of a throng; a massing together," from Old French presse (n.) "a throng, a crush, a crowd; wine or cheese press" (11c.), from Latin pressare (see press (v.1)). Late Old English had press in the sense of "clothes pr

 cologne 

 "a distilled spirit blended with certain essential oils so as to give off a fragrant scent," by 1844, short for Cologne water (1814), loan-translation of French eau de Cologne (which also was used in English), literally "water from Cologne," from the city in Germany (German Köln,

 source 

 mid-14c., "support, base," from Old French sourse "a rising, beginning, fountainhead of a river or stream" (12c.), fem. noun taken from past participle of sourdre "to rise, spring up," from Latin surgere "to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack," a contraction of surrige

 college 

 late 14c., "organized association of persons invested with certain powers and rights or engaged in some common duty or pursuit," especially "body of scholars and students within an endowed institution of learning," also "resident body of ecclesiastics supported by an endowment," 

 humble 

 late 13c., of persons, "submissive, respectful, lowly in manner, modest, not self-asserting, obedient," from Old French humble, umble, earlier umele, from Latin humilis "lowly, humble," literally "on the ground," from humus "earth" (from PIE root *dhghem- "earth"). From late 14c.

 Share swastika 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/swastika Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/swastika">Etymology of swastika by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of swastika. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/swastika Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of swastika," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/swastika. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of swastika." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/swastika. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of swastika." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/swastika (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near swastika 
 swarthy 
 swash 
 swashbuckle 
 swashbuckler 
 swashbuckling 
 swastika 
 swat 
 swatch 
 swath 
 swathe 
 swatter 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix