URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/consul
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:09:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Consul - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Consul - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of consul 

 consul (n.) 

 late 14c., "one of the two chief magistrates in the Roman republic," from Old French consule and directly from Latin consul "magistrate in ancient Rome," probably originally "one who consults the Senate," from consulere "to deliberate, take counsel" (see consultation ).

 Its modern sense of "agent appointed by a sovereign state to reside in a foreign place to protect the interests of its citizens and commerce there" began with use of the word as appellation of a representative chosen by a community of merchants living in a foreign country (c. 1600), an extended sense that developed 13c. in the Spanish form of the word.

 In French history it refers to the title given to the three magistrates of the republic after the dissolution of the Directory in 1799. Old English glossed the Latin word with gercynig , "year-king, king whose authority lasted a year," as the closest notion of it they could form in their language (Ælfric's vocabulary also has it as gerefa "reeve," a high-ranking king's officer).
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to consul 

 consultation (n.) 

 early 15c., "a meeting of persons to consult together;" 1540s, "act of consulting," from Latin consultationem (nominative consultatio ) "a mature deliberation, consideration," noun of action from past-participle stem of consultare "to consult, ask counsel of; reflect, consider maturely," frequentative of consulere "to deliberate, consider," originally probably "to call together," as in consulere senatum "to gather the senate" (to ask for advice), from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con- ) + *selere "take, gather," for a total sense of "gather (the Senate) together," from PIE *selho- "to take, seize."

 De Vaan writes: "Since consulere does not look like a derivative of consul (we would rather expect consulare ), it appears that the verb was original and meant 'to get together, deliberate'."

 consular (adj.) 

 early 15c., "pertaining to a Roman consul," from Latin consularis "of or pertaining to a consul," from consul (see consul ). From 17c. as "pertaining to the office of a consul" in the modern sense in international law.

 consulate 
 proconsul 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 proconsul 

 late 14c., "governor or military commander of an ancient Roman province," having there most of the duties and authorities of a consul in Rome, from Latin proconsul "governor of a province; military commander," from phrase pro consule "(acting) in place of a consul," from pro "in 

 concordat 

 The most celebrated modern concordat is that concluded in 1801 between Napoleon Bonaparte as first consul and Pius VII.,...

 exile 

 It might be a derivative of a verb *ex-sulere 'to take out' to the root *selh- 'to take', cf. consul and consulere; hence...

 monument 

 late 13c., "a sepulchre," from Old French monument "grave, tomb, monument," and directly from Latin monumentum "a monument, memorial structure, statue; votive offering; tomb; memorial record," literally "something that reminds," a derivative of monere "to remind, bring to (one's)

 news 

 late 14c., "new things," plural of new (n.) "new thing" (see new (adj.)); after French nouvelles, which was used in Bible translations to render Medieval Latin nova (neuter plural) "news," literally "new things." The English word was construed as singular at least from the 1560s,

 curious 

 mid-14c., "subtle, sophisticated;" late 14c., "eager to know, inquisitive, desirous of seeing" (often in a bad sense), also "wrought with or requiring care and art;" from Old French curios "solicitous, anxious, inquisitive; odd, strange" (Modern French curieux) and directly from 

 treadmill 

 invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill (n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s. As a corrective punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the pris

 adjective 

 "word used to qualify, limit, or define a noun or noun-like part of speech," late 14c., short for noun adjective, from Old French adjectif (14c.), from Latin adjectivum "that is added to (the noun)," neuter of adjectivus "added," past participle of adicere "throw to, fling at, th

 dichotomy 

 c. 1600, "a cutting in two, division into two classes;" 1630s, "state of having a dual arrangement or order," from Latinized form of Greek dikhotomia "a cutting in half," from dikho-, combining form of dikha "in two, asunder" (from or related to dis "twice," from PIE root *dwo- "

 grim 

 Old English grimm "fierce, cruel, savage; severe, dire, painful," from Proto-Germanic *grimma- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German, German grimm "grim, angry, fierce," Old Norse grimmr "stern, horrible, dire," Swedish grym "fierce, furious"), from PIE *ghremno

 Share consul 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/consul Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/consul">Etymology of consul by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of consul. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/consul Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of consul," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/consul. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of consul." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/consul. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of consul." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/consul (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near consul 
 constructor 
 construe 
 consubstantial 
 consubstantiation 
 consuetude 
 consul 
 consular 
 consulate 
 consult 
 consultant 
 consultation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix