URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/harbor
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:09:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Harbor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Harbor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of harbor 

 harbor (n.) 

 "lodging for ships; sheltered recess in a coastline," early 12c., a specialized sense of Middle English herberwe "temporary dwelling place, quarters, lodgings; an inn; the camp of an army in the field," probably from Old English here-beorg (West Saxon), *here-berg (Anglian) "lodgings, quarters," from Proto-Germanic compound *harja-bergaz "shelter, lodgings," from *heri "army, host" (see harry (v.)) + *burzjan- "protection, shelter" (from PIE root *bhergh- (1) "to hide, protect"). Perhaps modeled on Old Norse herbergi "room, lodgings, quarters."
 also from early 12c. 

 harbor (v.) 

 Old English herebeorgian "take up quarters, lodge, shelter oneself" (cognate with Old Norse herbergja , Old High German heribergon , Middle Dutch herbergen ), verbal formation from here-beorg "lodgings, quarters" (see harbor (n.)). Meaning "give shelter to, protect" is from mid-14c. Figuratively, of thoughts, etc., from late 14c. Related: Harbored ; harboring .

 Entries linking to harbor 

 harry (v.) 

 Old English hergian "make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder," the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (source also of Old Frisian urheria "lay waste, ravage, plunder," Old Norse herja "to make a raid, to plunder," Old Saxon and Old High German herion , German verheeren "to destroy, lay waste, devastate"). This is literally "to overrun with an army," from Proto-Germanic *harjan "an armed force" (source also of Old English here , Old Norse herr "crowd, great number; army, troop," Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri , Dutch heir , Old High German har , German Heer , Gothic harjis "a host, army").

 The Germanic words come from PIE root *korio- "war" also "war-band, host, army" (source also of Lithuanian karas "war, quarrel," karias "host, army;" Old Church Slavonic kara "strife;" Middle Irish cuire "troop;" Old Persian kara "host, people, army;" Greek koiranos "ruler, leader, commander"). Weakened sense of "worry, goad, harass" is from c. 1400. Related: Harried ; harrying .

 arbor (n.1) 

 c. 1300, herber , "herb garden, pleasure garden," from Old French erbier "field, meadow; kitchen garden," from Latin herba "grass, herb" (see herb ). Later "a grassy plot" (mid-14c., a sense also in Old French), "shaded nook, bower formed by intertwining of trees, shrubs, or vines" (mid-14c.). It is probably not from Latin arbor "tree" (see arbor (n.2)), though perhaps that word has influenced its spelling:

 [O]riginally signifying a place for the cultivation of herbs, a pleasure-ground, garden, subsequently applied to the bower or rustic shelter which commonly occupied the most conspicuous situation in the garden ; and thus the etymological reference to herbs being no longer apparent, the spelling was probably accommodated to the notion of being sheltered by trees or shrubs (
 arbor ). [Hensleigh Wedgwood, "A Dictionary of English Etymology," 1859]

 But the change from er- to ar- before consonants in Middle English also reflects a pronunciation shift: compare farm from ferme , harbor from Old English herebeorg .

 harbinger 
 harbour 
 *bhergh- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 harbinger 

 late 15c., herbengar "one sent ahead to arrange lodgings" (for a monarch, an army, etc.), alteration of Middle English herberger "provider of shelter, innkeeper" (late 12c.), from Old French herbergeor "one who offers lodging, innkeeper," agent noun from herbergier "provide lodgi

 hold 

 Middle English holden, earlier halden, from Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), "to contain; to grasp; to retain (liquid, etc.); to observe, fulfill (a custom, etc.); to have as one's own; to have in mind (of opinions, etc.); to possess, control, rule; to detain, 

 entertain 

 late 15c., "to keep up, maintain, to keep (someone) in a certain frame of mind," from Old French entretenir "hold together, stick together, support" (12c.), from entre- "among" (from Latin inter; see inter-) + tenir "to hold" (from Latin tenere, from PIE root *ten- "to stretch").

 importune 

 importunari "to make oneself troublesome," from Latin importunus "unfit, unfavorable, troublesome," literally "having no harbor..." (thus "difficult to access"), from assimilated form of in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + portus "harbor" (see port...

 haven 

 late Old English hæfen "haven, port," from Old Norse höfn "haven, harbor" or directly from Proto-Germanic *hafno- (source...Havener "harbor master" is attested from mid-14c....

 port 

 bay, cove, inlet, or recess of a large body of water where vessels can load and unload and find shelter from storms; a harbor..., whether natural or artificial," Old English port "a port, harbor, a place where there is a constant resort of vessels for...the purpose of loading and unloading;" also "a town, market town, city," reinforced by Old French port "harbor, port; mountain...The Old English and Old French words both are from Latin portus "a port, harbor," figuratively "haven, place of refuge, asylum...

 pier 

 Meaning "solid structure in a harbor, used as a landing place for vessels; mole or jetty projecting out to protect vessels...

 dock 

 "ship's berth, any structure in or upon which a ship may be held for loading, repairing, etc.," late 15c., dokke, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German docke, which is perhaps ultimately (via Late Latin *ductia "aqueduct") from Latin ducere "to lead" (from PIE root *deuk- "to le

 nurse 

 c. 1200, norice, nurrice, "wet-nurse, woman who nourishes or suckles an infant; foster-mother to a young child," from Old French norrice "foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny" (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin *nutricia "nurse, governess, tutoress," noun use of fem. of L

 experience 

 late 14c., "observation as the source of knowledge; actual observation; an event which has affected one," from Old French esperience "experiment, proof, experience" (13c.), from Latin experientia "a trial, proof, experiment; knowledge gained by repeated trials," from experientem 

 Share harbor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/harbor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/harbor">Etymology of harbor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of harbor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/harbor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of harbor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harbor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of harbor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harbor. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of harbor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/harbor (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near harbor 
 haram 
 harangue 
 harass 
 harassment 
 harbinger 
 harbor 
 harbour 
 hard 
 hard hat 
 hard-ass 
 hardback 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix