URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/parting
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:44:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Parting - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Parting - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of parting 

 parting (n.) 

 mid-13c., "the act of going away, departure;" c. 1300, "separation of persons, leave-taking," also "the act of dividing or putting asunder; distribution, apportionment;" verbal noun from part (v.). From late 14c. as "the act or process of dividing; a division or separation; a dividing line, a point or place of separation or division."
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to parting 

 part (v.) 

 c. 1200, parten "to depart, leave;" late 13c., "cause (things, persons) to separate;" from Old French partir "to divide, separate" (10c.), from Latin partire / partiri "to share, part, distribute, divide," from pars "a part, piece, a share" (from PIE root *pere- (2) "to grant, allot").

 Meaning "divide" (something), especially "divide by cutting or cleaving" is from c. 1300; that of "to share something" (with others) is from early 14c. Of persons, "to separate from one another," early 14c., also intransitive, "draw or hold (persons) apart, separate by intervening." Intransitive sense of "become disunited" is from early 14c.; that of "be divided or severed" is from 1570s. Meaning "to separate the hair, comb the hair away from a dividing line" is attested from 1610s. Related: Parted ; parting . To part with "surrender" is from 1580s; earlier it meant "to share with" (mid-13c.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 leave 

 Old English læfan "to allow to remain in the same state or condition; to let remain, allow to survive; to have left (of a deceased person, in reference to heirs, etc.); to bequeath (a heritage)," from Proto-Germanic *laibjanan (source also of Old Frisian leva "to leave," Old Saxo

 leave-taking 

 late 14c., from the verbal phrase to take leave, originally "obtain or receive formal permission" in any sense (c. 1300); see take (v.) + leave (n.). Sense evolution was through "receive formal permission to depart;" by 16c. it had begun to mean "depart with an expression of fare

 adieu 

 it was said to the party left (farewell was to the party setting forth), but in English it came to be used as a general parting...Compare the native parting salutation good-bye, a contraction of God be with ye....

 severance 

 difference," also, of apprentices, "release from previous obligations," from Anglo-French, from Old French sevrance "separation, parting...

 cleft 

 In Middle English anatomy, it meant "the parting of the thighs" (early 14c.)....

 partition 

 Meaning "act of parting or dividing, state of being divided" is from c. 1500....

 so long 

 parting salutation, 1860, of unknown origin, perhaps from a German idiom (compare German parting salutation adieu so lange...Dictionary of American Slang" also adds to the list of candidates Irish slán "safe," said to be used as a salutation in parting...Whitman's friend and fan William Sloane Kennedy wrote in 1923: The salutation of parting — 'So long!'...

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 dismember 

 c. 1300, dismembren, "to cut off the limbs of," also figuratively "to scatter, disperse, divide into parts or sections so as to destroy the integrity," from Old French desmembrer (11c., Modern French démembrer), from Medieval Latin dismembrare "tear limb from limb; castrate," fro

 start 

 Middle English sterten, "leap, jump, cavort, caper," from Old English *steortian, *stiertan, Kentish variants of styrtan "to leap up" (but the Old English verb is attested only in Northumbrian past participle sturtende), from Proto-Germanic *stert- (source also of Old Frisian ste

 Share parting 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/parting Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/parting">Etymology of parting by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of parting. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/parting Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of parting," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parting. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of parting." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parting. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of parting." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/parting (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near parting 
 particular 
 particularity 
 particularize 
 particularly 
 particulate 
 parting 
 partisan 
 partisanship 
 partition 
 partitive 
 partizan 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix