URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/garble
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:07:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Garble - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Garble - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of garble 

 garble (v.) 

 early 15c., "to inspect and remove the dirt and dross from (spices)," from Anglo-French garbeler "to sift" (late 14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin, Catalan, and Italian garbellare , from Arabic gharbal "to sift," related to kirbal "sieve," which perhaps is from Late Latin cribellum , diminutive of Latin cribrum "sieve" (from PIE root *krei- "to sieve"). Apparently the word was widespread among Mediterranean traders (compare Italian garbellare , Spanish garbillare "to sift grain").

 In later-medieval Europe, pepper and ginger and some other spices were always imports from the Arabic-speaking Eastern Mediterranean, and the same goes for many botanical drugs, and a few expensive colorants. The spices, drugs and colorants had variable amounts of natural chaff residuals and occasionally had unnatural added chaff. ["English Words of Arabic Ancestry"]

 From late 15c. in a general sense of "sort out the finer parts" of anything, "removal of what is objectionable," then "distort for some devious purpose or to give false impression;" especially "mix up, confuse or distort language" (1680s). Related: Garbled ; garbling . In Middle English garbeler (Anglo-French garbelour ) meant "official who garbles spices and sometimes also other dry goods" (early 15c.); it is attested from 1690s as "one who mixes up or mutilates words or language."
 also from early 15c. 

 garble (n.) 

 c. 1500 of spices; by 1829 of language; from garble (v.).
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to garble 

 garbled (adj.) 

 by 1620s of spices; by 1774 of language; past-participle adjective from garble (v.).

 garbage (n.) 

 "refuse, filth," 1580s; earlier "giblets, refuse of a fowl, waste parts of an animal (head, feet, etc.) used for human food" (early 15c., in early use also gabage , garbish , garbidge ), of unknown origin; OED says probably from Anglo-French "like many other words found in early cookery books." In its sense of "waste material, refuse" it has been influenced by and partly confused with garble (q.v.) in its older sense of "remove refuse material from spices;" Middle English had the derived noun garbelage but it is attested only as the action of removing the refuse, not the material itself.

 Perhaps the English word originally is from a derivative of Old French garbe / jarbe "sheaf of wheat, bundle of sheaves," though the sense connection is difficult. This word is from Proto-Germanic *garba- (source also of Dutch garf , German garbe "sheaf"), from PIE *ghrebh- (1) "to seize, reach" (see grab (v.)).

 "In modern American usage garbage is generally restricted to mean kitchen and vegetable wastes" [Craigie]. Used figuratively for "worthless, offensive stuff" from 1590s. Garbage can is from 1901. Garbage collector "trash man" is from 1872; Australian shortening garbo attested from 1953. Garbology "study of waste as a social science" is by 1976; garbologist is from 1965.

 tariff 
 *krei- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tariff 

 1590s, "arithmetical table," also "official list or table of customs duties on goods for import or export;" also "a law regulating import duties," from Italian tariffa "tariff, price, assessment," Medieval Latin tarifa "list of prices, book of rates," ultimately from Arabic ta'ri

 distort 

 1580s, "twist the true meaning, pervert the truth regarding," from Latin distortus, past participle of distorquere "to twist different ways, distort," from dis- "completely" (see dis-) + torquere "to twist" (from PIE root *terkw- "to twist"). Literal sense of "to twist or wrest o

 warp 

 "to bend, twist, distort," Old English weorpan "to throw, throw away, hit with a missile," from Proto-Germanic *werpanan "to fling by turning the arm" (source also of Old Saxon werpan, Old Norse verpa "to throw," Swedish värpa "to lay eggs," Old Frisian werpa, Middle Low German a

 mangle 

 .; as "to mispronounce (words), garble," from 1530s. Related: Mangled; mangler; mangling....

 chiropodist 

 classicists, who point out it could mean "having chapped feet" but probably doesn't, and in that case it is an etymological garble...

 belie 

 Middle English bilien, "tell a lie about, accuse falsely, slander," from Old English beleogan "to deceive by lies," from be- + lie (v.1) "to lie, tell lies." The  sense of "to contradict as a lie, give the lie to, show to be false" is attested by 1640s. The other verb lie on

 wrap 

 early 14c., wrappen, "to wind (something around something else), cover (something), conceal; bind up, swaddle; fold (something) up or back on itself," of uncertain origin, perhaps via Scandinavian (compare Danish dialectal vravle "to wind"), from PIE *werp- "to turn, wind," from 

 cognitive 

 1580s, "pertaining to cognition," with -ive + Latin cognit-, past participle stem of cognoscere "to get to know, recognize," from assimilated form of com "together" (see co-) + gnoscere "to know" (from PIE root *gno- "to know"). Taken over by psychologists and sociologists after 

 castor 

 late 14c., "a beaver," from Old French castor (13c.), from Latin castor "beaver," from Greek kastor "beaver," perhaps literally "he who excels," and thus identical with the name of one of the divine twins (with Pollux), worshipped by women in ancient Greece as a healer and preser

 pilgrim 

 c. 1200, pilegrim, "a person traveling to a holy place (as a penance or to discharge some vow or religious obligation, or seeking some miracle or spiritual benefit)," also "a traveler" generally, "a wayfarer," from Old French pelerin, peregrin "pilgrim, crusader; foreigner, stran

 Share garble 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/garble Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/garble">Etymology of garble by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of garble. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/garble Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of garble," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/garble. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of garble." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/garble. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of garble." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/garble (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near garble 
 garage 
 Garamond 
 garb 
 garbage 
 garbanzo 
 garble 
 garbled 
 Garbo 
 garcon 
 garden 
 gardener 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix