URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/John
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:20:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: John - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

John - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of John 

 John 

 masc. proper name, Middle English Jon , Jan (mid-12c.), from Old French Jan , Jean , Jehan (Modern French Jean ), from Medieval Latin Johannes , an alteration of Late Latin Joannes , from Greek Ioannes , from Hebrew Yohanan (longer form y'hohanan ), said to mean literally "Jehovah has favored" or "Jah is gracious," from hanan "he was gracious."

 Greek conformed the Hebrew ending to its own customs. The -h- in English was inserted in imitation of the Medieval Latin form. Old English had the Biblical name as Iohannes . As the name of John the Baptist and John the Evangelist, it was one of the most frequent Christian given names, and in England by early 14c. it rivaled William in popularity and was used generically (in Middle English especially of priests) and as an appellative (as in John Barleycorn , John Bull , John Q. Public ). Somehow it also became the characteristic name of a Chinaman (1818).

 The Latin name also is the source of French Jean , Spanish Juan , Italian Giovanni , Portuguese João , also Dutch Jan , Hans , German Johann , Russian Ivan . Welsh form was Ieuan , Efan (see Evan ), but Ioan was adopted for the Welsh Authorized Version of the Bible, hence frequency of Jones as a Welsh surname.
 also from mid-12c. 

 john (n.) 

 "toilet," 1932, probably from jakes , used for "toilet" since 15c. Meaning "prostitute's customer" is from 1911, probably from the common, and thus anonymous, name by which they identified themselves. Meaning "policeman" is by 1901, from shortening of johndarm (1823), a jocular Englishing of gendarme .

 "John Darm! who's he?" "What, don't you know! 

 In Paris he is all the go; 

 Like money here,—he's every thing; 

 A demigod—at least a king! 

 You cannot fight, you cannot drink, 

 Nor have a spree, nor hardly think, 

 For fear you should create a charm, 

 To conjure up the fiend John Darm! 

 ["John Darm," in "Varieties in Verse," John Ogden, London, 1823] 
 also from 1932 

 Entries linking to John 

 Evan 

 masc. proper name, Welsh form of John , perhaps influenced in form by Welsh ieuanc "young man" (cognate of Latin juvenis ), from Celtic *yowanko- , from PIE *yeu- "vital force, youthful vigor" (see young (adj.)).

 gendarme (n.) 

 "French military police," 1796, from French (they were first organized in France 1790); earlier "mounted trooper" (1540s), from French contraction (14c.) of gens d'armes "men at arms." Gens is plural of gent "nation, people," from Latin gentem (nominative gens ) "race, nation, people" (from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget," with derivatives referring to procreation and familial and tribal groups). For armes see arm (n.2). Related: Gendarmerie , gendarmery . French also had gens de (la) robe "lawyers," which was sometimes borrowed in English.

 jakes 
 John Bull 
 John Q. Public 
 Jones 
 Hans 
 Ian 
 Ivan 
 Jack 
 Jane 
 Jankin 
 Jean 
 Joan 
 joe 
 Johannine 
 Johnny 
 Jonathan 
 Juan 
 Sean 
 See All Related Words (20) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 joe 

 "coffee," by 1932, likely derived from Java, a noted source of fine coffee, as explained in the glossary of naval terms in Robert P. Erdman, "Reserve Officer's Manual, United States Navy" (Washington, 1932). The guess that it is from the name of U.S. coffee merchant Joseph Martin

 toilet 

 1530s, earliest in English in an obsolete sense "cover or bag for clothes," from French toilette "a cloth; a bag for clothes," diminutive of toile "cloth, net" (see toil (n.2)). Toilet acquired an association with upper class dressing by 18c., through the specific sense "a fine c

 lavatory 

 late 14c., "washbasin," from Late Latin lavatorium "place for washing," noun use of neuter of Latin adjective lavatorius "pertaining to washing," from lavat-, past participle stem of lavare "to wash," from PIE root *leue- "to wash." Sense of "washroom" is first attested 1650s; as

 weasel 

 A John Wesilheued ("John Weaselhead") turns up on the Lincolnshire Assize Rolls for 1384, but the name seems not to have...

 Baskerville 

 typeface style, 1802 (the type was created in the 1750s), named for John Baskerville (1706-1775), British type-founder and...The initial version were cut by John Handy under Baskerville's watchful eye....

 mathematical 

 [Sir John Hawkins, "A General History of the Science and Practice of Music," Sir John Hawkins, 1776]...

 Marshall 

 Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall (1755-1835)....The Marshall Islands in the western Pacific were explored in 1788 by British naval captains John Marshall (1748-1819) and...

 commode 

 1786, "decorative chest of drawers for holding clothes, handy articles, etc.," earlier (1680s) name of a type of fashionable ladies' large, high headdress mounted on a wire frame, from French commode, noun use of adjective meaning "convenient, suitable," from Latin commodus "prop

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 loo 

 "lavatory," 1940, but perhaps 1922 (based on a pun of Joyce's); perhaps [Dictionary of American Slang] from French lieux d'aisances "lavatory," literally "place of ease," picked up by British servicemen in France during World War I. Or possibly a pun on Waterloo, based on water c

 Share John 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/John Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/John">Etymology of John by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of John. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/John Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of John," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/John. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of John." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/John. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of John." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/John (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near John 
 jogger 
 jogging 
 joggle 
 jog-trot 
 Johannine 
 John 
 John Bull 
 John Doe 
 John Hancock 
 John Q. Public 
 Johnnie 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix