URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sincere
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sincere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sincere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sincere 

 sincere (adj.) 

 1530s, "pure, unmixed, unadulterated;" also "free from pretense or falsehood," from French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus , of things, "whole, clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed," figuratively "sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful" (unadulterated by deceit), a word of uncertain origin.

 There has been a temptation to see the first element as Latin sine "without." But there is no etymological justification for the common story that the word means "without wax" ( *sine cera ), which is dismissed out of hand by OED, Century Dictionary ("untenable"), and others, and the stories invented to justify that folk etymology are even less plausible. Watkins has it as originally "of one growth" (i.e. "not hybrid, unmixed"), from PIE *sm-ke-ro- , from *sem- "one" (see same ) + root of crescere "to grow" (from PIE root *ker- (2) "to grow"). De Vaan finds plausible a source in a lost adjective *caerus "whole, intact," from a PIE root meaning "whole."
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to sincere 

 same (adj.) 

 "identical, equal; unchanging; one in substance or general character," from Proto-Germanic *samaz "same" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic sama , Old High German samant , German samt "together, with," Gothic samana "together," Dutch zamelen "to collect," German zusammen "together"), from PIE *samos "same," from suffixed form of root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with."

 Old English seems to have lost the adjective except in the adverbial phrase swa same "the same as" (literally "so same"). But the word that emerged in Middle English as "the ordinary adjectival pronominal designation of identity" [OED] is considered to be more likely (or mostly) from the Old Norse cognate same , samr "same." In its revival it replaced synonymous ilk .

 As a pronoun, "the person or thing just mentioned," from c. 1300. In Middle English also a verb and an adjective, "together, mutually" (as in comen same "gather together, unite," kissen same "embrace one another").

 Colloquial phrase same here "the same thing applies to me" as an exclamation of agreement is from 1895. All the same is from 1803 as "nevertheless, in spite of what has been mentioned." Same difference , a curious way to say "not different; equal," is attested from 1945. Often expanded for emphasis: ilk-same (mid-13c.); the self-same (early 15c.); one and the sam e is in Wycliffe (late 14c.), translating Latin unus atque idem. 

 insincere (adj.) 

 1620s (implied in insincerely ), from Latin insincerus "spoiled, corrupted; not genuine, not pure, adulterated," from in- "not" (see in- (1)) + sincerus "genuine, candid" (see sincere ). Related: Insincerely .

 sincerely 
 sincerity 
 *ker- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 earnest 

 "serious or grave in speech or action," early 14c., ernest, from Old English eornoste (adj.) "zealous, serious," or from Old English noun eornost "seriousness, serious intent" (surviving only in the phrase in earnest), from Proto-Germanic *er-n-os-ti- (source also of Old Saxon er

 solemn 

 mid-14c., solemne, solempne, "performed with due religious ceremony or reverence; sacred, devoted to religious observances," also, of a vow, etc., "made under religious sanction, binding," from Old French solempne, solemne (12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin so

 very 

 verray "true, real, genuine," later "actual, sheer" (late 14c.), from Anglo-French verrai, Old French verai "true, truthful, sincere...

 devout 

 Meaning "sincere, solemn" is from mid-15c. Related: Devoutly; devoutness....

 urbane 

 Urbane; literally city-like, expresses a sort of politeness which is not only sincere and kind, but peculiarly suave and...

 application 

 The meaning "sincere hard effort" is from c. 1600....

 honorable 

 Meaning "honest, sincere, in good faith" is from 1540s; sense of "acting justly" is from c. 1600....

 sine 

 one of the three fundamental functions of trigonometry,  1590s (in Thomas Fale's "Horologiographia, the Art of Dialling"), from Latin sinus "fold in a garment, bend, curve, bosom" (see sinus). The Latin word was used mid-12c. by Gherardo of Cremona's Medieval Latin translati

 harlot 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), "vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue," from Old French herlot, arlot "vagabond, tramp, vagrant; rascal, scoundrel," with cognates in Old Provençal (arlot), Old Spanish (arlote), and Italian (arlotto), but of unknown origin. Usually ma

 scapegoat 

 1530, "goat sent into the wilderness on the Day of Atonement as a symbolic bearer of the sins of the people," coined by Tyndale from scape, a shortening of escape (see scape (v.)) + goat; the whole word translating Latin caper emissarius, itself a translation in Vulgate of Hebrew

 Share sincere 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sincere Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sincere">Etymology of sincere by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sincere. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sincere Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sincere," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sincere. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sincere." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sincere. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sincere." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sincere (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sincere 
 simurgh 
 sin 
 sin city 
 Sinai 
 since 
 sincere 
 sincerely 
 sincerity 
 sinciput 
 sine 
 sine die 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix