URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/xero-
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:38:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Xero- - Etymology & Meaning of the Suffix

Xero- - Etymology & Meaning of the Suffix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of xero- 

 xero- 

 before vowels, xer- , word-forming element of Greek origin used from mid-129c. in scientific and technical terms, meaning "dry," from Greek xero- , combining form of x ē ros "dry, arid, withered."

 This is reconstructed in Watkins, etc., to be from PIE root *ksero- "dry" (source also of Latin serenus "clear, unclouded," serescere "become dry;" Greek xeron "dry land;" Old High German serawen , German serben "to dry out").

 Entries linking to xero- 

 xerasia (n.) 

 "excessive dryness of hair," 1706, medical Latin, from Greek xerasia "dryness," from xeros "dry, withered" (see xero- ).

 xeric (adj.) 

 "having little moisture, very dry," 1926; see xero- + -ic .

 xeroderma 
 xerography 
 xerophagy 
 xerophilous 
 xerophyte 
 xerosis 
 xerotic 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 regeneration 

 mid-14c., regeneracioun, "act of regenerating or producing anew," originally spiritual, also of the Resurrection, from Old French regeneracion (Modern French regénération) and directly from Late Latin regenerationem (nominative regeneratio) "a being born again," noun of action fr

 hyperbole 

 "obvious exaggeration in rhetoric," early 15c., from Latin hyperbole, from Greek hyperbole "exaggeration, extravagance," literally "a throwing beyond," from hyper- "beyond" (see hyper-) + bole "a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile, bolt, beam," from bol-, nominative ste

 preposterous 

 1540s, "contrary to nature, reason, or common sense," from Latin praeposterus "absurd, contrary to nature, inverted, perverted, in reverse order," literally "before-behind" (compare topsy-turvy, cart before the horse), from prae "before" (see pre-) + posterus "subsequent, coming 

 incarceration 

 "fact of being imprisoned," 1530s, from Medieval Latin incarcerationem (nominative incarceratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of incarcerare "to imprison," from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + carcer "prison, an enclosed space," from Proto-Italic *kar-kr(o)-, whi

 realism 

 "the doctrine of a realist," in any sense of that word, 1794, originally in philosophy, from real (adj.) + -ism; after French réalisme or German Realismus; from Late Latin realis "real." In reference to scholastic doctrine of Thomas Aquinas (opposed to nominalism), it is recorded

 refugee 

 1680s, "one who flees to a refuge or shelter or place of safety; one who in times of persecution or political disorder flees to a foreign country for safety," from French refugié, a noun use of the past participle of refugier "to take shelter, protect," from Old French refuge "hi

 dismay 

 c. 1300, dismaien, "become or be alarmed, upset, or frightened; to confound, break down the courage of by danger or difficulty or fear of calamity, fill with despairing apprehension;" perhaps formed in Anglo-French or Middle English from dis-, here probably intensive (see dis-), 

 kudos 

 "fame, renown, glory," 1799, probably originally in university slang, from Greek kydos "glory, fame," especially in battle, "a poetical word, found chiefly in the Iliad and Odyssey" [Century Dictionary], literally "that which is heard of," perhaps from PIE root *keu- "to see, obs

 preposition 

 late 14c., preposicioun, in grammar, "indeclinable part of speech regularly placed before and governing a noun in an oblique case and showing its relation to a verb, adjective, or other noun," from Latin praepositionem (nominative praepositio) "a putting before, a prefixing," nou

 patsy 

 "fall guy, victim of a deception," by 1903, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Italian pazzo "madman" (see patch (n.2)), or south Italian dialectal paccio "fool." Another theory traces it to Patsy Bolivar, character created by Billy B. Van in an 1890s vaudeville skit 

 Share xero- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/xero- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/xero-">Etymology of xero- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of xero-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/xero- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of xero-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/xero-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of xero-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/xero-. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of xero-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/xero- (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near xero- 
 xenophobia 
 xenophobic 
 xerasia 
 Xeres 
 xeric 
 xero- 
 xeroderma 
 xerography 
 xerophagy 
 xerophilous 
 xerophyte 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix