URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/client
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:57:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Client - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Client - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of client 

 client (n.) 

 late 14c., "one who lives under the patronage of another," from Anglo-French clyent (c. 1300), from Latin clientem (nominative cliens ) "follower, retainer" (related to clinare "to incline, bend"), from PIE *klient- , a suffixed (active participle) form of root *klei- "to lean." The notion apparently is "one who leans on another for protection." In ancient Rome, a plebeian under the guardianship and protection of a patrician (who was called patronus in this relationship; see patron ).

 The meaning "a lawyer's customer" is attested from c. 1400, and by c. 1600 the word was extended to any customer who puts a particular interest in the care and management of another. Related: Cliency .

 The relation of client and patron between a plebeian and a patrician, although at first strictly voluntary, was hereditary, the former bearing the family name of the latter, and performing various services for him and his family both in peace and war, in return for advice and support in respect to private rights and interests. Foreigners in Rome, and even allied or subject states and cities, were often clients of Roman patricians selected by them as patrons. The number of a patrician's clients, as of a baron's vassals in the middle ages, was a gage his greatness. [Century Dictionary]
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to client 

 patron (n.) 

 c. 1300, patroun , "a lord-master, one who protects, supports, or encourages," also "one who has the right of presenting a clergyman to a preferment," from Old French patron "patron, protector, patron saint" (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin patronus "patron saint, bestower of a benefice; lord, master; model, pattern, example," from Latin patronus "defender, protector; former master (of a freed slave); advocate," from pater (genitive patris ) "father" (see father (n.)). A doublet of pattern (n.); also compare patroon .

 From late 14c. as "founder of a religious order," also "a patron saint." The meaning "one who advances and encourages the cause or work" of an artist, institution, etc., usually by means of the person's wealth and power, is suggested from late 14c., clearly in this sense by c. 1600; "commonly a wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery" [Johnson]. The commercial sense of "regular customer" is recorded from c. 1600. Patron saint "saint regarded as a special protector of a person, place, profession, etc." (by 1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).

 clientele (n.) 

 1560s, "body of professed adherents, clients collectively under the patronage of someone," from French clientèle (16c.), from Latin clientela "relationship between dependent and patron; body of clients," from clientem (nominative cliens , "follower, retainer;" see client ).

 The word is said in OED to apparently have become obsolete after 17c., and the main modern meaning "customers, those who regularly patronize a business or professional" is from 1857, perhaps a reborrowing from French (it was used in English in italics as a foreign word from 1836).

 Clientage is attested from 1630s as "a body of clients;" clientship from 1640s as "condition of being a client."

 *klei- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to lean."

 It might form all or part of: acclivity ; anticline ; clemency ; client ; climate ; climax ; cline ; clinic ; clinical ; clino- ; clitellum ; clitoris ; decline ; declivity ; enclitic ; heteroclite ; incline ; ladder ; lean (v.); lid ; low (n.2) "small hill, eminence;" matroclinous ; patroclinous ; polyclinic ; proclitic ; proclivity ; recline ; synclinal ; thermocline .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit srayati "leans," sritah "leaning;" Old Persian cay "to lean;" Lithuanian šlyti "to slope," šlieti "to lean;" Latin clinare "to lean, bend," clivus "declivity," inclinare "cause to bend," declinare "bend down, turn aside;" Greek klinein "to cause to slope, slant, incline;" Old Irish cloin "crooked, wrong;" Middle Irish cle , Welsh cledd "left," literally "slanting").

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 guest 

 Old English gæst, giest (Anglian gest) "an accidental guest, a chance comer, a stranger," from Proto-Germanic *gastiz (source also of Old Frisian jest, Dutch gast, German Gast, Gothic gasts "guest," originally "stranger"), from PIE root *ghos-ti- "stranger, guest, host" (source a

 customer 

 late 14c., custumer, "customs official, toll-gatherer;" c. 1400, "one who purchases goods or supplies, one who customarily buys from the same tradesman or guild," from Anglo-French custumer, Old French coustumier, from Medieval Latin custumarius "a toll-gatherer, tax-collector," 

 nonchalant 

 French chaland "customer, client" is of the same origin. Related: Nonchalantly....

 necessary 

 genitalia; lavatory," and directly from Latin necessarius (n.), in classical Latin "a relation, relative, kinsman; friend, client...

 lawyer 

 late 14c. lauier, lawer, lawere (mid-14c. as a surname), "one versed in law, one whose profession is suits in court or client...

 application 

 aplicacion (14c.), from Latin applicationem (nominative applicatio) "a joining to, an attaching oneself to; relation of a client...

 trick 

 Meaning "prostitute's client" is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for "a robbery" (1865)....

 case 

 early 13c., "what befalls one; state of affairs," from Old French cas "an event, happening, situation, quarrel, trial," from Latin casus "a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap," literally "a falling," from cas-, past-participle stem of cadere "to fall, sink, settle do

 John 

 masc. proper name, Middle English Jon, Jan (mid-12c.), from Old French Jan, Jean, Jehan (Modern French Jean), from Medieval Latin Johannes, an alteration of Late Latin Joannes, from Greek Ioannes, from Hebrew Yohanan (longer form y'hohanan), said to mean literally "Jehovah has fa

 done 

 past participle of do (v.); from Old English past participle gedon (a vestige of the prefix is in ado). As a past-participle adjective meaning "completed, finished, performed, accomplished" from early 15c. As a word of acceptance of a deal or wager, 1590s. U.S. Southern use of do

 Share client 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/client Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/client">Etymology of client by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of client. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/client Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of client," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/client. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of client." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/client. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of client." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/client (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near client 
 clew 
 cliche 
 click 
 click-bait 
 clicker 
 client 
 clientele 
 cliff 
 cliff-hanger 
 Clifford 
 climacteric 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix