URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmoil
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T15:58:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Turmoil - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Turmoil - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of turmoil 

 turmoil (n.) 

 "distracting confusion; tumult, disturbance, and trouble;" 1520s, of uncertain origin, attested earlier as a verb (1510s, also turmoyle ),with no apparent corresponding word in French. Some French sources have suggested it is from an alteration of French tremouille "mill hopper" (a word variously explained), in reference to the hopper's constant motion to and fro. Influence from moil also is possible (OED, 1989). The verbal sense now is obsolete. Related: Turmoilous (1550s).
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to turmoil 

 moil (v.) 

 c. 1400, "to wet, moisten," from Old French moillier "to wet, moisten" (12c., Modern French mouiller ), from Vulgar Latin *molliare , from Latin mollis "soft," from PIE root *mel- (1) "soft." Sense of "drudge, labor, toil" (1540s) probably is via the notion of "to labor in dirt or mire." Related: Moiled ; moiling .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 convulsion 

 1580s, "a violent and involuntary contraction of the muscular parts of the body," from Latin convulsionem (nominative convulsio) "cramp, convulsion," noun of action from past-participle stem of convellere "to tear loose," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) +

 agitation 

 1560s, "debate, discussion" (on the notion of "a mental tossing to and fro"), from French agitation, from Latin agitationem (nominative agitatio) "motion, agitation," noun of action from past-participle stem of agitare "move to and fro," frequentative of agere "to set in motion, 

 perturb 

 mind, from per "through" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through") + turbare "disturb, confuse," from turba "turmoil...

 trouble 

 c. 1200, "agitation of the mind, emotional turmoil," from Old French truble, torble "trouble, disturbance" (12c.), from trubler...

 turbine 

 turbine (19c.), from Latin turbinem (nominative turbo) "spinning top, eddy, whirlwind, that which whirls," related to turba "turmoil...

 disturbance 

 Latin disturbare "throw into disorder," from dis- "completely" (see dis-) + turbare "to disorder, disturb," from turba "turmoil...

 battle 

 or hostile engagement between opposing forces," c. 1300, from Old French bataille "battle, single combat," also "inner turmoil...

 flutter 

 Old English floterian "to flutter (of birds), to fly before, flicker, float to and fro, be tossed by waves," frequentative of flotian "to float" (see float (v.)). Meaning "throw (someone) into confusion" is from 1660s. Related: Fluttered; fluttering. As a noun, "quick, irregular 

 disruption 

 "a rending asunder, a bursting apart, forcible separation into parts," early 15c., originally medical, "laceration of tissue," general sense from 1640s, from Medieval Latin disruptionem (nominative disruptio) "a breaking asunder," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin

 hurly-burly 

 also hurlyburly, "commotion, tumult," 1530s, apparently an alteration of phrase hurling and burling, reduplication of 14c. hurling "commotion, tumult," verbal noun of hurl (v.). Shakespeare has hurly "tumult, uproar," and Hurling time (early 15c.) was the name applied by chronicl

 Share turmoil 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmoil Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmoil">Etymology of turmoil by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of turmoil. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmoil Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of turmoil," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmoil. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of turmoil." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmoil. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of turmoil." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/turmoil (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near turmoil 
 Turkic 
 Turkish 
 Turkoman 
 Turkophile 
 turmeric 
 turmoil 
 turn 
 turn up 
 turnable 
 turnabout 
 turn-around 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix