URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/divan
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:21:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Divan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Divan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of divan 

 divan (n.) 

 1580s, "Oriental council of state," from Turkish divan , from Arabic diwan , from Persian devan "bundle of written sheets, small book, collection of poems" (as in the "Divan i-Hafiz" ), related to debir "writer."

 Sense evolved in Arabic through "book of accounts," to "office of accounts," "custom house," "council chamber," then to "long, cushioned seat," such as are found along the walls in Middle Eastern council chambers. The sofa/couch sense was taken into English 1702; the "book of poems" sense (especially a collection by a single author) by 1787.
 also from 1580s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 casting 

  The theatrical sense is from 1814; casting couch "divan in a Hollywood casting directors office," with suggestion of...

 couch 

 raised and a full back; a settee is like a sofa but may be without arms; an ottoman has neither back nor arms, nor has a divan...

 anthology 

 1630s, "collection of poetry," from Latin anthologia, from Greek anthologia "collection of small poems and epigrams by several authors," literally "flower-gathering," from anthos "a flower" (see anther) + logia "collection, collecting," from legein "gather" (see -logy). The moder

 lounge 

 c. 1500, "to loll idly, act or rest lazily and indifferently, move indolently if at all," Scottish, a word of uncertain origin. The meaning "recline lazily" is from 1746. Perhaps [Barnhart] it is from French s'allonger (paresseusement) "to lounge about, lie at full length," from 

 chamber 

 c. 1200, "a room in a house," usually a private one, from Old French chambre "room, chamber, apartment" (11c.), from Late Latin camera "a chamber, room" (see camera). The Old French word and the Middle English one also were used alone and in combinations to form words for "latrin

 pine 

 "coniferous tree, tree of the genus Pinus," Old English pin (in compounds), from Old French pin and directly from Latin pinus "pine, pine-tree, fir-tree," which is perhaps from a PIE *pi-nu-, from root *peie- "to be fat, swell" (see fat (adj.)). If so, the tree's name would be a 

 occult 

 1530s, "secret, not divulged," from French occulte and directly from Latin occultus "hidden, concealed, secret," past participle of occulere "cover over, conceal," from assimilated form of ob "over" (see ob-) + a verb related to celare "to hide" (from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover

 jersey 

 1580s as a type of knitted cloth; 1842 as a breed of cattle; both from Jersey, one of the Channel Islands. Its name is said to be a corruption of Latin Caesarea, the Roman name for the island (or another near it), influenced by Old English ey "island" (see island); but it is perh

 corporation 

 mid-15c., corporacioun, "persons united in a body for some purpose," from such use in Anglo-Latin, from Late Latin corporationem (nominative corporatio) "assumption of a body" (used of the incarnation of Christ), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin corporare "embody

 burgeon 

 early 14c., "grow, sprout, blossom," from Anglo-French burjuner, Old French borjoner "to bud, sprout," from borjon "a bud, shoot, pimple" (Modern French bourgeon), a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *burrionem (nominative *burrio), from Late Latin burra "flock 

 Share divan 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/divan Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/divan">Etymology of divan by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of divan. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/divan Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of divan," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/divan. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of divan." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/divan. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of divan." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/divan (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near divan 
 diuretic 
 diurnal 
 diva 
 divagate 
 divagation 
 divan 
 dive 
 diver 
 diverge 
 divergence 
 divergent 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix