URL: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/alchemy
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:24:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: alchemy - Wiktionary, the free dictionary

alchemy - Wiktionary, the free dictionary 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Community portal 
 Requested entries 
 Recent changes 
 Random entry 
 Help 
 Glossary 
 Contact us 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donations 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Beginning

 1 
 English 

 Toggle English subsection 

 1.1 
 Etymology 

 1.2 
 Pronunciation 

 1.3 
 Noun 

 1.3.1 
 Hypernyms 

 1.3.2 
 Derived terms 

 1.3.3 
 Translations 

 1.3.4 
 See also 

 1.4 
 References 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 alchemy 

 36 languages 

 العربية 
 বাংলা 
 Čeština 
 Deutsch 
 Ελληνικά 
 Esperanto 
 Eesti 
 Euskara 
 Suomi 
 Français 
 Magyar 
 Հայերեն 
 Ido 
 Italiano 
 日本語 
 ಕನ್ನಡ 
 한국어 
 Kurdî 
 Malagasy 
 മലയാളം 
 မြန်မာဘာသာ 
 Norsk bokmål 
 Polski 
 پښتو 
 Română 
 Русский 
 တႆး 
 Simple English 
 Slovenčina 
 Svenska 
 Kiswahili 
 தமிழ் 
 Türkçe 
 اردو 
 Tiếng Việt 
 中文 

 Entry 

 Discussion 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 

 Print/export

 Create a book 
 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wiktionary, the free dictionary

 English
 [ edit ] 

 Etymology
 [ edit ] 

 Etymology tree

 Proto-Indo-European *ǵʰew- 

 Proto-Indo-European *-mn̥ 
 Proto-Hellenic *-mə 
 Ancient Greek -μᾰ ( -mă ) 

 Ancient Greek χῠ́μᾰ ( khŭ́mă ) 

 Proto-Indo-European *-h₂ 
 Proto-Indo-European *-éh₂ 
 Proto-Indo-European *-i-eh₂ 
 Proto-Hellenic *-íā 
 Ancient Greek -ία ( -ía ) 

 Ancient Greek χυμείᾱ ( khumeíā ) bor. 
 Arabic الْكِيمِيَاء ( al-kīmiyāʔ ) bor. 
 Medieval Latin alchēmīa bor. 
 Old French alkimie der. 
 English alchemy 

 From Old French alkimie , arquemie ( French alchimie ), from Medieval Latin alchēmia , from Arabic اَلْكِيمِيَاء ( al-kīmiyāʔ ) , from Ancient Greek χυμείᾱ ( khumeíā , “ art of alloying metals ” ) , from χύμα ( khúma , “ ingot, bar ” ) . Compare Spanish alquimia and Italian alchimia .

 Pronunciation
 [ edit ] 

 ( US ) IPA ( key ) : /ˈælkəmi/ 

 Audio ( US ) : ( file ) 

 Noun
 [ edit ] 

 alchemy ( countable and uncountable , plural alchemies ) 

 ( uncountable ) The premodern and early modern study of physical changes , particularly in Europe , Arabia , and China ; and chiefly in pursuit of an elixir of immortality , a universal panacea , and/or a philosopher's stone able to transmute base metals into gold , eventually developing into chemistry .
 1605 , Francis Bacon , The Advancement of Learning ‎ [1] , IV. (11) : And yet surely to alchemy this right is due, that it may be compared to the husbandman whereof Æsop makes the fable; that, when he died, told his sons that he had left unto them gold buried underground in his vineyard; and they digged over all the ground, and gold they found none; but by reason of their stirring and digging the mould about the roots of their vines, they had a great vintage the year following: so assuredly the search and stir to make gold hath brought to light a great number of good and fruitful inventions and experiments, as well for the disclosing of nature as for the use of man’s life. 

 2014 June 21, “Magician’s brain”, in The Economist ‎ [2] , volume 411 , number 8892 , archived from the original on 9 January 2025 : There were also letters to scientists and other scholars, pages of derivations of mathematics and physics formulae, and copious writings on alchemy and religion. [ … ] The [ Isaac ] Newton that emerges from the [ unpublished ] manuscripts is far from the popular image of a rational practitioner of cold and pure reason. The architect of modern science was himself not very modern. He was obsessed with alchemy . 

 The purpose of physical alchemy —as opposed to its various spiritual pursuits—was to treat the supposed leprosity of base metals such as lead , refining and purifying them into gold . 

 ( countable ) The causing of any sort of mysterious sudden transmutation .
 1599 (first performance), William Shakespeare , “ The Tragedie of Iulius Cæsar ”, in Mr. William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, & Tragedies   [ … ] ( First Folio ), London: [ … ] Isaac Iaggard , and Ed [ ward ] Blount , published 1623 , →OCLC , [ Act I, scene iii ] : O, he sits high in all the people’s hearts:
And that which would appear offence in us,
His countenance, like richest alchemy ,
Will change to virtue and to worthiness. 

 1640 , George Herbert , Jacula Prudentum; or, Outlandish Proverbs, Sentences, etc. , in The Remains of that Sweet Singer of the Temple George Herbert , London: Pickering, 1841, p. 143, [3] 
 No alchymy to saving. 

 1667 , John Milton , “Book II”, in Paradise Lost.   [ … ] , London: [ … ] [ Samuel Simmons ], and are to be sold by Peter Parker   [ … ] ; [ a ] nd by Robert Boulter   [ … ] ; [ a ] nd Matthias Walker,   [ … ] , →OCLC ; republished as Paradise Lost in Ten Books:   [ … ] , London: Basil Montagu Pickering   [ … ] , 1873 , →OCLC : Then of their session ended they bid cry
With trumpet’s regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding alchemy ,
By herald’s voice explained; the hollow Abyss
Heard far and wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout returned them loud acclaim. 

 1840 , Percy Bysshe Shelley , A Defence of Poetry ‎ [4] : [Poetry] transmutes all that it touches, and every form moving within the radiance of its presence is changed by wondrous sympathy to an incarnation of the spirit which it breathes: its secret alchemy turns to potable gold the poisonous waters which flow from death through life; it strips the veil of familiarity from the world, and lays bare the naked and sleeping beauty, which is the spirit of its forms. 

 2016 , Boris Johnson , (Please provide the book title or journal name) : There is such a rich thesaurus now of things that I have said that have been, one way or another, through what alchemy I do not know, somehow misconstrued, that it would really take me too long to engage in a full global itinerary of apology to all concerned. 

 ( computing , slang , countable ) Any elaborate transformation process or algorithm .

 Hypernyms
 [ edit ] 

 protoscience 
 pseudoscience 

 Derived terms
 [ edit ] 

 alchemical 
 alchemise 
 alchemist 
 alchemistic 
 alchemistical 
 alchemize 
 algeny 
 practical alchemy 

 Translations
 [ edit ] 

 ancient chemistry

 Afrikaans: alchemie 

 Arabic: اَلْخِيمِيَاء   f ( al-ḵīmiyāʔ ) , خِيمِيَاء   f ( ḵīmiyāʔ ) 

 Armenian: ալքիմիա   (hy) ( alkʻimia ) 

 Azerbaijani: əlkimya 

 Belarusian: алхі́мія   f ( alxímija ) 

 Bengali: কিমিয়া   (bn) ( kimiẏa ) 

 Breton: alkimiezh   f 

 Bulgarian: алхи́мия   (bg)   f ( alhímija ) 

 Catalan: alquímia   (ca)   f 

 Chinese:
 Mandarin: 煉金術  / 炼金术   (zh) ( liànjīnshù ) 

 Cornish: alkemi   m 

 Czech: alchymie   (cs)   f 

 Danish: alkymi   (da)   c 

 Dutch: alchemie   (nl)   f , scheikunde   (nl)   f 

 Esperanto: alkemio , alĥemio 

 Estonian: alkeemia   (et) 

 Finnish: alkemia   (fi) 

 French: alchimie   (fr)   f 

 Galician: alquimia   (gl)   f 

 Georgian: ალქიმია ( alkimia ) 

 German: Alchemie   (de)   f 

 Greek: αλχημεία   (el)   f ( alchimeía ) 
 Ancient Greek: χυμεία   f ( khumeía ) 

 Hebrew: אַלְכִּימְיָה   (he)   f ( alkimiya ) 

 Hindi: कीमिया   (hi)   f ( kīmiyā ) , कीमियागरी   (hi)   f ( kīmiyāgrī ) , रसायन   (hi)   m ( rasāyan ) ( historical ) 

 Hungarian: alkímia   (hu) , aranycsinálás   (hu) 

 Icelandic: gullgerðarlist   f 

 Indonesian: alkimia   (id) 

 Irish: ailceimic   f 

 Italian: alchimia   (it)   f 

 Japanese: 錬金術   (ja) ( れんきんじゅつ , renkinjutsu ) , 黄金術 ( おうごんじゅつ , ōgonjutsu ) , 煉丹術   (ja) ( れんたんじゅつ , rentanjutsu ) 

 Kannada: ರಸವಿದ್ಯೆ   (kn) ( rasavidye ) 

 Kazakh: алхимия ( alxıymıya ) 

 Khmer: រសវិទ្យា ( ros vityie ) , រសាយនវិទ្យា   (km) ( rĕəʼsaayaʼnaʼvityiə ) 

 Korean: 연금술(鍊金術)   (ko) ( yeon'geumsul ) , 련금술(鍊金術) ( ryeon'geumsul ) ( North Korea ) 

 Kyrgyz: алхимия   (ky) ( alhimiya ) 

 Latin: alchemia   f 

 Latvian: alķīmija   f 

 Lezgi: алхимия ( alꭓimiä ) 

 Limburgish: alsjemie   (li)   f 

 Lithuanian: alchemija   f 

 Macedonian: алхемија   f ( alhemija ) 

 Malay: alkimia 

 Manx: far-chemmig   f 

 Norwegian:
 Bokmål: alkymi   (no)   m 
 Nynorsk: alkymi   m 

 Occitan: alquimia   (oc)   f 

 Persian: کیمیا   (fa) ( kimiyâ ) , کیمیاگری   (fa) ( kimiyâgari ) 

 Polish: alchemia   (pl)   f , alchimia   (pl) ( archaic ) 

 Portuguese: alquimia   (pt)   f 

 Romanian: alchimie   (ro)   f 

 Russian: алхи́мия   (ru)   f ( alxímija ) 

 Scottish Gaelic: sgoil na cumaisg 

 Serbo-Croatian:
 Cyrillic: алке́мија   f 
 Latin: alkemija   (sh)   f 

 Slovak: alchýmia   (sk)   f 

 Slovene: alkimija   (sl)   f 

 Spanish: alquimia   (es)   f 

 Swedish: alkemi   (sv)   c 

 Tagalog: pagbabalahak 

 Tamil: இரசவாதம்   (ta) ( iracavātam ) 

 Telugu: రసవాదము   (te) ( rasavādamu ) 

 Thai: รสายนเวท   (th) ( rá-sǎa-yá-ná-wêet ) , การเล่นแร่แปรธาตุ ( gaan-lên-rɛ̂ɛ-bprɛɛ-tâat ) 

 Turkish: alşimi , simya   (tr) 
 Ottoman Turkish: سیمیا ( simiya, simya ) , كیمیا ( kimiya, kimya ) 

 Turkmen: alhimiýa   (tk) 

 Ukrainian: алхі́мія   (uk)   f ( alxímija ) 

 Urdu: کیمیا   f ( kīmiyā ) ( historical ) 

 Uzbek: alkimyo   (uz) 

 Vietnamese: thuật giả kim 

 Volapük: lalkim   (vo) 

 Welsh: alcemeg   f , alcemi   m 

 causing of mysterious transmutation

 French: alchimie   (fr)   f 

 Greek: αλχημεία   (el)   f ( alchimeía ) 

 Polish: alchemia   (pl)   f 

 Portuguese: alquimia   (pt)   f 

 Serbo-Croatian: alkemija   (sh)   f 

 Spanish: alquimia   (es)   f 

 Turkish: alşimi , simya   (tr) 
 Ottoman Turkish: سیمیا ( simiya, simya ) , كیمیا ( kimiya, kimya ) 

 The translations below need to be checked and inserted above into the appropriate translation tables. See instructions at Wiktionary:Entry layout § Translations . 

 Translations to be checked

 Latin: (please verify ) alchemia   f 

 Lithuanian: (please verify ) alchemija   f 

 See also
 [ edit ] 

 elixir of life 

 philosophers' stone 

 References
 [ edit ] 

 alchemy on Wikipedia. Wikipedia 

 “ alchemy ”, in Webster’s Revised Unabridged Dictionary , Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam , 1913 , →OCLC . 

 Douglas Harper ( 2001–2026 ), “ alchemy ”, in Online Etymology Dictionary . 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=alchemy&oldid=91185466 "

 Categories : English terms derived from Proto-Hellenic 
 English terms derived from Arabic 
 English terms derived from Ancient Greek 
 English terms derived from Old French 
 English terms derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *ǵʰew- 
 English terms derived from Medieval Latin 
 English terms derived from Proto-Indo-European 
 English 3-syllable words 
 English terms with IPA pronunciation 
 English terms with audio pronunciation 
 English lemmas 
 English nouns 
 English uncountable nouns 
 English countable nouns 
 English terms with quotations 
 English terms with usage examples 
 en:Computing 
 English slang 
 English hybridisms 
 en:Alchemy 

 Hidden categories: Pages with etymon 
 English entries with etymon 
 Pages with etymology trees 
 English entries with etymology trees 
 Pages using etymon with no ID 
 Pages with entries 
 Pages with 1 entry 
 Quotation templates to be cleaned 
 Entries with translation boxes 
 Terms with Afrikaans translations 
 Terms with Arabic translations 
 Terms with Armenian translations 
 Terms with Azerbaijani translations 
 Terms with Belarusian translations 
 Terms with Bengali translations 
 Terms with Breton translations 
 Terms with Bulgarian translations 
 Terms with Catalan translations 
 Mandarin terms with redundant transliterations 
 Terms with Mandarin translations 
 Terms with Cornish translations 
 Terms with Czech translations 
 Terms with Danish translations 
 Terms with Dutch translations 
 Terms with Esperanto translations 
 Terms with Estonian translations 
 Terms with Finnish translations 
 Terms with French translations 
 Terms with Galician translations 
 Terms with Georgian translations 
 Terms with German translations 
 Terms with Greek translations 
 Terms with Ancient Greek translations 
 Terms with Hebrew translations 
 Terms with Hindi translations 
 Terms with Hungarian translations 
 Terms with Icelandic translations 
 Terms with Indonesian translations 
 Terms with Irish translations 
 Terms with Italian translations 
 Terms with Japanese translations 
 Terms with Kannada translations 
 Terms with Kazakh translations 
 Terms with Khmer translations 
 Terms with Korean translations 
 Terms with Kyrgyz translations 
 Terms with Latin translations 
 Terms with Latvian translations 
 Terms with Lezgi translations 
 Terms with Limburgish translations 
 Terms with Lithuanian translations 
 Terms with Macedonian translations 
 Terms with Malay translations 
 Terms with Manx translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Bokmål translations 
 Terms with Norwegian Nynorsk translations 
 Terms with Occitan translations 
 Terms with Persian translations 
 Terms with Polish translations 
 Terms with Portuguese translations 
 Terms with Romanian translations 
 Terms with Russian translations 
 Terms with Scottish Gaelic translations 
 Terms with Serbo-Croatian translations 
 Terms with Slovak translations 
 Terms with Slovene translations 
 Terms with Spanish translations 
 Terms with Swedish translations 
 Terms with Tagalog translations 
 Terms with Tamil translations 
 Terms with Telugu translations 
 Terms with Thai translations 
 Terms with Turkish translations 
 Terms with Ottoman Turkish translations 
 Terms with Turkmen translations 
 Terms with Ukrainian translations 
 Urdu terms with non-redundant manual transliterations 
 Terms with Urdu translations 
 Terms with Uzbek translations 
 Terms with Vietnamese translations 
 Terms with Volapük translations 
 Terms with Welsh translations 
 Requests for review of Latin translations 
 Requests for review of Lithuanian translations 

 This page was last edited on 11 June 2026, at 09:37.

 Definitions and other text are available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 

 Privacy policy 

 About Wiktionary 

 Disclaimers 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 alchemy 

 36 languages 

 Add topic