URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gabriel
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:34:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gabriel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Gabriel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Gabriel 

 Gabriel 

 masc. proper name, also name of an Old Testament angel, from Hebrew Gabhri el , literally "man of God," from gebher "man" + El "God." First element is from base of verb gabhar "was strong" (compare Arabic jabr "strong, young man;" jabbar "tyrant"). Gabriel's hounds (17c.) was a folk explanation for the cacophony of wild geese flying over, hidden by clouds or night.

 Entries linking to Gabriel 

 Gabe 

 masc. proper name, usually short for Gabriel .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Don Juan 

 dissolute Spanish nobleman whose rakish exploits formed the stuff of popular tales in Spain from early 17c., dramatized by Gabriel...

 meter 

 French Academy of Sciences for system of weights and measures based on a decimal system originated 1670 by French clergyman Gabriel...

 vanadium 

 rare metallic element, 1833, named 1830 by Swedish chemist Nils Gabriel Sefström (1787-1845), from Old Norse Vanadis, one...

 annunciation 

 The Church festival (March 25) commemorates the visit of the angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, foretelling the incarnation...

 Frisbee 

 Thirteen years ago the Wham-O Manufacturing Company of San Gabriel, Calif., ... brought out the first Frisbee....

 Hobbit 

 kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows, banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds...

 Vatican 

 1550s, from Latin mons Vaticanus, Roman hill on which Papal palace stands. By Klein's sources said to be an Etruscan loan-word and unrelated to vates "soothsayer, prophet, seer" (see vates), but most others seem to think it is related, on the notion of "hill of prophecy" (compare

 shall 

 Old English sceal, Northumbrian scule "I owe/he owes, will have to, ought to, must" (infinitive sculan, past tense sceolde), from *skulanan, a common Germanic preterite-present verb (along with can, may, will), from Proto-Germanic *skul- (source also of Old Saxon sculan, Old Fris

 oven 

 Old English ofen "furnace, oven, chamber or receptacle in which food is baked or cooked by continuous heat radiated from the structure," from Proto-Germanic *ukhnaz (source also of Old Frisian, Dutch oven, Old High German ovan, German Ofen, Old Norse ofn, Old Swedish oghn, Gothic

 heuristic 

 "serving to discover or find out," 1821, irregular formation from Greek heuriskein "to find; find out, discover; devise, invent; get, gain, procure" (from PIE *were- (2) "to find;" cognate with Old Irish fuar "I have found") + -istic. As a noun, from 1860. Greek had heuretikos "i

 Share Gabriel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gabriel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gabriel">Etymology of Gabriel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Gabriel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gabriel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Gabriel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gabriel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Gabriel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gabriel. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Gabriel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Gabriel (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Gabriel 
 gabby 
 Gabe 
 gaberdine 
 gabfest 
 gable 
 Gabriel 
 gad 
 gadabout 
 Gadarene swine 
 gadfly 
 gadget 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix