URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/kudos
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:32:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Kudos - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Kudos - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of kudos 

 kudos (n.) 

 "fame, renown, glory," 1799, probably originally in university slang, from Greek kydos "glory, fame," especially in battle, "a poetical word, found chiefly in the Iliad and Odyssey" [Century Dictionary], literally "that which is heard of," perhaps from PIE root *keu- "to see, observe, perceive." In form the word is a Greek singular noun, but the final -s often is mistaken as a plural suffix in English, leading to the barbarous back-formation kudo (attested by 1936).
 also from 1799 

 Entries linking to kudos 

 *keu- 

 also *skeu- Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to see, observe, perceive." 

 It might form all or part of: Anschauung ; caution ; cautious ; caveat ; kudos ; precaution ; scavenger ; scone ; sheen ; show .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit kavih "wise, sage; seer, poet;" Avestan kauui- "seer, poet, wise man;" Middle Iranian škoh "splendor, majesty;" Latin cautio "care, foresight," cautus "careful, heedful," cavere "beware, take heed;" Greek kydos "glory, fame;" Lithuanian kavoti "tend, safeguard;" Armenian cucanem "I show;" Old Church Slavonic čudo "wonder;" Czech (z)koumati "to perceive, be aware of;" Serbian čuvati "watch, heed;" Old English sceawian "to look at," Middle Dutch schoon "beautiful, bright," properly "showy," Old High German scouwon "to watch."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 praise 

 c. 1300, preisen, "to express admiration of, commend, adulate, flatter" (someone or something), from Old French preisier, variant of prisier "to praise, value," from Late Latin preciare, earlier pretiare "to price, value, prize," from Latin pretium "reward, prize, value, worth," 

 commendation 

 late 14c., commendacioun, "expression of approval," late 14c. (from c. 1200 as the name of one of the Offices of the Dead), from Old French commendacion "approval, praise," from Latin commendationem (nominative commendatio) "recommendation, commendation," noun of action from past

 aspire 

 "strive for, seek eagerly to attain, long to reach," c. 1400, aspiren, from Old French aspirer "aspire to; inspire; breathe, breathe on" (12c.), from Latin aspirare "to breathe upon, blow upon, to breathe," also, in transferred senses, "to be favorable to, assist; to climb up to,

 panegyric 

 "eulogy, laudation, praise bestowed upon some person, action, or character," c. 1600, from French panégyrique (1510s), from Latin panegyricus "public eulogy," originally an adjective, "for a public festival," from Greek panēgyrikos (logos) "(a speech) given in or addressed to a p

 paean 

 "hymn of praise, song of triumph;" in general use, "a loud and joyous song," 1590s, from Latin paean "hymn of deliverance, hymn to a help-giving god," from Greek paian "hymn, chant, hymn to Apollo," from Paian, Paiōn, a name of the god of healing; originally the physician of the 

 compliment 

 "act or expression of civility, respect, or regard" (or, as Johnson defines it, "An act, or expression of civility, usually understood to include some hypocrisy, and to mean less than it declares"), 1570s, complement, ultimately from Latin complementum "that which fills up or com

 testimonial 

 early 15c., "of or pertaining to testimony," in part from testimonial (n.) and from Late Latin testimonialis, from Latin testimonium (see testimony). Originally especially in phrase letters testimonial (French lettres testimoniaulx, Latin litteræ testimoniales) "document or docum

 superlative 

 late 14c., superlatif, "supreme, most excellent, raised or occupying the highest pitch, position, or degree," from Old French superlatif "absolute, highest; powerful; best" (13c.) and directly from Late Latin superlativus "extravagant, exaggerated, hyperbolic," from Latin superla

 encomium 

 "discriminating expression of approval, formal praise or laudation of a person or thing," 1580s, from Late Latin encomium, from Greek enkōmion (epos) "laudatory (ode) to a conqueror or eulogy or panegyric on a living person," neuter of enkōmios "belonging to the praise or reward 

 meconium 

 "dark fecal discharge from a newborn infant," 1706, from Latin meconium "excrement of a newborn child," literally "poppy juice," from Greek mēkōnion "poppy-juice, opium," diminutive of mēkōn "poppy," which perhaps is related to Old Church Slavonic maku, German Mohn "poppy," and i

 Share kudos 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/kudos Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/kudos">Etymology of kudos by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of kudos. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/kudos Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of kudos," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kudos. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of kudos." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kudos. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of kudos." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/kudos (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near kudos 
 krummhorn 
 Krupp 
 krypton 
 kryptonite 
 Ku Klux Klan 
 kudos 
 kudu 
 kudzu 
 kugel 
 kulak 
 kultur 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix