URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/soya
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T15:02:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Soya - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Soya - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of soya 

 soya (n.) 

 "soy," 1670s; see soy . Soyaburger is attested from 1953.
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to soya 

 soy (n.) 

 1670s, saio "soybean-based Asian fish sauce," from Dutch soya , from Japanese soyu , variant of shoyu "soy," from Chinese shi-yu, from shi "fermented soy beans" + yu "oil." The etymology reflects Dutch presence in Japan before English and American merchants began to trade there. Soy sauce is attested from 1795.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bane 

 Middle English bane, from Old English bana "killer, slayer, murderer, a worker of death" (human, animal, or object), also "the devil," from Proto-Germanic *banon, cognate with *banja- "wound" (source also of Old Frisian bona "murderer," Old Norse bani "death; that which causes de

 bean 

 Old English bean "bean, pea, legume," from Proto-Germanic *bauno (source also of Old Norse baun, Middle Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), and related to Latin faba "bean;" Greek phakos "lentil;" Albanian bathë "horse-bean;" Old Prussian babo, Russian bo

 plant 

 Old English plante "young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, a shoot or strip recently sprouted from seed," from Latin planta "sprout, shoot, cutting" (source of Spanish planta, French plante), which is perhaps from an unattested verb *plantare "to drive in with the feet, push in

 reservoir 

 1680s, "a place where something tends to collect, place where anything is kept in store," originally figurative, from French réservoir "storehouse," from Old French reserver "set aside, withhold," from Latin reservare "keep back, save up; retain, preserve," from re- "back" (see r

 oasis 

 "fertile spot in a desert, where there is a spring or well and more or less vegetation," originally in reference to the Libyan desert, 1610s, from French oasis (18c.) and directly from Late Latin oasis, from Greek oasis, probably from Hamitic (compare Coptic wahe, ouahe "oasis," 

 fortune 

 c. 1300, "chance, luck as a force in human affairs," from Old French fortune "lot, good fortune, misfortune" (12c.), from Latin fortuna "chance, fate, good luck," from fors (genitive fortis) "chance, luck," possibly ultimately from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear ch

 tattoo 

 1680s, "signal calling soldiers or sailors to quarters at night," earlier tap-to (1640s), from Dutch taptoe, from tap "faucet of a cask" (see tap (n.1)) + toe "shut, to" (from Proto-Germanic *to; see to (prep.)). "So called because police formerly visited taverns in the evening t

 nature 

 late 13c., "restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth;" from Old French nature "nature, being, principle of life; character, essence," from Latin natura "course of things; natural character, constitution, quality; the universe," literally "birth," from na

 paradigm 

 late 15c., "an example, a model," from Late Latin paradigma "pattern, example," especially in grammar, from Greek paradeigma "pattern, model; precedent, example," from paradeiknynai "exhibit, represent," literally "show side by side," from para- "beside" (see para- (1)) + deiknyn

 bohemian 

 "a gypsy of society; person (especially an artist) who lives a free and somewhat dissipated life, despising conventionalities and having little regard for social standards," 1848, from a transferred sense of French bohemién "a Bohemian; a Gypsy," from the country name (see Bohemi

 Share soya 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/soya Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/soya">Etymology of soya by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of soya. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/soya Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of soya," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/soya. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of soya." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/soya. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of soya." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/soya (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near soya 
 sower 
 Soweto 
 sown 
 sox 
 soy 
 soya 
 soybean 
 sozzled 
 spa 
 space 
 spacecraft 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix