URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hour
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:28:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hour - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hour - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hour 

 hour (n.) 

 c. 1200, "divine office prescribed for each of the seven canonical hours; the daily service at the canonical hours;" c. 1300, "time of day appointed for prayer, one of the seven canonical hours," from Old French ore , hore "canonical hour; one-twelfth of a day" (sunrise to sunset), from Latin hora "an hour;" poetically "time of year, season," from Greek hōra a word used to indicate any limited time within a year, month, or day (from PIE *yor-a- , from root *yer- "year, season;" see year ).

 The Church sense is oldest in English. The meaning "one of the 24 equal parts of a natural solar day (time from one sunrise to the next), equal hour; definite time of day or night reckoned in equal hours," and that of "one of the 12 equal parts of an artificial day (sunrise to sunset) or night, varying in duration according to the season; definite time of day or night reckoned in unequal hours" are from late 14c.

 In the Middle Ages the planets were held to rule over the unequal hours. As late as 16c. distinction sometimes was made in English between temporary (unequal) hours and sidereal (equal) ones. The meaning "time of a particular happening; the time for a given activity" (as in hour of death ) is mid-14c.

 The h- has persisted in this word despite not being pronounced since Roman times. Replaced Old English tid , literally "time" (see tide (n.)) and stund "period of time, point of time, hour," from Proto-Germanic *stundo (compare German Stunde "hour"), which is of uncertain origin. German Uhr likewise is from French.

 Greek hora could mean "a season; 'the season' (spring or summer)." In classical times it sometimes meant "a part of the day," such as morning, evening, noon, night. The Greek astronomers apparently borrowed the notion of dividing the day into twelve parts (mentioned in Herodotus) from the Babylonians. Night continued to be divided into four watches (see watch (n.)); but because the amount of daylight changed throughout the year, the hours were not fixed or of equal length.

 As a measure of distance ("the distance that can be covered in an hour") it is recorded from 1785. At all hours "at all times" is from early 15c. For small hours (those with low numbers) see wee (adj.).
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to hour 

 tide (n.) 

 Middle English tide "time, season; recurring interval, space of time," especially as regards a particular purpose or natural process, from Old English tīd "point or portion of time, due time, period, season; feast-day, canonical hour," from Proto-Germanic *tīdi- "division of time" (source also of Old Saxon tid , Dutch tijd , Old High German zi t, German Zeit "time"), according to Watkins from PIE *di-ti- "division, division of time," suffixed form of root *da- "to divide."

 The "time" senses in English mostly are archaic. Compare tidings , betide , tidy (adj.), also Middle English anytide "any time," tideful "seasonable, opportune, timely, fitting" (c. 1300). Old English uhtan-tid was early morning, the period before dawn (with  uhte  "daybreak"); tide-song was the divine service peculiar to a canonical hour.

 In the alliterative pairing of time and tide (early 13c.) the words are synonyms, originally indicating "on all occasions" or "as warranted." Nares writes that the Puritans preferred -tide in festival names to -mas .

 The main modern meanings "time of the tide" (c. 1300), "rise and fall of the sea, flow of the tidal current" (mid-14c.) probably are via the notion of "fixed time" (compare Old English morgentid "dawn," Middle English dai-tide "daytime"), specifically "time of high water." This is either a native evolution or from Middle Low German getide (compare Middle Dutch tijd , Dutch tij , German Gezeiten "flood tide, tide of the sea"). Figurative use by late 14c.

 Old English seems to have had no specific word for this, using flod and ebba to refer to the rise and fall. Old English heahtid "high tide" meant "festival, high day."

 Tide-mark "limit of the ebb or flow of a tide" is by 1753; tide-pool , left by regress of the sea, is by 1849. Tide-table , showing the times of the daily tides, is by 1590s.

 watch (n.) 

 Middle English wacche , from Old English wæcce "a watching, state of being or remaining awake, wakefulness;" also "act or practice of refraining from sleep for devotional or penitential purposes;" from wæccan "keep watch, be awake," from Proto-Germanic *wakjan , from PIE root *weg- "to be strong, be lively."

 The meaning "small timepiece" is from 1580s, developing from that of "a clock to wake up sleepers" (mid-15c.).

 From c. 1200 as "one of the periods into which the night is divided," in reference to ancient times translating Latin vigilia , Greek phylak ē , Hebrew ashmoreth . From mid-13c. as "a shift of guard duty; an assignment as municipal watchman;" late 13c. as "person or group obligated to patrol a town (especially at night) to keep order, etc."

 Also in Middle English, "the practice of remaining awake at night for purposes of debauchery and dissipation;" hence wacches of wodnesse "late-night revels and debauchery."

 The alliterative combination watch-and-ward for the old custom of keeping order in cities and towns preserves the distinction of watch for night-time municipal patrols and ward (n.) for guarding by day; in combination, they mean "continuous vigilance."

 The military sense of "military guard, sentinel" is from late 14c. Also in early 18c. as a designation of certain irregular troops in the Scottish Highlands.

 The general sense of "careful observation, watchfulness, vigilance" is from late 14c.; to keep watch is from late 14c. The meaning "period of time in which a division of a ship's crew remains on deck" is from 1580s.

 The Hebrews divided the night into three watches, the Greeks usually into four (sometimes five), the Romans (followed by the Jews in New Testament times) into four. [OED]

 On þis niht beð fowuer niht wecches: Biforen euen þe bilimpeð to children; Mid-niht ðe bilimpeð to frumberdlinges; hanecrau þe bilimpeð þowuene men; morgewile to alde men. [Trinity Homilies, c. 1200]

 wee 
 year 
 H 
 half-hour 
 horologer 
 horology 
 horometry 
 horoscope 
 hourglass 
 hourlong 
 hourly 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wee 

 "extremely small," mid-15c., from earlier noun use in sense of "quantity, amount" (such as a littel wei "a little thing or amount," c. 1300), from Old English wæge "weight, unit of weight," from Proto-Germanic *wego, from PIE root *wegh- "to go, move, transport in a vehicle." The

 year 

 Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) "year," from Proto-Germanic *jēr "year" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr, Gothic jer "year"), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- "year, season" (source al

 horologer 

 late 14c., "clock-maker," via Latin from Greek hōrologe "clock, timepiece, instrument for measuring the hours of a day," from hōrologos "telling the hour," from hōra "hour" (see hour) on model of astrologer, etc. Hence also obsolete English horologe "timepiece, sundial, hourglass

 D-day 

 1918, "date set for the beginning of a military operation," with D as an abbreviation of day; compare H-hour, also from the...same military order of Sept. 7, 1918: The First Army will attack at H-Hour on D-Day with the object of forcing the evacuation..."They designate the day and hour of the operation when the day and hour have not yet been determined, or where secrecy is...

 noon 

 12c., non "midday," in exact use, "12 o'clock p.m.," also "midday meal," from Old English non "3 o'clock p.m., the ninth hour...from sunrise," also "the canonical hour of nones," from Latin nona hora "ninth hour" of daylight, by Roman and ecclesiastical...Whatever the cause, the meaning change from "ninth hour" to "sixth hour" seems to have been complete by 14c....

 dinette 

 The Court dinner-hour, in the reign of George III., was at the Hanoverian hour of four o'clock....During the reign of George IV. it gradually crept up to six o'clock, and finally became steady at the Indian hour of seven..., and so remained until the reign of Her Most gracious Majesty, when the formal Court dinner-hour became eight o'clock....

 nones 

 The ecclesiastical sense of "daily office said originally at the ninth hour of the day" is from 1709; originally fixed at...ninth hour from sunrise, hence about 3 p.m....(now usually somewhat earlier), from Latin nona (hora) "ninth (hour)," from fem. plural of nonus "ninth."...

 gloaming 

 Old English glomung "twilight, the fall of evening," found but once (glossing Latin crepusculum), and formed (probably on model of æfning "evening") from glom "twilight," which is related to glowan "to glow" (hence "glow of sunrise or sunset"), from Proto-Germanic *glo- (see glow

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 Share hour 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hour Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hour">Etymology of hour by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hour. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hour Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hour," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hour. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hour." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hour. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hour." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hour (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hour 
 hough 
 hound 
 hound-dog 
 houndstooth 
 houp-la 
 hour 
 hourglass 
 houri 
 hourlong 
 hourly 
 house 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close