URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/naphtha
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:39:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Naphtha - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Naphtha - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of naphtha 

 naphtha (n.) 

 1570s, from Latin, from Greek naphtha "bitumen," perhaps from Persian neft "pitch," or Aramaic (Semitic) naphta, nephta , but these could as well be from Greek. In Middle English as napte (late 14c.), from Old French napte , but the modern word is a re-introduction. In ancient writers it refers to a more fluid and volatile variety of natural asphalt or bitumen. In modern use, a colorless inflammable liquid distilled from petroleum.
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to naphtha 

 napalm (n.) 

 1942, from naphthenic + palmitic , names of the two acids used in manufacture of the chemical thickening agent. See naphtha . It was used especially in mixture with gasoline to make a kind of inflammabvle jelly used in flame-throwers, incendiary bombs, etc. The verb, "to destroy with napalm," is by 1950, from the noun. Related: Napalmed ; napalming .

 naphthalene (n.) 

 a benzene hydrocarbon obtained originally from distillation of coal tar, 1821, named by English chemist John Kidd, who first isolated and studied it, from naphtha + chemical suffix -ine (2) + -l- for the sake of euphony.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 petroleum 

 Petroleum was known to the Persians, Greeks, and Romans under the name of naphtha; the less-liquid varieties were called...

 hamburger 

 1610s, Hamburger "native of Hamburg." Also used of ships from Hamburg. From 1838 as a type of excellent black grape indigenous to Tyrolia; 1857 as a variety of hen. The meat product was so called by 1880 (as hamburg steak); if it was named for the German city no certain connectio

 leviathan 

 late 14c., "sea monster, sea serpent," sometimes regarded as a form of Satan, from Late Latin leviathan, from Hebrew livyathan "dragon, serpent, huge sea animal," of unknown origin, perhaps from root l-w-h- "to wind, turn, twist," on the notion of a serpent's coils. If so, relate

 conceit 

 late 14c., "a thought, a notion, that which is mentally conceived," from conceiven (see conceive) based on analogy of deceit/deceive and receipt/receive. The sense evolved from "something formed in the mind" to "fanciful or witty notion, ingenious thought" (1510s), to "vanity, ex

 bias 

 1520s, "oblique or diagonal line," from French biais "a slant, a slope, an oblique," also figuratively, "an expedient, means" (13c., originally in Old French a past-participle adjective, "sideways, askance, against the grain"), a word of unknown origin. Probably it came to French

 reprimand 

 "severe reproof (especially one given by a magistrate or authority) for a fault," 1630s, from French réprimande (16c.), earlier reprimende "reproof," from Latin reprimenda "that is to be repressed" (as in reprimenda culpa "fault to be checked," reprimenda res "thing that ought to

 rest 

 [sleep, repose, slumber] Old English ræste, reste "rest; a bed or couch; intermission of labor; mental peace, state of quiet or repose," from Proto-Germanic *rasto- (source also of Old Saxon resta "resting place, burial-place," Dutch rust, Old High German rasta, German Rast "rest

 please 

 c. 1300, plesen, "to please or satisfy (a deity), propitiate, appease," from Old French plaisir "to please, give pleasure to, satisfy" (11c., Modern French plaire, the form of which is perhaps due to analogy of faire), from Latin placere "to be acceptable, be liked, be approved,"

 precipitate 

 1520s, "to hurl or fling down" (from a precipice or height), a back formation from precipitation or else from Latin praecipitatus, past participle of praecipitare "to throw or dive headlong; be hasty," from praeceps (genitive praecipitis) "steep, headlong, headfirst," from prae "

 Russia 

 nation in Eastern Europe with a large possession in north Asia, 1530s, from Medieval Latin Russi "the people of Russia," from Rus, the native name of the people and the country (source of Arabic Rus, Medieval Greek Rhos), originally the name of a group of Swedish merchant/warrior

 Share naphtha 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/naphtha Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/naphtha">Etymology of naphtha by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of naphtha. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/naphtha Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of naphtha," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/naphtha. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of naphtha." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/naphtha. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of naphtha." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/naphtha (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near naphtha 
 Naomi 
 nap 
 Napa 
 napalm 
 nape 
 naphtha 
 naphthalene 
 napkin 
 Naples 
 napless 
 Napoleon 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix