URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/seersucker
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:38:12Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Seersucker - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Seersucker - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of seersucker 

 seersucker (n.) 

 thin linen fabric, originally imported from the East, 1722, from Hindi sirsakar , said to be an East Indian corruption of Persian shir o shakkar "striped cloth," literally "milk and sugar," a reference to the alternately smooth and puckered surfaces of the stripes. This would be from Persian shir (cognate with Sanskrit ksiram "milk") + shakar (cognate with Pali sakkhara , Sanskrit sarkara "gravel, grit, sugar;" see sugar (n.)).
 also from 1722 

 Entries linking to seersucker 

 sugar (n.) 

 late 13c., sugre , "sweet crystalline substance from plant juices," from Old French sucre "sugar" (12c.), from Medieval Latin succarum , from Arabic sukkar , from Persian shakar , from Sanskrit sharkara "ground or candied sugar," originally "grit, gravel" (cognate with Greek kroke "pebble").

 The Arabic word also was borrowed in Italian ( zucchero ), Spanish ( azucar , with the Arabic article), and German (Old High German zucura , German Zucker ), and its forms are represented in most European languages (such as Serbian cukar , Polish cukier , Russian sakhar ).

 Its Old World home was India (Alexander the Great's companions marveled at "honey without bees") and it remained exotic in Europe until the Arabs began to cultivate it in Sicily and Spain; not until after the Crusades did it begin to rival honey as the West's sweetener. The Spaniards in the West Indies began raising sugar cane by 1506.

 The reason for the -g- in the English word is obscure (OED compares flagon , from French flacon ). The pronunciation shift from s- to sh- is probably from the initial long vowel sound syu- (as in sure ).

 As a general name for a type of chemical compound, from 1826. Slang use as a "euphemistic substitute for an imprecation" [OED] is attested by 1891. As a term of endearment, it is attested by 1930.

 Sugar-maple , the North American species that yields sugar, is from 1731. Sugar-tongs , for lifting small lumps, are attested from 1708.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share seersucker 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/seersucker Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/seersucker">Etymology of seersucker by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of seersucker. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/seersucker Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of seersucker," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/seersucker. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of seersucker." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/seersucker. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of seersucker." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/seersucker (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near seersucker 
 seemly 
 seen 
 seep 
 seepage 
 seer 
 seersucker 
 see-saw 
 seethe 
 seether 
 see-through 
 *segh- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix