URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pajamas
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:49:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pajamas - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pajamas - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pajamas 

 pajamas (n.) 

 also pajamahs , 1800, pai jamahs "loose trousers tied at the waist," worn by Muslims in India and adopted by Europeans there, especially for nightwear, from Hindi pajama , probably from Persian paejamah , literally "leg clothing," from pae "leg" (from PIE root *ped- "foot") + jamah "clothing, garment." The modern U.S. spelling is by 1845; British spelling tends toward pyjamas .
 also from 1800 

 Entries linking to pajamas 

 jams (n.) 

 1966, abstracted from pajamas (q.v.). Much earlier English picked up jam "a kind of frock for children" (1793) from Hindi jamah .

 pajama 

 see pajamas .

 PJs 
 pyjamas 
 *ped- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bee's knees 

 Other versions that lasted through the century are cat's whiskers (1923), cat's pajamas, cat's meow....

 cat 

 For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas, see bee's knees. For let the cat out of the bag, see bag (n.)....

 pant 

 mid-14c., panten, "breathe hard or rapidly," perhaps a shortening of Old French pantaisier "gasp, puff, pant, be out of breath, be in distress" (12c.), which is probably from Vulgar Latin *pantasiare "be oppressed with a nightmare, struggle for breathing during a nightmare," lite

 sleeper 

 Middle English slepere, from Old English slæpere "one who sleeps, one who is inclined to sleep soundly or much," agent noun from sleep (v.). The meaning "dormant or inoperative thing" is from 1620s. The meaning "railway car fitted with berths in which beds can be made" is by 1875

 friend 

 Old English freond "one attached to another by feelings of personal regard and preference," from Proto-Germanic *frijōjands "lover, friend" (source also of Old Norse frændi, Old Danish frynt, Old Frisian friund, Dutch vriend, Middle High German friunt, German Freund, Gothic frijo

 experience 

 late 14c., "observation as the source of knowledge; actual observation; an event which has affected one," from Old French esperience "experiment, proof, experience" (13c.), from Latin experientia "a trial, proof, experiment; knowledge gained by repeated trials," from experientem 

 indulgence 

 mid-14c., in the Church sense, "a freeing from temporal punishment for sin, remission from punishment for sin that remains due after absolution," from Old French indulgence or directly from Latin indulgentia "complaisance, a yielding; fondness, tenderness, affection; remission," 

 conceit 

 late 14c., "a thought, a notion, that which is mentally conceived," from conceiven (see conceive) based on analogy of deceit/deceive and receipt/receive. The sense evolved from "something formed in the mind" to "fanciful or witty notion, ingenious thought" (1510s), to "vanity, ex

 education 

 1530s, "child-rearing," also "the training of animals," from French education (14c.) and directly from Latin educationem (nominative educatio) "a rearing, training," noun of action from past-participle stem of educare (see educate). Originally of instruction in social codes and m

 intrinsic 

 late 15c., "interior, inward, internal," from Old French intrinsèque "inner" (14c.), from Medieval Latin intrinsecus "interior, internal," from Latin intrinsecus (adv.) "inwardly, on the inside," from intra "within" (see intra-) + secus "along, alongside," from PIE *sekw-os- "fol

 Share pajamas 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pajamas Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pajamas">Etymology of pajamas by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pajamas. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pajamas Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pajamas," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pajamas. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pajamas." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pajamas. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pajamas." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pajamas (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pajamas 
 painting 
 pair 
 paisano 
 paisley 
 pajama 
 pajamas 
 Paki 
 Pakistan 
 pal 
 palace 
 paladin 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix