URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Camilla
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:13:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Camilla - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Camilla - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Camilla 

 Camilla 

 fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of Camillus , cognomen of several members of the gens Furia , from camillus "noble youth attending at sacrifices," a word perhaps from Etruscan.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 love 

 Camilla alone remembers her Uncle Pio and her son; this woman, her mother....

 jubilee 

 late 14c., in the Old Testament sense, from Old French jubileu "jubilee; anniversary; rejoicing" (14c., Modern French jubilé), from Late Latin iubilaeus "the jubilee year," originally an adjective, "of the jubilee," from Greek iabelaios, from iobelos, from Hebrew yobhel "jubilee,

 girl 

 c. 1300, gyrle "child, young person" (of either sex but most frequently of females), of unknown origin. One guess [OED] leans toward an unrecorded Old English *gyrele, from Proto-Germanic *gurwilon-, diminutive of *gurwjoz (apparently also represented by Low German gære "boy, gir

 heathen 

 Old English hæðen "not Christian or Jewish," also as a noun, "heathen man, one of a race or nation which does not acknowledge the God of the Bible" (especially of the Danes), merged with Old Norse heiðinn (adj.) "heathen, pagan," from Proto-Germanic *haithana- (source also of Old

 castor 

 late 14c., "a beaver," from Old French castor (13c.), from Latin castor "beaver," from Greek kastor "beaver," perhaps literally "he who excels," and thus identical with the name of one of the divine twins (with Pollux), worshipped by women in ancient Greece as a healer and preser

 adept 

 1690s, "completely skilled, well-versed," from Latin adeptus "having reached or attained," past participle of adipisci "to come up with, arrive at," figuratively "to attain to, acquire," from ad "to" (see ad-) + apisci "to grasp, attain" (related to aptus "fitted," from PIE root 

 hormone 

 "organic compound produced in animal bodies to regulate activity and behavior," 1905, from Greek hormon "that which sets in motion," present participle of horman "impel, urge on," from horme "onset, impulse," from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- (1) "to move, set in motion." Used by

 pessimism 

 1794 "worst condition possible, point of greatest deterioration" (a sense now rare or obsolete), borrowed (by Coleridge) from French pessimisme, formed (on model of French optimisme) from Latin pessimus "worst," perhaps originally "bottom-most," from PIE *ped-samo-, suffixed (sup

 moment 

 late 14c., "very brief portion of time, instant," in moment of time, from Old French moment (12c.) "moment, minute; importance, weight, value" and directly from Latin momentum "movement, motion; moving power; alteration, change;" also "short time, instant" (also source of Spanish

 soldier 

 c. 1300, souder, soudiour, "fighting man, one engaged ion military service," from Old French soudier, soldier and Anglo-French variants, "one who serves in the army for pay," from Medieval Latin soldarius "a soldier" (source also of Spanish soldado, Italian soldato), literally "o

 Share Camilla 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Camilla Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Camilla">Etymology of Camilla by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Camilla. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Camilla Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Camilla," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Camilla. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Camilla." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Camilla. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Camilla." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Camilla (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Camilla 
 camera obscura 
 cameral 
 camerlengo 
 Cameron 
 Cameroon 
 Camilla 
 camino 
 camisole 
 camomile 
 camouflage 
 camp 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix