URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/study
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:20:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Study - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Study - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of study 

 study (v.) 

 early 12c., studien , "to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate" (virtue, vice, wisdom, art, etc., sometimes translating Latin occupare ), from Old French estudiier "to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine" (13c., Modern French étudier ).

 This is from Medieval Latin studiare , from Latin studium "study, application," originally "eagerness," from studere "to be diligent," which is reconstructed to be from PIE *(s)teu- (1) "to push, stick, knock, beat" (see steep (adj.)). The notion appears to be "pressing forward, thrusting toward," hence "striving after."

 Martha swanc and becarcade to geforðigene þan Hælende and his þeowen þa lichamlice behefðen. Seo studdede emb þa uterlice þing. ["Homily for the Feast of the Virgin Mary," c. 1125]

 It is attested from c. 1300 specifically as "apply oneself to the acquisition of learning, pursue a formal course of study," also "read (a book or writings) intently or meditatively." It is from mid-14c. as "reflect, muse, think, ponder."

 The broad meaning "seek to learn particulars of by observation" is from c. 1600; that of "regard attentively" is from 1660s. Related: Studied ; studying .
 also from early 12c. 

 study (n.) 

 c. 1300, studie , "pursuit of learning, application of the mind to the acquisition of knowledge, intensive reading and protracted contemplation of a book, writings, etc.," from Old French estudie "care, attention, skill, thought; study, school" (Modern French étude ), from Latin studium "study, application" (see study (v.)).

 Also from c. 1300 as "a state of deep thought or contemplation; a state of mental perplexity, doubt, anxiety; state of amazement or wonder." It is attested from mid-14c. as "careful examination, scrutiny."

 The meaning "a subject of study" is from late 15c. In Middle English also in now-obsolete sense of "eagerness, earnestness, zeal; diligent effort" of any sort (late 14c.) on the notion of "studied purpose."

 The sense of "room furnished with books, room in a house for private reading and writing" is from late 14c. Study hall is attested from 1891, originally a large common room in a college. Study group is by 1926.

 The meaning "artistic production done as an exercise in learning," especially a careful sketch, is by 1769. In theater, "the action of committing to memory," by 1590s, hence "one who learns lines and directions" in a stated manner (fast, slow).
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to study 

 steep (adj.) 

 "precipitous, sheer, having a sharp slope," of cliffs, mountains, etc., Middle English stēpe , from Old English steap "high, lofty" (senses now obsolete), also "deep; prominent, projecting," from Proto-Germanic *staupa- (source also of Old Frisian stap "high, lofty," Middle High German *stouf ).

 This is held to be from PIE *steup- , an extended form of the root *(s)teu- (1) "to push, stick, knock, beat," with derivations referring to projecting objects (source also of Greek typtein "to strike," typos "a blow, mold, die;" Sanskrit tup- "harm," tundate "pushes, stabs;" Gothic stautan "push;" Old Norse stuttr "short"). But Boutkan is dubious of the wider grouping.

 The sense of "precipitous" probably was in Old English. In Middle English also of strong men, loud voices, large bright eyes, and old age. The slang sense of "at a high price" is a U.S. coinage attested by 1848, perhaps 1847. Related: Steeply . The noun meaning "a steep place, a declivity" is from 1550s.

 studied (adj.) 

 1520s, of persons, "learned, informed by study;" c. 1600, "deliberate; studiously elaborate," past-participle adjectives from study (v.). The earlier adjective was studient "devoted to study, habitually learning" (late 14c.), from Latin.

 etude 
 student 
 studio 
 studious 
 understudy 
 unstudied 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 student 

 late 14c., studient, "studious person, one who pursues knowledge," from Old French estudiant "student, scholar, one who is studying" (Modern French étudiant), noun use of present participle of estudiier, from Medieval Latin studiare "to study," from Latin studium (see study (v.))

 studio 

 1819, "work-room of a sculptor or painter," usually one with windows to admit light from the sky, from Italian studio "room for study," from Latin studium (see study (v.)). Later extended to photographers' rooms. The motion picture sense of "room in which a film is shot" is attes

 studious 

 mid-14c., "zealous, diligent, eager;" by late 14c. specifically as "eager to learn, devoted to learning, seeking knowledge from books;" from Latin studiosus "devoted to study, assiduous, zealous," from studium "eagerness, zeal" (see study). By 1530s as "characterized by careful a

 pathology 

 "science of diseases," 1610s, from French pathologie (16c.), from medical Latin pathologia "study of disease," from Greek...pathos "suffering" (from PIE root *kwent(h)- "to suffer") + -logia "study" (see -logy)....In reference to the study of abnormal mental conditions from 1842....Ancient Greek pathologia was "study of the passions;" the Greek word for "science of diseases" was pathologike ("pathologics...

 psychology 

 1650s, "the study of the soul," from Modern Latin psychologia, probably coined mid-16c. in Germany by Melanchthon from Latinized...form of Greek psykhē "breath, spirit, soul" (see psyche) + logia "study of" (see -logy)....The meaning "science or study of the phenomena of the mind" is attested by 1748, in reference to Christian Wolff's "Psychologia...

 museum 

 1610s, "the university building in Alexandria," from Latin museum "library, study," from Greek mouseion "place of study,...The earliest use in reference to English institutions was of libraries for scholarly study (1640s); the sense of "building...

 physiology 

 1560s, "study and description of natural objects, natural philosophy" (a sense now obsolete), from French physiologie (16c....) or directly from Latin physiologia "natural science, study of nature," from Greek physiologia "natural science, inquiry...into nature," from physios "nature" (see physio-) + logia "study" (see -logy)....

 discipline 

 c. 1200, "penitential chastisement; punishment for the sake of correction," from Old French descepline "discipline, physical punishment; teaching; suffering; martyrdom" (11c., Modern French discipline) and directly from Latin disciplina "instruction given, teaching, learning, kno

 contemplate 

 1590s, "reflect upon, ponder, study, view mentally, meditate," from Latin contemplatus, past participle of contemplari "to gaze attentively, observe; consider, contemplate," originally "to mark out a space for observation" (as an augur does), from assimilated form of com-, here p

 think 

 Old English þencan "imagine, conceive in the mind; consider, meditate, remember; intend, wish, desire" (past tense þohte, past participle geþoht), probably originally "cause to appear to oneself," from Proto-Germanic *thankjan (source also of Old Frisian thinka, Old Saxon thenkia

 Share study 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/study Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/study">Etymology of study by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of study. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/study Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of study," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/study. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of study." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/study. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of study." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/study (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near study 
 student 
 studied 
 studio 
 studious 
 studly 
 study 
 stuff 
 stuffed 
 stuffing 
 stuffy 
 Stuka 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix