URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chorus
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:11:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chorus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chorus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chorus 

 chorus (n.) 

 1560s, in drama, "person who speaks the prologue and explains or comments on events on stage," from Latin chorus "a dance in a circle, the persons singing and dancing, the chorus of a tragedy," from Greek khoros "round dance; dancing-place; band of dancers; company of persons in a play, under a leader, who take part in dialogue with the actors and sing their sentiments at intervals."

 The Greek word is of uncertain origin, because the original sense is unknown. Perhaps it is from PIE root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose," if the original sense of the Greek word is "enclosed dancing floor," or *gher- (2) "to like, want," if the original notion is "to rejoice."

 Extension from dance to voice is because Attic drama arose from tales inserted in the intervals of the dance. In Attic tragedy, the khoros (of 12 or 15 (tragic) or 24 (comedic) persons) gave expression, between the acts, to the moral and religious sentiments evoked by the actions of the play. English 16c. theater adopted a stripped-down version of this.

 When a Poet wished to bring out a piece, he asked a Chorus from the Archon, and the expenses, being great, were defrayed by some rich citizen (the khoregos ): it was furnished by the Tribe and trained originally by the Poet himself [Liddell & Scott]

 The meaning "an organized company of singers" is from 1650s. Meaning "the refrain of a song" (which the audience joins in singing) is from 1590s; that of "a song to be sung by a (large) chorus" is from 1744.

 In reference to the main part of a modern popular song (as distinguished from the verse , q.v.), by 1926, originally in jazz. As a verb, 1703, from the noun.

 Chorus girl "young woman who sings and dances in a stage chorus" is attested by 1852.
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to chorus 

 verse (n.) 

 late Old English (replacing Old English fers , an early West Germanic borrowing directly from Latin), "line or section of a psalm or canticle," later "line of poetry, metrical line" (late 14c.), from Anglo-French and Old French vers "line of verse; rhyme, song," from Latin versus "a line, row, line of verse, line of writing" (from PIE root *wer- (2) "to turn, bend"). The metaphor is of plowing, of "turning" from one line to another ( vertere = "to turn") as a plowman does.

 The meaning "metrical composition" generally is recorded from mid-14c., also "type of metrical composition, stanza." Hence, "a meter" (1550s) as represented by the run of the verse.

 From earliest use, with reference to canticles, etc., "line said by an officiant or leader and responded to by the people or choir." As the non-repeating part of a modern popular song (between repetitions of the chorus ) by 1918.

 The Negroes say that in form their old songs usually consist in what they call "Chorus and Verses." The "chorus," a melodic refrain sung by all, opens the song; then follows a verse sung as a solo, in free recitative; the chorus is repeated; then another verse; chorus again;—and so on until the chorus, sung for the last time, ends the song. [Natalie Curtis-Burlin, "Negro Folk-Songs," 1918]

 The English New Testament chapters were divided fully into verses first in the Geneva version (1550s). Related: Versual .

 carol (n.) 

 c. 1300, "joyful song," also a kind of dance in a ring, from Old French carole "kind of dance in a ring, round dance accompanied by singers," a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Medieval Latin choraula "a dance to the flute," from Latin choraules "flute-player," from Greek khoraulēs "flute player who accompanies the choral dance," from khoros "chorus" (see chorus ) + aulein "to play the flute," from aulos "reed instrument" (see alveolus ). OED writes that "a Celtic origin is out of the question." The meaning "Christmas hymn of joy" is attested from c. 1500.

 ch 
 choir 
 choral 
 chorale 
 chorea 
 choreography 
 choreology 
 choriambic 
 choric 
 chorine 
 chorister 
 Terpsichore 
 *gher- 
 See All Related Words (15) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ch 

 digraph used in Old French for the "tsh" sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French "tsha." This was introduced to English after the Norman Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste, charity, chief (

 choir 

 c. 1300, queor "part of the church where the choir sings," from Old French cuer, quer "(architectural) choir of a church; chorus of singers" (13c., Modern French choeur), from Latin chorus "choir" (see chorus). The meaning "band of singers" in English is from c. 1400, quyre. It w

 chorale 

 1828, "sacred choral song; musical composition in harmony, suited for performance by a choir," from German Choral "metrical hymn in Reformed church," shortened from Choralgesang "choral song," translating Medieval Latin cantus choralis, from Latin choralis "belonging to a chorus 

 refrain 

 "regularly recurring phrase in a poem, chorus, or song," late 14c., refreine, from Old French refrain "chorus" (13c.), an...

 orchestra 

 c. 1600, "area in an ancient theater for the chorus," from Latin orchestra, from Greek orkhēstra, semicircular space where...the chorus of dancers performed, with suffix -tra denoting place + orkheisthai "to dance," perhaps an intensive of erkhesthai...

 burden 

 idea, main topic," 1640s, a figurative use (on the notion of "subject often repeated") of the earlier sense "refrain or chorus...

 antistrophe 

 part of an ancient Greek choral ode, 1610s, from Latin, from Greek antistrophē "the returning of the chorus," "answering...

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 Share chorus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chorus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chorus">Etymology of chorus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chorus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chorus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chorus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chorus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chorus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chorus. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chorus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chorus (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chorus 
 chorister 
 chorizo 
 chork 
 choroid 
 chortle 
 chorus 
 chose 
 chosen 
 chou 
 chouse 
 chow 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix