URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/falcon
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:59:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Falcon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Falcon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of falcon 

 falcon (n.) 

 mid-13c., faucon , from Old French faucon "falcon" (12c.), from Late Latin falconem (nominative falco ) "falcon" (source also of Old Spanish falcon , Portuguese falcão , Italian falcone , Old High German falcho , German Falke , Dutch valk ), probably from Latin falx (genitive falcis ) "curved blade, pruning hook, sickle, war-scythe" (see falcate ); the bird said to be so called for the shape of its talons, legs, or beak, but also possibly from the shape of its spread wings.

 The other theory is that the Latin bird name falx is of Germanic origin and means "gray bird" (from PIE root *pel- (1) "pale"), which is supported by the antiquity of the word in Germanic but opposed by those who point out that falconry by all evidences was imported from the East, and the Germans got it from the Romans, not the other way round.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to falcon 

 falcate (adj.) 

 "hooked, curved like a scythe or sickle," 1801, from Latin falcatus "sickle-shaped, hooked, curved," from falcem (nominative falx ) "sickle," which is of uncertain origin, perhaps a borrowing from a non-Latin Indo-European language of Italy. De Vaan lists cognates as Old Irish delg "thorn, pin," Welsh dala "sting," Lithuanian dilgė "nettle," Old Norse dalkr "pin, spine, dagger," Old English delg "clasp." Related: Falcated ; falcation ; falciform (1766).

 falconer (n.) 

 late 14c., "one who hunts with falcons" (as a surname from late 12c.), from Old French fauconier "falconer" (Modern French fauconnier ), from faucon (see falcon ). Meaning "one who keeps and trains hawks" is from early 15c.

 falconry 
 gyrfalcon 
 *pel- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gyrfalcon 

 large falcon used in hawking, also gerfalcon, c. 1200, partly Englished from Old French girfauc "large northern falcon," probably from a Frankish compound with Latin falco "hawk" (see falcon) + first element meaning "vulture," from Proto-Germanic *ger (source of Old High German g

 haggard 

 , "wild, unruly" (originally in reference to hawks), from French haggard, probably from Old French faulcon hagard "wild falcon...," literally "falcon of the woods," from hagard, hagart, from Middle High German hag "hedge, copse, wood," from Proto-Germanic...

 peregrine 

 also peregrin, type of large, spirited falcon, 1550s, short for peregrine falcon (late 14c.), from Old French faulcon pelerin...

 merlin 

 small, strong European species of falcon, late 14c., merlioun (perhaps early 14c.), from Anglo-French merilun, a shortened...

 kestrel 

 kind of small falcon, windhover, c. 1600, earlier castrell (15c.), probably from Old French cresserele (13c.), earlier cercelle...

 hawk 

 Old High German habuh, German Habicht "hawk"), from PIE root *kap- "to grasp" (source also of Russian kobec "a kind of falcon...

 giblets 

 of uncertain origin; perhaps from Frankish *gabaiti "hunting with falcons," related to Old High German beizan "to fly a falcon...

 hunt 

 Old English huntian "chase game" (transitive and intransitive), perhaps developed from hunta "hunter," and related to hentan "to seize," from Proto-Germanic *huntojan (source also of Gothic hinþan "to seize, capture," Old High German hunda "booty"), which is of uncertain origin. 

 urn 

 late 14c., "large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead," from Latin urna "a jar, vessel of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead" (also used as a ballot box and for drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus "pitcher, jug," and 

 run 

 Old English, "move swiftly by using the legs, go on legs more rapidly than walking," also "make haste, hurry; be active, pursue or follow a course," and, of inanimate things, "to move over a course." The modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which t

 Share falcon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/falcon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/falcon">Etymology of falcon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of falcon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/falcon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of falcon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/falcon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of falcon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/falcon. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of falcon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/falcon (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near falcon 
 Falange 
 Falangist 
 Falasha 
 falcate 
 falchion 
 falcon 
 falconer 
 falconry 
 falderol 
 Falernum 
 fall 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix