URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ambassador
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:37:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ambassador - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ambassador - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ambassador 

 ambassador (n.) 

 late 14c., also embassador , "diplomatic emissary of a ruler in the court of another," from Old French embassator , ambassateor , which comes via Provençal or Old Spanish from Latin ambactus "a servant, vassal," from Celtic amb(i)actos "a messenger, servant" (from PIE root *ambhi- "around" + *ag- "to drive, draw out or forth, move").

 Compare embassy . Forms in am- and em- were used indiscriminately in English 17c.-18c. Until 1893 the United States sent and received none, having only ministers (often called ambassadors), who represented the state, not the sovereign.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to ambassador 

 embassy (n.) 

 1570s, "position of an ambassador," from French embassee "mission, charge, office of ambassador," Old French ambassee , from Italian ambasciata , from Old Provençal ambaisada "office of ambassador," from Gaulish *ambactos "dependant, vassal," literally "one going around" (from PIE *amb(i)-ag-to , from roots *ambhi- "around" + *ag- "to drive, draw out or forth, move").

 The meaning "official residence and retinue of an ambassador" is from 1764. In earlier use were embassade (late 15c.), ambassade (early 15c.), from Old French variant ambassade .

 ambassadorial (adj.) 

 "of or belonging to an ambassador," 1759, from ambassador + -al (1).

 Amish 
 amt 
 embassador 
 *ag- 
 *ambhi- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 legate 

 mid-12c., "authorized representative of the Pope," from Old French legat and directly from Latin legatus "ambassador, envoy...General sense of "ambassador, delegate, messenger of a state or authority" is from late 14c. in English....

 credentials 

 Especially in reference to the letters of authorization given by a government to an ambassador....

 errand 

 In Old English, ærendgast was "angel," ærendraca was "ambassador."...

 messenger 

 one who bears a message; the bearer of a verbal or written communication," from Old French messagier "messenger, envoy, ambassador...

 plenipotentiary 

 As a noun from 1650s, "person invested with full powers to transact any business," especially with reference to an ambassador...

 legacy 

 late 14c., legacie, "body of persons sent on a mission," from Medieval Latin legatia, from Latin legatus "ambassador, envoy...

 constructive 

 [The Christian Ambassador, vol. ix, 1871] It later was extended to education and became personal: Constructive criticism...

 voice 

 late 13c., "sound made by the human mouth," from Old French voiz "voice, speech; word, saying, rumor, report" (Modern French voix), from Latin vocem (nominative vox) "voice, sound, utterance, cry, call, speech, sentence, language, word" (source also of Italian voce, Spanish voz),

 representative 

 1580s, "serving to portray or symbolize," from French representatif (early 14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin repraesentativus, from stem of Latin repraesentare "show, exhibit, display" (see represent). Meaning "standing for others, acting as a substitute or agent for another"

 constellation 

 early 14c., constellacioun, "position of a planet in the zodiac;" late 14c., "one of the recognized star patterns handed down from antiquity" (in the zodiac or not), from Old French constellacion "constellation, conjuncture (of planets)" and directly from Late Latin constellation

 Share ambassador 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ambassador Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ambassador">Etymology of ambassador by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ambassador. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ambassador Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ambassador," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ambassador. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ambassador." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ambassador. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ambassador." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ambassador (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ambassador 
 amazing 
 Amazon 
 Amazonian 
 ambage 
 ambagious 
 ambassador 
 ambassadorial 
 amber 
 ambergris 
 *ambhi- 
 ambi- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close