URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nimbus
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:33:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nimbus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nimbus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nimbus 

 nimbus (n.) 

 1610s, "bright cloud surrounding a divine or sacred personage," from Latin nimbus "cloud," which is perhaps related to nebula "cloud, mist" (from PIE root *nebh- "cloud"). In art, the meaning "halo around the head of a representation of a divine or sacred person" is by 1727. Figurative use is by 1860. Compare aureole .

 The nimbus of God the Father is represented as of triangular form, with rays diverging from it on all sides, or in the form of two superposed triangles, or in the same form (inscribed with the cross) as that of Christ. The nimbus of Christ contains a cross more or less enriched; that of the Virgin Mary is a plain circle, or occasionally a circlet of small stars, and that of angels and saints is often a circle of small rays. When the nimbus is depicted of a square form, it is supposed to indicate that the person was alive at the time of delineation. [Century Dictionary]
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to nimbus 

 aureole (n.) 

 early 13c., "celestial crown worn by martyrs, virgins, etc., as victors over the flesh," from Latin aureola (corona) , fem. diminutive of aureus "golden" (see aureate ). In religious art aureola (1848) is the luminous cloud or aura surrounding holy figures.

 nimbostratus (n.) 

 "thick, low, dark cloud from which rain or snow falls," 1932 (earlier use from late 19c. refers to different cloud types), from Modern Latin nimbus "cloud" (see nimbus ) + connecting element -o- + stratus (see stratus ). Nimbus as "a rain cloud" is attested from 1803. 

 *nebh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "cloud."

 It might form all or part of: nebula ; nebular ; nebulosity ; nebulous ; Neptune ; Nibelungenlied ; Niflheim ; nimbus .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit nabhas- "vapor, cloud, mists, fog, sky;" Greek nephele , nephos "cloud;" Latin nebula "mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation;" German Nebel "fog;" Old English nifol "dark, gloomy;" Welsh niwl "cloud, fog;" Slavic nebo .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 aura 

 1870 in spiritualism, "subtle emanation around living beings;" earlier "characteristic impression" made by a personality (1859), earlier still "an aroma or subtle emanation" (1732). Also used in some mystical sense in Swedenborgian writings (by 1847). All from Latin aura "breeze,

 halo 

 1560s, "ring of light around the sun or moon," from Latin halo (nominative halos), from Greek halos "disk of the sun or moon; ring of light around the sun or moon" (also "disk of a shield"); ""threshing floor; garden," of unknown origin. The sense "threshing floor" (on which oxen

 glory 

 c. 1200, gloire "the splendor of God or Christ; praise offered to God, worship," from Old French glorie "glory (of God); worldly honor, renown; splendor, magnificence, pomp" (11c., Modern French gloire), from Latin gloria "fame, renown, great praise or honor," a word of uncertain

 Agnus Dei 

 The phrase is used from 1620s in reference to an image of a lamb as emblematic of Christ; usually it is pictured with a nimbus...

 cloud 

 The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus, nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist...

 light 

 "brightness, radiant energy, that which makes things visible," Old English leht (Anglian), leoht (West Saxon), "light, daylight; spiritual illumination," from Proto-Germanic *leukhtam (source also of Old Saxon lioht, Old Frisian liacht, Middle Dutch lucht, Dutch licht, Old High G

 corona 

 1650s, "a crown," from Latin corona "a crown, a garland," in ancient Rome especially "a crown or garland bestowed for distinguished military service" (from a suffixed form of PIE root *sker- (2) "to turn, bend"). With many extended senses in botany, anatomy, etc. As a brand of Cu

 nebula 

 mid-15c., nebule "a cloud, mist," from Latin nebula, plural nebulae, "mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation," figuratively "darkness, obscurity," from PIE root *nebh- "cloud." Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of "cataracts in the eye;" astronomical meaning "luminous cloud-like

 rain 

 Middle English rein, from Old English regn "rain, descent of water in drops through the atmosphere," from Proto-Germanic *regna- (source also of Old Saxon regan, Old Frisian rein, Middle Dutch reghen, Dutch regen, German regen, Old Norse regn, Gothic rign "rain"), with no certain

 missionary 

 "one who is sent on a mission, person sent by ecclesiastical authority to labor for the propagation of the faith in a place where it has no indigenous organization," 1650s, from missionary (adj.). The phrase missionary position for "sexual intercourse arrangement in which the cou

 Share nimbus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nimbus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nimbus">Etymology of nimbus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nimbus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nimbus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nimbus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nimbus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nimbus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nimbus. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nimbus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nimbus (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nimbus 
 Nilo- 
 nim 
 nimble 
 nimbly 
 nimbostratus 
 nimbus 
 NIMBY 
 nimiety 
 Nimrod 
 Nimzo-Indian 
 Nina 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix