URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/kinetic
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:07:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Kinetic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Kinetic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of kinetic 

 kinetic (adj.) 

 "relating to muscular motion," 1841, from Greek kin ē tikos "moving, putting in motion," from kin ē tos "moved," verbal adjective of kinein "to move" (from PIE root *keie- "to set in motion").

 Buster Keaton's subject was kinetic man, a being he approached with the almost metaphysical awe we reserve for a Doppelgänger. This being was, eerily, himself, played by himself, then later in a projection room, watched by himself: an experience never possible to any generation of actors in the previous history of the world. [Hugh Kenner, "The Counterfeiters," 1968]

 From 1855 as "causing motion." Related: Kinetical ; kinetically .
 also from 1841 

 Entries linking to kinetic 

 hyperkinetic (adj.) 

 1880, from hyper- "over, exceedingly, to excess" + kinetic . Perhaps immediately from French hyperkinetic (1874). Related: Hyperkinesis (1869); hyperkinesia (1818).

 isokinetic (adj.) 

 1942, from iso- + kinetic .

 kinetics 
 pharmacokinetics 
 *keie- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kin 

 c. 1200, from Old English cynn "family; race; kind, sort, rank; nature" (also "gender, sex," a sense obsolete since Middle English), from Proto-Germanic *kunja- "family" (source also of Old Frisian kenn, Old Saxon kunni "kin, kind, race, tribe," Old Norse kyn, Old High German chu

 integrity 

 c. 1400, integrite, "innocence, blamelessness; chastity, purity," from Old French integrité and directly from Latin integritatem (nominative integritas) "soundness, wholeness, completeness," figuratively "purity, correctness, blamelessness," from integer "whole" (see integer). Th

 review 

 mid-15c., review, revewe, reveue, "a formal inspection of military forces" by a higher official or superior in rank, to judge the effectiveness of their training, from Old French reveue "a reviewing, review" (Modern French revue), noun use of fem. past participle of reveeir "to s

 palm 

 "flat of the hand, inner surface of the hand between the wrist and the fingers," c. 1300, paume, from Old French paume, palme (Modern French paume), from Latin palma "palm of the hand," also "flat end of an oar; palm tree," from PIE root *pele- (2) "flat; to spread" (source also 

 asylum 

 early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), "place of refuge, sanctuary," from Latin asylum "sanctuary," from Greek asylon "refuge, fenced territory," noun use of neuter of asylos "inviolable, safe from violence," especially of persons seeking protection, from a- "without" (see a- (3)

 curtail 

 late 15c., "restrict or limit," a word based on Old French courtault "made short," from court "short" (Old French cort, from Latin curtus, from PIE root *sker- (1) "to cut") + -ault, a pejorative suffix of Germanic origin. From 1550s as "cut short, cut off the end of." General se

 disheveled 

 also dishevelled, early 15c., "without dressed hair," parallel form of dishevel, dischevele (adj.) "bare-headed," late 14c., from Old French deschevele "bare-headed, with shaven head," past-participle adjective from descheveler "to disarrange the hair," from des- "apart" (see dis

 joke 

 1660s, joque, "a jest, something done to excite laughter," from Latin iocus "joke, jest, sport, pastime" (source also of French jeu, Spanish juego, Portuguese jogo, Italian gioco), from Proto-Italic *joko-, from PIE *iok-o- "word, utterance," from root *yek- (1) "to speak" (cogna

 sand 

 "water-worn detritus finer than gravel; fine particles of rocks (largely crystalline rocks, especially quartz); the material of the beach, desert, or sea-bed;" Old English sand, from Proto-Germanic *sandam (source also of Old Norse sandr, Old Frisian sond, Middle Dutch sant, Dutc

 Share kinetic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/kinetic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/kinetic">Etymology of kinetic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of kinetic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/kinetic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of kinetic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kinetic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of kinetic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kinetic. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of kinetic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/kinetic (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near kinetic 
 kinesiology 
 kinesis 
 kinesthesia 
 kinesthetic 
 kinesthetics 
 kinetic 
 kinetics 
 kineto- 
 kinfolk 
 king 
 King Kong 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix