URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinnabar
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:05:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cinnabar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cinnabar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cinnabar 

 cinnabar (n.) 

 mid-15c., "red or crystalline form of mercuric sulphide," also applied to other ores of mercury, originally with reference to its use as a pigment; from Old French cinabre (13c.), from Late Latin cinnabaris , from Greek kinnabari , a foreign word, probably of Oriental origin (compare Persian zanjifrah in the same sense). Also used 14c.-17c. of red resinous juice of a certain Eastern tree, which was believed to be a mixture of dragon's and elephant's blood. Related: Cinnabaric .
 also from mid-15c. 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hydrargyrum 

 mercury, quicksilver," 1560s, from Latin hydrargyrus, from Greek hydrargyros "quicksilver" (as prepared artificially from cinnabar...

 mercury 

 Prepared in ancient times from cinnabar, it was one of the seven metals (bodies terrestrial) known to the ancients, which...

 mineral 

 late 14c., "substance obtained by mining," from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin minerale "something mined," noun use of neuter of mineralis "pertaining to mines," from minera "a mine" (see mine (n.1)). Meaning "material substance that is neither animal nor veg

 quicksilver 

 common popular designation of metallic mercury, Middle English quik-silver, from late Old English cwicseolfor, literally "living silver," so called for its mobility, translating Latin argentum vivum (source also of Italian argento vivo), "living silver;" so called from its liquid

 moth 

 "nocturnal lepidopterous insect," Middle English motthe, from Old English moððe (Northumbrian mohðe), a common Germanic word (compare Old Norse motti, Middle Dutch motte, Dutch mot, German Motte "moth"), perhaps related to Old English maða "maggot," or perhaps from the root of mi

 seminar 

 1887, "special group-study class for advanced students pursuing real research," from German Seminar "group of students working with a professor," from Latin seminarium "plant nursery, seed plot," figuratively, "breeding ground," from seminarius "of seed," from semen (genitive sem

 remedy 

 c. 1200, remedie, "means of counteracting sin or evil of any kind; cure for a vice or temptation;" late 14c., "a cure for a disease or disorder, medicine or process which restores health;" from Anglo-French remedie, Old French remede "remedy, cure" (12c., Modern French remède) an

 mess 

 c. 1300, "a supply or provision of food for one meal," from Old French mes "portion of food, course at dinner," from Late Latin missus "course at dinner," literally "a placing, a putting (on a table, etc.)," from past participle of mittere "to put, place," in classical Latin "to 

 haggard 

 1560s, "wild, unruly" (originally in reference to hawks), from French haggard, said in Watkins to be from Old French faulcon hagard "wild falcon," literally "falcon of the woods," from hagard, hagart, from Middle High German hag "hedge, copse, wood," from Proto-Germanic *hagon, f

 enterprise 

 early 15c., "an undertaking," formerly also enterprize, from Old French enterprise "an undertaking," noun use of fem. past participle of entreprendre "undertake, take in hand" (12c.), from entre- "between" (see entre-) + prendre "to take," contraction of prehendere "to catch hold

 Share cinnabar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinnabar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinnabar">Etymology of cinnabar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cinnabar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinnabar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cinnabar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinnabar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cinnabar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinnabar. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cinnabar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cinnabar (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cinnabar 
 cinematographer 
 cinematography 
 Cinerama 
 cinerary 
 cineration 
 cinnabar 
 cinnamon 
 cinquain 
 cinque 
 cinquecento 
 cinquefoil 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix