URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/scene
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Scene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Scene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of scene 

 scene (n.) 

 1530s, "subdivision of an act of a play," also "stage-setting," from French scène (14c.), from Latin scaena , scena "scene, stage of a theater," from Greek skēnē "wooden stage for actors," also "that which is represented on stage," originally "tent or booth," which is related to skia "shadow, shade," via the notion of "something that gives shade" (see Ascians ).

 According to Beekes' sources, the Greek word "originally denoted any light construction of cloth hung between tree branches in order to provide shadow, under which one could shelter, sleep, celebrate festivities, etc."

 A theatrical word; the wider senses come from the notion of the painted drops and hangings on stage as the "setting" for the action. From "stage setting" the sense extended to "material apparatus of a theatrical stage, part of a theater in which the acting is done" (1540s), which led to "setting of any artistic work, place in which the action of a literary work is supposed to occur" and the general (non-literary) sense of "place where anything is done or takes place" (both by 1590s).

 Hence the sense in reference to a (specified) activity and its realm or sphere (1931, as in the poetry scene ) and U.S. slang sense of "setting or milieu or situation for a specific group or activity," attested from 1951 in Beat jargon.

 Meaning "any exhibition, display, or demonstration of strong feeling," especially "stormy encounter between two or more persons," is attested by 1761. By 1650s as "a view presented to the mind or eye." 

 Behind the scenes "having knowledge of affairs not apparent to the public" (1748) is an image from the theater, "amid actors and stage machinery" (back of the visible stage and out of sight of the audience), which is attested from 1660s. Scene of the crime is attested by 1843. To make a scene "make a noisy or otherwise unpleasant demonstration" is by 1831.

 The word was in Middle English in the Latin form, scena , "structure on a stage for dramatic recitations" (late 14c.).
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to scene 

 Ascians (n.) 

 inhabitants of the torrid zone, 1630s, from Medieval Latin Ascii , from Greek askioi , from a- "not, without" (see a- (3)) + skia "shade, shadow," which Beekes derives from PIE *skhieh- "shadow" (source also of Sanskrit chaya "shadow," also "image;" Persian saya "shadow," Albanian hie "shadow"). So called because they "haue the Sunne twice euery yeere in their zenith, and then they make no shaddowes at all" [Nathanael Carpenter, "Geographie Delineated forth in Two Bookes," 1635].

 love-scene (n.) 

 "a marked exhibition of mutual love; an interview between lovers; a pictured, written, or acted representation of such an interview" [Century Dictionary], by 1630s, from love (n.) + scene . 

 proscenium 
 scenario 
 scenery 
 scene-shifter 
 scenic 
 scenite 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 proscenium 

 c. 1600, "stage of an ancient theater," from Latin proscaenium, from Greek proskēnion "the space in front of the scenery," also "entrance of a tent," from pro "in front, before" (see pro-) + skēnē "stage, tent, booth" (see scene). Modern sense of "space between the curtain and th

 scenic 

 1620s, "of or pertaining to the stage or drama, theatrical," from French scénique (14c.) and directly from Latin scaenicus "dramatic, theatrical," from Greek skenikos, from skēnē "wooden stage for actors," also "that which is represented on stage," originally "tent or booth" (see

 picture 

 early 15c., pictur, pictoure, pittour, pectur, "the process or art of drawing or painting," a sense now obsolete; also "a visual or graphic representation of a person, scene, object, etc.," from Latin pictura "painting," from pictus, past participle of pingere "to make pictures, 

 locale 

 1816, false spelling of local in a sense "a place, a locality, a scene," especially with reference to circumstances connected...The word's right to exist depends upon the question whether the two indispensable words locality & scene give all the...

 recognition 

 The literary (especially stage) recognition scene "scene in which a principal character suddenly learns or realizes the true...

 pageant 

 But an early sense in Middle English also was "wheeled stage or scene of a play" (late 14c.) and Klein, Century Dictionary...In Middle English also "a scene in a royal welcome or a Roman triumph" (mid-15c.); "a story, a tale" (early 15c.); "an ornamental...

 congressman 

 a piece of abuse (written by a Loyalist): Ye coxcomb Congressmen, declaimers keen, Brisk puppets of the Philadelphia scene...

 country 

 mid-13c., "(one's) native land;" c. 1300, "any geographic area," sometimes with implications of political organization, from Old French contree, cuntrede "region, district, country," from Vulgar Latin *(terra) contrata "(land) lying opposite," or "(land) spread before one," in Me

 conniption 

 "attack of hysteria," 1833, in conniption fit, American English, origin uncertain; perhaps a fanciful formation related to corruption, which was used in a sense of "anger" from 1799, or from English dialectal canapshus "ill-tempered, captious," which probably is a corruption of c

 photo 

 1860, a colloquial shortening of photograph. The verb is by 1865, from the noun. Photo-finish, of a race that ends with two or more competitors crossing the finishing line at nearly the same time (so a photograph taken at the finish line at the moment of crossing is the only way 

 Share scene 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/scene Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/scene">Etymology of scene by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of scene. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/scene Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of scene," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scene. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of scene." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/scene. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of scene." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/scene (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near scene 
 scavenge 
 scavenger 
 scavenger hunt 
 scenario 
 scenary 
 scene 
 scenery 
 scene-shifter 
 scenic 
 scenite 
 scent 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix