URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/julep
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:59:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Julep - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Julep - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of julep 

 julep (n.) 

 late 14c., "syrupy drink in which medicine is given," from Old French julep (14c.), from Medieval Latin julapium , from Arabic julab , from Persian gulab "a sweet drink," also "rose water," from gul "rose" (related to Greek rhodon , Latin rosa ; see rose (n.1)) + ab "water," from PIE root *ap- (2) "water" (for which see water (n.1)).

 As the name of a sugared alcoholic drink flavored with mint, 1761, originally a medical recipe; the apothecary's name for it was julepum menthae .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to julep 

 rose (n.1) 

 a fragrant shrub noted for its beauty and its thorns, cultivated from remote antiquity, Old English rose , from Latin rosa (source of Italian and Spanish rosa , French rose ; also source of Dutch roos , German Rose , Swedish ros , Serbo-Croatian ruža , Polish róża , Russian roza , Lithuanian rožė , Hungarian rózsa , Irish ros , Welsh rhosyn , etc.), probably via Italian and Greek dialects from Greek rhodon "rose" (Aeolic brodon ).

 Greek rhodon probably is ultimately from or related to the Iranian root *vrda- . Beekes writes that "The word is certainly borrowed from the East, probably like Arm[enian] vard 'rose' from OIran. *urda ." Aramaic warda is from Old Persian; the modern Persian cognate, via the usual sound changes, is gul , source of Turkish gül "rose."

 The form of the English word was influenced by the French. Used as a color name for a light crimson by 1520s (earlier rose-color , late 14c.; rose-red , early 13c.). As "person of great beauty or virtue," early 15c. A rose-bowl (by 1887) is one designed to hold cut roses.

 The Wars of the Roses (by 1823; in 1807 as Wars of the Two Roses ) was the English civil wars of 15c., the white rose was the badge of the House of York, the red of its rival Lancaster.

 As an adjective, "of a rich red color characteristic of the rose," by 1816. Earlier adjectives were rose-red (c. 1300); rose-colored (1520s).

 Roses often are figurative of favorable circumstances, hence bed of roses , attested from 1590s in the figurative sense. (In 15c. to be (or dwell ) in flowers meant "be prosperous, flourish.") To come up roses "turn out perfectly" is attested by 1959; the image, though not the wording, is by 1855. To come out smelling like a rose is from 1968.

 Rose of Sharon (Song of Solomon ii.1) is attested from 1610s, named for the fertile strip of coastal Palestine (see Sharon ), but the flower has not been identified. The name has been used in U.S. since 1847 of the Syrian hibiscus.

 water (n.1) 

 Old English wæter , from Proto-Germanic *watr- (source also of Old Saxon watar , Old Frisian wetir , Dutch water , Old High German wazzar , German Wasser , Old Norse vatn , Gothic wato "water"), from PIE *wod-or , suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet." In ancient conceptions one of the handful of basic elements of which everything is composed.

 To have one's head above water (and thus avoid drowning) is by 1660s; in the figurative sense "out of difficulty" it is recorded from 1742.

 Water-cure for healing therapies involving water is by 1842. The crowd-control water-cannon is so called by 1964; water-fountain "drinking fountain" is by 1946. Water-buffalo is attested by 1894. W ater polo is attested from 1884; water torture from 1928.

 Waters for "seas of a particular region," especially "maritime claims of a nation," is by 1650s.

 Linguists believe PIE had two root words for water: *ap- and *wed- . The first (preserved in Sanskrit apah as well as Punjab and julep ) was "animate," referring to water as a living force; the latter referred to it as an inanimate substance. The same probably was true of fire (n.).

 mint (n.1) 

 aromatic herb, plant of the genus Mentha , Old English minte (8c.), from West Germanic *minta (source also of Old Saxon minta , Middle Dutch mente , Old High German minza , German Minze ), a borrowing from Latin menta , mentha "mint," itself from Greek minth ē , personified as a nymph transformed into an herb by Proserpine, which is probably a loan-word from a lost Mediterranean language. For mint-julep , see julep .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 smash 

 As a type of julep-like brandy drink, by 1950, American English....

 bourbon 

 type of American corn whiskey, 1846, from Bourbon County, Kentucky, where it first was made, supposedly in 1789. Bourbon County was organized 1785, one of the nine established by the Virginia legislature before Kentucky became a state. The name reflects the fondness felt in the U

 Creole 

 "person born in a country but of a people not indigenous to it," c. 1600, from French créole (17c.), from Spanish criollo "(person) native to a locality," from Portuguese crioulo, diminutive of cria "person (especially a servant) raised in one's house," from criar "to raise or br

 sycophant 

 1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), "informer, talebearer, slanderer" (a sense now obsolete), from French sycophante and directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantēs "false accuser, slanderer," literally "one who shows the fig," from sykon "fig" (see fig (n.1)) + phainein

 world 

 Old English woruld, worold "human existence, the affairs of life," also "a long period of time," also "the human race, mankind, humanity," a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt,

 discrimination 

 1640s, "the making of distinctions, act of observing or marking a difference," from Late Latin discriminationem (nominative discriminatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of discriminare "to divide, separate" (see discriminate (v.)). Sense of "making invidious distincti

 believe 

 Middle English bileven, from Old English belyfan "to have faith or confidence" (in a person), earlier geleafa (Mercian), gelefa (Northumbrian), gelyfan (West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *ga-laubjan "to believe," perhaps literally "hold dear (or valuable, or satisfactory), to love

 sublime 

 1580s, of language, style, etc., "expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner," from French sublime (15c.), or directly from Latin sublimis "uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished," possibly originally "sloping up to the lintel," from sub "up to" (se

 aftermath 

 1520s, originally "a second crop of grass grown on the same land after the first had been harvested," from after + -math, which is from Old English mæð "a mowing, cutting of grass" (from PIE root *me- (4) "to cut down grass or grain"). Other words for it were aftercrop (1560s), a

 surprise 

 also formerly surprize, late 14c., "unexpected attack or capture," from Old French surprise "a taking unawares" (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre "to overtake, seize, invade" (12c.), from sur- "over" (see sur- (1)) + prendre "to take," from Latin p

 Share julep 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/julep Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/julep">Etymology of julep by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of julep. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/julep Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of julep," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/julep. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of julep." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/julep. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of julep." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/julep (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near julep 
 jujitsu 
 juju 
 jujube 
 juke 
 jukebox 
 julep 
 Julia 
 Julian 
 Julie 
 julienne 
 Juliet 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix