URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fur
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:41:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fur - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fur - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fur 

 fur (n.) 

 late 14c. "trimming or lining of a garment" (implied c. 1300 in surname Furhode "fur hood"), probably from Old French forrer , fourrer "cover with fur, line (clothing)," in general "to cover, fill with," from fuerre "sheath, scabbard" (via notion of "covering"), from Frankish *fodr or another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *fodram "sheath" (source also of Old Frisian foder "coat lining," Old High German fotar "a lining," German Futter , Gothic fodr "sword sheath"), from PIE root *pa- "to feed, protect."

 First applied c. 1400 to the hairy pelt of an animal, whether still on the animal or not. The Old French noun might have had the sense "hide, fur, pelt" (and thus might serve as the immediate source of the English noun), but this is not attested. Absent this, the sense transfer from the lining to the material that goes to make it probably happened in English. As an adjective from 1590s.

 To make the fur (or feathers) fly "make an effective assault or attack" is a reference to the effect of a successful shot in hunting on the hunted creature.

 I'le make the fur Flie 'bout the eares of the old Cur. [Butler, "Hudibras," 1663]
 also from late 14c. 

 fur (v.) 

 c. 1300 (implied in furred ), from fur (n.) or Old French fourrer "to line." Related: Furring .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to fur 

 furrier (n.) 

 "dealer or dresser in furs," late 15c.; as a surname late 13c. ( Osberto le ffurrere ), via Anglo-French from Old French forreor "furrier," from forrer "to line or trim with fur" (see fur (n.)).

 furry (adj.) 

 1670s, "made of fur, covered with fur," from fur + -y (2). As a noun, in reference to "anthropomorphic animal characters with human personalities," also of people who identify with them, by 1995. Related: Furriness ; furries .

 *pa- 

 *pā- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to protect, feed."

 It might form all or part of: antipasto ; appanage ; bannock ; bezoar ; companion ; company ; feed ; fodder ; food ; forage ; foray ; foster ; fur ; furrier ; impanate ; pabulum ; panatela ; panic (n.2) "type of grass;" pannier ; panocha ; pantry ; pastern ; pastor ; pasture ; pester ; repast ; satrap .

 It might also be the source of: Greek pateisthai "to feed;" Latin pabulum "food, fodder," panis "bread," pasci "to feed," pascare "to graze, pasture, feed," pastor "shepherd," literally "feeder;" Avestan pitu- "food;" Old Church Slavonic pasti "feed cattle, pasture;" Russian pishcha "food;" Old English foda , Gothic fodeins "food, nourishment."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pelt 

 "to strike repeatedly" (with something), c. 1500, a word of unknown origin; according to one old theory it is perhaps from early 13c. pelten "to strike," a variant of pilten "to thrust, strike," from an unrecorded Old English *pyltan, from Medieval Latin *pultiare, from Latin pul

 surplice 

 1200, from Old French surpeliz (12c.), from Medieval Latin superpellicium (vestmentum) "a surplice," literally "an over fur...(garment)," from Latin super "over" (see super-) + Medieval Latin pellicium "fur garment, tunic of skins," from Latin pellis...So called because it was donned over fur garments worn by clergymen for warmth in unheated medieval churches....

 sable 

 early 15c., "fur or pelt of the European sable" (Martes zibellina), from Old French sable (also martre sable "sable martin..."), in reference to the carnivorous arctic mammal or its highly prized fur, borrowed in French from Germanic (compare Middle...The earlier word for the fur was sabeline (c. 1200), from Old French sabeline and directly from Medieval Latin sabelinum....

 ermine 

 winter coat, late 12c., from Old French ermine (12c., Modern French hermine), used in reference to both the animal and the fur...The fur, especially with the black of the tail inserted at regular intervals in the pure white of the winter coat, was used...

 glass 

 slipper in "Cinderella" perhaps is an error by Charles Perrault, translating in 1697, mistaking Old French voir "ermine, fur...In other versions of the tale it is a fur slipper....

 leather 

 In commercial and popular usage leather does not include skins dressed with the hair or fur on: such skins are usually distinguished...In the untanned state skins valued for their fur, hair, or wool and destined to be tawed and dressed for furriers' and analogous...

 rabbit 

 common burrowing mammal, identified as a rodent, noted for prolific breeding, late 14c., rabet, "young of the coney," suspected to be from Walloon robète or a similar northern French dialect word, a diminutive of Flemish or Middle Dutch robbe "rabbit," which are of unknown origin

 sale 

 Middle English sale, from late Old English sala "a sale, act of selling," which according to OED probably is from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse sala "sale," but in either case from Proto-Germanic *salo (source also of Old High German sala, Swedish salu, Danish salg), fr

 seal 

 "design stamped on wax," especially an impressed figure attached to a document as evidence of authenticity, c. 1200, sel, sele, from Old French seel, seal "seal on a letter" (Modern French sceau), from Vulgar Latin *sigellum (source of Italian suggello, Spanish sello; also Old Fr

 Share fur 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fur Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fur">Etymology of fur by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fur. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fur Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fur," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fur. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fur." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fur. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fur." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fur (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fur 
 funnies 
 funnily 
 funniment 
 funning 
 funny 
 fur 
 furbelow 
 furbish 
 furcate 
 furcation 
 furious 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix