URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/garden
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:11:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Garden - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Garden - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of garden 

 garden (n.) 

 late 13c. (late 12c. in surnames), from Old North French gardin "(kitchen) garden; orchard; palace grounds" (Old French jardin , 13c., Modern French jardin ), from Vulgar Latin * hortus gardinus "enclosed garden," via Frankish *gardo or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *gardan- (source also of Old Frisian garda , Old Saxon gardo , Old High German garto , German Garten "a garden," Old English geard , Gothic gards "enclosure"), from PIE root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose." Italian giardino , Spanish jardin are from French.

 As an adjective from c. 1600. Garden-party "company attending an entertainment on the lawn or garden of a private house" is by 1843. Garden-variety in figurative sense first recorded 1928. To lead someone up the garden path "entice, deceive" is attested by 1925. Garden-glass "round dark glass reflective globe (about a foot and a half across) placed on a pedestal, used as a garden ornament," is from 1842.
 also from late 13c. 

 garden (v.) 

 "to lay out and cultivate a garden," 1570s, from garden (n.). Related: Gardened ; gardening .
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to garden 

 gardening (n.) 

 1570s, verbal noun from garden (v.).

 gardener (n.) 

 late 13c. (early 12c. as a surname), from Old North French *gardinier (Old French jardineor "gardener," 12c., Modern French jardinier ), from gardin "(kitchen) garden" (see garden (n.)). Compare German Gärtner . An Old English word for it was wyrtweard , literally "plant-guard."

 lustgarden 
 rock-garden 
 tea-garden 
 *gher- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rosary 

 mid-15c., rosarie, "rose garden, ground set apart for the cultivation of roses," a sense now obsolete, from Latin rosarium..."rose garden," in Medieval Latin also "garland; string of beads; series of prayers," from noun use of neuter of rosarius...sense of "series of prayers" is attested by 1540s, from French rosaire, a figurative use of the French word meaning "rose garden...," on the notion of a "garden" of prayers....

 orchard 

 late Old English orceard "fruit garden; piece of ground, usually enclosed, devoted to the culture of fruit-trees," also for..., etc., earlier ortgeard, perhaps reduced from wortgeard, from wort (Old English wyrt "vegetable, plant root") + geard "garden..., yard" (also "vegetable garden" until 15c.); see yard (n.1)....The first element would have been influenced in Middle English by Latin hortus (in Late Latin ortus) "garden," which also...

 arbor 

 c. 1300, herber, "herb garden, pleasure garden," from Old French erbier "field, meadow; kitchen garden," from Latin herba...that word has influenced its spelling: [O]riginally signifying a place for the cultivation of herbs, a pleasure-ground, garden..., subsequently applied to the bower or rustic shelter which commonly occupied the most conspicuous situation in the garden...

 paradise 

 late Old English, "the garden of Eden," from Old French paradis "paradise, garden of Eden" (11c.), from Late Latin paradisus..."a park, an orchard; the garden of Eden, the abode of the blessed," from Greek paradeisos "a park; paradise, the garden...of Eden," from an Iranian source similar to Avestan pairidaeza "enclosure, park" (Modern Persian and Arabic firdaus "garden...used by Xenophon and others for an orchard or royal hunting park in Persia, and it was taken in Septuagint to mean "the garden...

 yard 

 "patch of ground around a house," Old English geard "fenced enclosure, garden, court; residence, house," from Proto-Germanic...*gardan- (source also of Old Norse garðr "enclosure, garden, yard;" Old Frisian garda, Dutch gaard, Old High German garto..., German Garten "garden;" Gothic gards "house," garda "stall"), of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE *ghor-to-, suffixed...

 convent 

 The Middle English form lingers in London's Covent Garden district (notorious late 18c. for brothels), so called because...it had been the garden of a defunct monastery....COVENT GARDEN ABBESS. A bawd. COVENT GARDEN AGUE. The venereal diſeaſe....

 kindergarten 

 1852, from German Kinder-Garten (1840), literally "children-garden, garden of children," a metaphoric name from Kinder "children..." (plural of Kind "child;" see kin (n.)) + Garten "garden" (from suffixed form of PIE root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose"...Compare the double sense in nursery Kindergarten means a garden of children, and Froebel, the inventor of it, or rather,...other nations that borrowed the institution nativized the name (Danish börnehave, Modern Hebrew gan yeladim, literally "garden...

 patch 

 "piece of cloth used to mend another material," late 14c., pacche, of obscure origin, perhaps a variant of pece, pieche, from Old North French pieche (see piece (n.1)), or from an unrecorded Old English word (Old English had claðflyhte for "a patch"). Meaning "portion of any surf

 flora 

 c. 1500, "Roman goddess of flowers;" 1777, "the plant life of a region or epoch," from Latin Flora, "goddess of flowers," from flos (accusative florem, genitive floris) "flower," from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- "to blossom, flourish" (source also of Middle Irish 

 landscaping 

 "art of laying out grounds and arranging plants and trees for picturesque effect," by 1861, verbal noun from landscape (v.). Earlier in the same sense was landscape-gardening (1763). The question, however, is, Can landscape-gardening (or short and sweet, landscaping) be taught? 

 Share garden 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/garden Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/garden">Etymology of garden by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of garden. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/garden Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of garden," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/garden. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of garden." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/garden. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of garden." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/garden (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near garden 
 garbanzo 
 garble 
 garbled 
 Garbo 
 garcon 
 garden 
 gardener 
 gardenia 
 gardening 
 garderobe 
 gare 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix