URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/corn
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:55:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Corn - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Corn - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of corn 

 corn (n.1) 

 [grain], Old English corn "single seed of a cereal plant; seeds of cereal plants generally; plants which produce corn when growing in the field," from Proto-Germanic *kurnam "small seed" (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon korn "grain," Middle Dutch coren , German Korn , Old Norse korn , Gothic kaurn ), from PIE root *gre-no- "grain."

 The sense of the Old English word was "grain with the seed still in" (as in barleycorn ) rather than a particular plant. Locally understood to denote the leading crop of a district. It has been restricted to the indigenous maize in America (c. 1600, originally Indian corn , but the adjective was dropped), usually "wheat" in England, "oats" in Scotland and Ireland, while Korn means "rye" in parts of Germany.

 Maize was introduced to China by 1550, it thrived where rice did not grow well and was a significant factor in the 18th century population boom there. Corn-starch is from 1850. Corn-silk is attested from 1852.

 corn (n.2) 

 "hardening or thickening of skin," early 15c., corne , from Old French corne (13c.) "horn (of an animal)," later "a corn on the foot," from Latin cornu "horn of an animal," from PIE root *ker- (1) "horn; head."

 Latin cornu was used of many things similar in substance or form to the horns of animals and of projecting extremities or points: It could mean "a wart, a branch of a river, a tongue of land, the end of a bow or sail-yard, the peak of a mountain, a bugle, a wing of an army," or "the stiff hair of the Germans."
 also from early 15c. 

 corn (v.) 

 1550s, "to form into grains, granulate," from corn (n.1). From 1560s as "to preserve and season with grains ('corns') of salt." From 1785 (in corned ) as "make drunk," as with corn whiskey. Corned beef has nothing to do with the grain; it is so called for the "corns" or "grains" of salt with which it is preserved.
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to corn 

 barleycorn (n.) 

 "barley," late 14c., from barley + corn (n.1). Perhaps to distinguish the barley plant or the grain from its products. In Britain and U.S., the grain is used mainly to prepare liquor, hence personification of malt liquor as John Barleycorn (1620) in popular ballads, and many now-obsolete figures of speech, such as to wear a barley cap (16c.) "to be drunk."

 maize (n.) 

 1550s, "the grain of Indian corn;" 1580s of the cereal plant of the grass family that produces it, from Cuban Spanish maiz , from Arawakan (Haiti) mahiz , the native name of the plant. In Europe it was formerly also called Turkey corn ; like the fowl, this is from mistaken notions of its origin.

 corn flakes 
 cornball 
 cornbread 
 corn-cob 
 corn-crib 
 corn-dodger 
 corn-dog 
 cornfield 
 cornflower 
 cornhole 
 corn-husking 
 cornmeal 
 corn-pone 
 corn-snake 
 corn-stalk 
 corny 
 peppercorn 
 popcorn 
 See All Related Words (23) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 corn-dog 

 "frankfurter dipped in cornmeal batter, fried, and served on a stick," 1949, American English; see corn (n.1) + hot dog. Said to have been introduced by Vaudeville performers Neil and Carl Fletcher in 1942 at the Texas State Fair. Be the first to serve this delicious new sandwic

 corny 

 1570s, "full of corn, pertaining to corn," from corn (n.1) + -y (2). Chaucer used it of ale (late 14c.), perhaps to mean "malty." American English slang "old-fashioned, sentimental" is from 1932 (first attested in "Melody Maker"), perhaps originally "something appealing to countr

 Persephone 

 He analyzes it as *perso-, cognate with Sanskrit parsa- "sheaf of corn," + a second element from the PIE root *gwhen- "to...hit, strike" (see bane) thus "a female thresher of corn."...

 alectryomancy 

 "divination by means of a cock and grains of corn," 1680s, from -mancy "divination" + Latinized form of Greek alektryon "...Letters of the alphabet were traced on the ground and a grain of corn was placed on each....

 shock 

 grain to dry," early 14c., shok, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English word or from Middle Low German schok "shock of corn...originally "group of sixty," from Proto-Germanic *skukka- (source also of Old Saxon skok, Dutch schok "sixty pieces; shock of corn...

 shuck 

 Many extended U.S. slang senses are from the notion of "stripping" an ear of corn, or from the capers associated with husking...[B]lack senses probably fr[om] the fact that black slaves sang and shouted gleefully during corn-shucking season, and this...term to be shucked out, "be defeated, be denied victory," which suggests that the notion of stripping someone as an ear of corn...

 hangnail 

 .) + (finger) nail) of Middle English agnail, angnail "a corn on the foot," from Old English agnail, angnail....OED also compares Latin clavus, which "was both a nail (of iron, etc.) and a corn on the foot."...

 ear 

 "organ of hearing," Old English eare "ear," from Proto-Germanic *auzon (source also of Old Norse eyra, Danish øre, Old Frisian are, Old Saxon ore, Middle Dutch ore, Dutch oor, Old High German ora, German Ohr, Gothic auso), from PIE *ous- "ear" (source also of Greek ous, Latin aur

 era 

 1716, earlier aera (1610s), from Late Latin aera, era "an era or epoch from which time is reckoned" (7c.), probably identical with Latin aera "counters used for calculation," plural of aes (genitive aeris) "brass, copper, money" (see ore, also compare copper). The Latin word's us

 are 

 present plural indicative of be (q.v.), from Old English earun (Mercian), aron (Northumbrian), from Proto-Germanic *ar-, probably a variant of PIE *es- "to be" (see am). Also from Old Norse cognates. In 17c. it began to replace be, ben as first person plural present indicative in

 Share corn 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/corn Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/corn">Etymology of corn by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of corn. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/corn Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of corn," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/corn. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of corn." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/corn. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of corn." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/corn (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near corn 
 corker 
 corkscrew 
 corky 
 corm 
 cormorant 
 corn 
 corn flakes 
 cornball 
 cornbread 
 corn-cob 
 corn-crib 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix