URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cholesterol
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cholesterol - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cholesterol - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cholesterol 

 cholesterol (n.) 

 white, solid substance present in body tissues, 1894, earlier cholesterin , from French cholestrine (Chevreul, 1827), from Latinized form of Greek khole "bile" (from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives denoting "green, yellow," and thus "bile, gall") + steros "solid, stiff" (from PIE root *ster- (1) "stiff"). So called because originally found in gallstones (Conradi, 1775). The name was changed to the modern form (with chemical suffix -ol , denoting an alcohol) after the compound was discovered to be a secondary alcohol.
 also from 1894 

 Entries linking to cholesterol 

 sterol (n.) 

 "white, crystalline substance discovered in gallstones," 1913, abstracted from cholesterol .

 *ghel- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine;" it forms words for "gold" (the "bright" metal), words denoting colors, especially "yellow" and "green," also "bile, gall," for its color, and a large group of Germanic gl- words having to do with shining and glittering and, perhaps, sliding. Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is "perhaps because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to yellow."

 It might form all or part of: arsenic ; Chloe ; chloral ; chloride ; chlorinate ; chlorine ; chloro- ; chloroform ; chlorophyll ; chloroplast ; cholecyst ; choler ; cholera ; choleric ; cholesterol ; cholinergic ; Cloris ; gall (n.1) "bile, liver secretion;" gild ; glad ; glance ; glare ; glass ; glaze ; glazier ; gleam ; glee ; glib ; glide ; glimmer ; glimpse ; glint ; glissade ; glisten ; glister ; glitch ; glitter ; glitzy ; gloaming ; gloat ; gloss (n.1) "glistening smoothness, luster;" glow ; glower ; gold ; guilder ; jaundice ; melancholic ; melancholy ; yellow ; zloty .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit harih "yellow, tawny yellow," hiranyam "gold;" Avestan zari "yellow;" Old Persian daraniya- , Avestan zaranya- "gold;" Greek khlōros "greenish-yellow color," kholos "bile, gall, wrath;" Latin helvus "yellowish, bay," Gallo-Latin gilvus "light bay;" Lithuanian geltonas "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlutu , Polish żółty , Russian zeltyj "yellow;" Latin galbus "greenish-yellow," fellis "bile, gall;" Lithuanian žalias "green," želvas "greenish," tulžis "bile;" Old Church Slavonic zelenu , Polish zielony , Russian zelenyj "green;" Old Irish glass , Welsh and Breton glas "green," also "gray, blue;" Old English galla "gall, bile," geolu , geolwe , German gelb , Old Norse gulr "yellow;" Old Church Slavonic zlato , Russian zoloto , Old English gold , Gothic gulþ "gold;" Old English glæs "glass; a glass vessel."

 -ol 
 *ster- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ineffable 

 late 14c., "beyond expression, too great for words, inexpressible," from Old French ineffable (14c.) or directly from Latin ineffabilis "unutterable," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + effabilis "speakable," from effari "utter," from assimilated form of ex "out" (see ex

 commodity 

 early 15c., "benefit, profit, welfare;" also "a convenient or useful product," from Old French commodit "benefit, profit" (15c.) and directly from Latin commoditatem (nominative commoditas) "fitness, adaptation, convenience, advantage," from commodus "proper, fit, appropriate, co

 fellowship 

 c. 1200, feolahschipe "companionship," from fellow + -ship. The sense of "a body of companions" is from late 13c. The meaning "spirit of comradeship, friendliness" is from late 14c. As a state of privilege in English colleges, from 1530s. In Middle English it was at times a euphe

 latitude 

 late 14c., "breadth," from Old French latitude (13c.) and directly from Latin latitudo "breadth, width, extent, size," from lātus (adj.) "wide, broad, extensive" Old Latin stlatus, from PIE *stleto-, suffixed form of root *stele- "to spread, to extend" (source also of Old Church 

 zone 

 late 14c., from Latin zona "geographical belt, celestial zone," from Greek zōnē "a belt, the girdle worn by women at the hips," from zōnnynai "to gird," from PIE root *yos- "to gird" (source also of Avestan yasta- "girt," Lithuanian juosiu, juosti "to gird," Old Church Slavonic p

 set 

 Middle English setten, from Old English settan (transitive) "cause to sit; make or cause to rest as on a seat; cause to be put, placed, or seated;" also "put in a definite place," also "arrange, fix adjust; fix or appoint (a time) for some affair or transaction," and "cause (thou

 concert 

 1660s, "agreement of two or more in design or plan; accord, harmony," from French concert (16c.), from Italian concerto "concert, harmony," from concertare "bring into agreement," apparently from Latin concertare "to contend with zealously, contest, dispute, debate" from assimila

 counterfeit 

 c. 1300, countrefeten, "pretend to be," from countrefet (adj.), Old French contrefait "imitated" (Modern French contrefait), past participle of contrefaire "imitate," from contre- "against" (see contra-) + faire "to make, to do" (from Latin facere "to make, do," from PIE root *dh

 waffle 

 "kind of batter-cake, baked crisp in irons and served hot," 1744, from Dutch wafel "waffle," from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German wafel, from Proto-Germanic *wabila- "web, honeycomb" (source also of Old High German waba "honeycomb," German Wabe), related to Old High German weba

 scale 

 [one of the skin plates on fish or snakes] c. 1300, from Old French escale "cup, scale, shell pod, husk" (12c., Modern French écale), from Frankish *skala or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *skæla "to split, divide" (source also of Dutch schaal "a scale, husk," Ol

 Share cholesterol 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cholesterol Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cholesterol">Etymology of cholesterol by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cholesterol. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cholesterol Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cholesterol," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cholesterol. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cholesterol." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cholesterol. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cholesterol." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cholesterol (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cholesterol 
 cholecystitis 
 choler 
 cholera 
 choleraic 
 choleric 
 cholesterol 
 cholinergic 
 Cholo 
 chomp 
 chondro- 
 choo-choo 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix