URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadmium
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:13:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cadmium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cadmium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cadmium 

 cadmium (n.) 

 bluish-white metallic element, 1822, discovered 1817 by German scientist Friedrich Strohmeyer (1776-1835), coined in Modern Latin from cadmia , a word used by ancient naturalists for various earths and oxides (especially zinc carbonate), from Greek kadmeia (ge) "Cadmean (earth)," from Kadmos "Cadmus," legendary founder of Boeotian Thebes. With metallic element ending -ium . So called because the earth was first found in the vicinity of Thebes ( Kadmeioi was an alternative name for "Thebans" since the time of Homer). Its sulphate furnishes a brilliant and permanent yellow color ( cadmium-yellow , 1850) used by artists, etc.
 also from 1822 

 Entries linking to cadmium 

 calamine (n.) 

 "zinc carbonate," also, confusedly, "zinc silicate," 1590s, from French calamine , from Old French calemine , chalemine (13c.), from Medieval Latin calamina , corrupted by alchemists from Latin cadmia "zinc ore," from Greek kadmeia (see cadmium ). Or possibly the Medieval Latin word is from Latin calamus "reed," in reference to the mineral's stalactite form in furnace chimneys.

 -ium 

 word-forming element in chemistry, used to coin element names, from Latin adjectival suffix -ium (neuter of -ius ), which formed metal names in Latin ( ferrum "iron," aurum "gold," etc.). In late 18c chemists began to pay attention to the naming of their substances with words that indicate their chemical properties. Berzelius in 1811 proposed forming all element names in Modern Latin. As the names of some recently discovered metallic elements already were in Latin form ( uranium , chromium , borium , etc.), the pattern of naming metallic elements in -ium or -um was maintained (in cadmium , lithium , plutonium , etc.; helium is an anomaly).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 d.c. 

 abbreviation of direct current, attested from 1898. In music, it is an abbreviation of da capo, which is Italian for "from the beginning."...abbreviation of District of Columbia, apparently not widely used before 1820, but eventually it became necessary to distinguish the place f

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 review 

 mid-15c., review, revewe, reveue, "a formal inspection of military forces" by a higher official or superior in rank, to judge the effectiveness of their training, from Old French reveue "a reviewing, review" (Modern French revue), noun use of fem. past participle of reveeir "to s

 ponder 

 mid-14c., ponderen, "to estimate the worth of, to appraise" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French ponderer "to weigh, poise" (14c., Modern French pondérer) and directly from Latin ponderare "ponder, consider, reflect," literally "to weigh," from pondus (genitive ponderis) "weig

 traffic 

 c. 1500, "trade, commerce," from  French trafique (15c.), from Italian traffico (14c.), from trafficare "carry on trade," of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Vulgar Latin *transfricare "to rub across," from Latin trans "across" (see trans-) + fricare "to rub" (see friction),

 philosophy 

 c. 1300, philosophie, "knowledge, learning, scholarship, scholarly works, body of knowledge," from Old French filosofie "philosophy, knowledge" (12c., Modern French philosophie) and directly from Latin philosophia, from Greek philosophia "love of knowledge, pursuit of wisdom; sys

 indict 

 formerly also endict, c. 1300, enditen, inditen, "bring formal charges against (someone); accuse of a crime," from Anglo-French enditer "accuse, indict, find chargeable with a criminal offense" (late 13c.), Old French enditier, enditer "to dictate, write, compose; (legally) indic

 hobby 

 c. 1400, hobi, "small, active horse," short for hobyn (mid-14c.; late 13c. in Anglo-Latin), probably originally a proper name for a horse (compare dobbin), a diminutive of Robert or Robin. Old French hobi, hobin, once considered possible sources, now are held to be borrowings fro

 Share cadmium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadmium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadmium">Etymology of cadmium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cadmium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadmium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cadmium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadmium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cadmium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadmium. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cadmium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cadmium (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cadmium 
 cadet 
 cadge 
 Cadillac 
 Cadiz 
 Cadmean victory 
 cadmium 
 cadre 
 caduceus 
 caducous 
 cady 
 caecum 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix