URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/caterpillar
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:00:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caterpillar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Caterpillar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of caterpillar 

 caterpillar (n.) 

 "larva of a butterfly or moth," mid-15c., catyrpel , probably altered (by association with Middle English piller "plunderer;" see pillage (n.)) from Old North French caterpilose "caterpillar" (Old French chatepelose ), literally "shaggy cat" (probably in reference to the "wooly-bear" variety), from Late Latin catta pilosa , from catta "cat" (see cat (n.)) + pilosus "hairy, shaggy, covered with hair," from pilus "hair" (see pile (n.3)).

 Compare also French chenille "caterpillar," literally "little dog." A Swiss German name for it is teufelskatz "devil's cat." "The caterpillar has in many idioms received the name of other animals" [Kitchin, who cites also Milanese cagnon "little dog," Italian dialectal gattola "little cat," Kentish hop-dog , hop-cat , Portuguese lagarta "lizard."] Compare also American English wooly-bear for the hairy variety. An Old English name for it was cawelworm "cole-worm." Caterpillar tractor , one which travels on endless steel belts, is from 1908, so called from its way of moving.
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to caterpillar 

 cat (n.) 

 Old English catt (c. 700) "domestic cat," from West Germanic (c. 400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (source also of Old Frisian katte , Old Norse köttr , Dutch kat , Old High German kazza , German Katze ), from Late Latin cattus .

 The near-universal European word now, it appeared in Europe as Latin catta (Martial, c. 75 C.E.), Byzantine Greek katta (c. 350) and was in general use on the continent by c. 700, replacing Latin feles . It is probably ultimately Afro-Asiatic (compare Nubian kadis , Berber kadiska , both meaning "cat"). Arabic qitt "tomcat" may be from the same source. Cats were domestic in Egypt from c. 2000 B.C.E. but not a familiar household animal to classical Greeks and Romans.

 The Late Latin word also is the source of Old Irish and Gaelic cat , Welsh kath , Breton kaz , Italian gatto , Spanish gato , French chat (12c.). Independent, but ultimately from the same source are words in the Slavic group: Old Church Slavonic kotuka , kotel'a , Bulgarian kotka , Russian koška , Polish kot , along with Lithuanian katė and (non-Indo-European) Finnish katti , which is via Lithuanian.

 Extended to lions, tigers, etc. c. 1600. The nine lives have been proverbial at least since 1560s. As a term of contempt for a woman, from early 13c. The slang sense of "prostitute" is from at least c. 1400. That of "fellow, guy," is from 1920, originally in African-American vernacular; narrower sense of "jazz enthusiast" is recorded from 1931.

 Cat's paw (1769, but cat's foot in the same sense, 1590s) refers to the old folk tale in which the monkey tricks the cat into pawing chestnuts from a fire; the monkey gets the roasted nuts, the cat gets a burnt paw. Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth. Cat-witted "small-minded, obstinate, and spiteful" (1670s) deserved to survive. For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas , see bee's knees . For let the cat out of the bag , see bag (n.).

 pile (n.3) 

 mid-14c., "downy plumage;" late 15c, "fine, soft hair," from Anglo-French pyle or Middle Dutch pijl , both from Latin pilus "a hair" (source of Italian pelo , Old French pel ), a word of uncertain origin. Phonological evidence rules out transmission of the English word via Old French cognate peil , poil . Meaning "soft, raised surface of a regular and closely set kind upon cloth" is from 1560s.

 pillage 
 chenille 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pillage 

 late 14c., "act of plundering" (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) "plunder," from pillier "to plunder, loot, ill-treat," possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare "to plunder," probably from a figurative use of Latin pilare "to strip of hair," perhaps also meaning "to s

 locust 

 particular species or varieties; in the English Bible they are rendered sometimes 'locust,' sometimes 'beetle,' 'grasshopper,' 'caterpillar...

 hippocampus 

 hippokampos, from hippos "horse" (from PIE root *ekwo- "horse") + kampos "a sea monster," which is perhaps related to kampe "caterpillar...

 tent 

 Tent-caterpillar so caled by 1854, from the tent-like silken webs in which they live gregariously....

 bulldoze 

 The meaning "use a mechanical ground-clearing caterpillar tractor" is from 1942 (see bulldozer); figurative use in this sense...

 tank 

 Fuller quotes a memorandum of the Committee of Imperial Defence dated Dec. 24, 1915, recommending the proposed "caterpillar...

 larva 

 1630s, "a ghost, specter, disembodied spirit" (earlier as larve, c. 1600), from Latin larva (plural larvae), earlier larua "ghost, evil spirit, demon," also "mask," a word from Roman mythology, of unknown origin; de Vaan finds a possible derivation from Lar "tutelary god" (see La

 act 

 late 14c., "a thing done," from Latin actus "a doing; a driving, impulse, a setting in motion; a part in a play," and actum "a thing done" (originally a legal term), both from agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform," figuratively "incite to action; 

 analogy 

 early 15c., "correspondence, proportion," from Old French analogie or directly from Latin analogia, from Greek analogia "proportion," from ana "upon, according to" (see ana-) + logos "ratio," also "word, speech, reckoning" (from PIE root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with deriv

 keen 

 c. 1200, kene, from Old English cene "bold, brave, fearless," in later Old English "clever, prudent, wise, intelligent," common Germanic (cognate with Old Norse kænn "skillful, wise," Middle Dutch coene "bold," Dutch koen, Old High German kuon "pugnacious, strong," German kühn "b

 Share caterpillar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/caterpillar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/caterpillar">Etymology of caterpillar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of caterpillar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/caterpillar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of caterpillar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caterpillar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of caterpillar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/caterpillar. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of caterpillar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/caterpillar (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near caterpillar 
 categorize 
 category 
 catenary 
 cater 
 caterer 
 caterpillar 
 caterwaul 
 catfish 
 catgut 
 Cathar 
 catharsis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix