URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/board
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T13:55:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Board - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Board - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of board 

 board (n.1) 

 "piece of timber sawn flat and thin, longer than it is wide, wider than it is thick, narrower than a plank ;" Old English bord "a plank, flat surface," from Proto-Germanic *burdam (source also of Old Norse borð "plank," Dutch bord "board," Gothic fotu-baurd "foot-stool," German Brett "plank"), perhaps from a PIE verb meaning "to cut." See also board (n.2), with which this is so confused as practically to form one word (if indeed they were not the same word all along).

 In late Old English or early Middle English the sense was extended to include "table;" hence the transferred meaning "food" (early 14c.), as "that which is served upon a table," especially "daily meals provided at a place of lodging" (late 14c.). Compare boarder , boarding , and Old Norse borð , which also had a secondary sense of "table" and an extended sense "maintenance at table." Hence also above board "honest, open" (1610s; compare modern under the table "dishonest").

 A further extension was to "table where council is held" (1570s), from whence the word was transferred to "leadership council, persons having the management of some public or private concern" (1610s), as in board of directors (1712).

 "Bow to the board," said Bumble. Oliver brushed away two or three tears that were lingering in his eyes; and seeing no board but the table, fortunately bowed to that.

 The meaning "table upon which public notices are written" is from mid-14c. The meaning "table upon which a game is played" is from late 14c. The sense of "thick, stiff paper" is from 1530s. Boards "stage of a theater" is from 1768.

 board (n.2) 

 "side of ship," Old English bord "border, rim, ship's side," from Proto-Germanic *burdan (source also of Old Frisian bord , Old Saxon bord , Dutch boord "border, edge, ship's side," German Bord "margin, border," Old High German bart , Old Norse barð "margin, shore, ship-board"), perhaps from the same source as board (n.1), but not all sources accept this. Connected to border ; see also starboard .

 If not etymologically related to board (n.1), the two forms represented in English by these words were nonetheless confused at an early date in most Germanic languages, a situation made worse in English because this Germanic word also was adopted in Medieval Latin as bordus (source of Italian and Spanish bordo ) and entered Old French as bort "beam, board, plank; side of a ship" (12c., Modern French bord ), via either Medieval Latin or Frankish. It came into English with the Normans to mingle with its native cousins. By now the senses are inextricably tangled. Some etymology dictionaries treat them as having been the same word all along.

 To go by the board originally was "fall overboard" (1757), of a mast, etc., hence, generally, "be completely lost or destroyed" (1835). To be on board is from c. 1500, originally nautical, "close alongside;" then, less technically, "on the ship" (1708), perhaps by influence of aboard , or from the noun in the sense "plank;" subsequently extended to trains, planes, general situations.

 board (v.) 

 various senses from board (n.1) and board (n.2): "come alongside" (a ship), mid-15c. (from n.2); "put boards on, frame with boards," late 14c. (from n.1); "close with boards" (1885, typically with up , from n.1). The meaning "get onto" a ship (1590s, from n.2), was transferred mid-19c. to stages, railway cars, and later aircraft, etc.

 The meaning "to be supplied with food and lodging" (from n.1 in transferred sense) is from 1550s. The transitive meaning "provide with daily meals and lodging" is from 1590s. Related: Boarded ; boarding .

 Entries linking to board 

 boarder (n.) 

 1520s, "one who has food and/or lodging at the house of another," agent noun from board (v.) in the "be supplied with food" sense. The nautical meaning "one who boards (an enemy's) ship" to attack it is from 1769, from a verbal sense derived from board (n.2).

 boarding (n.) 

 1530s, "supplying of meals; food and lodging," from board (n.1) in its extended sense of "food" (via notion of "table"). Boarding-school is from 1670s; boarding-house is attested from 1728.

 border 
 plank 
 starboard 
 aboard 
 aboveboard 
 baseboard 
 bed-board 
 billboard 
 blackboard 
 board-game 
 boardroom 
 boardwalk 
 bordello 
 buckboard 
 cabinet 
 cardboard 
 chalkboard 
 checker-board 
 See All Related Words (54) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 border 

 mid-14c., bordure, in heraldry, "broad, colored band surrounding the shield," from Old French bordeure "seam, edge of a shield, border," from Frankish *bord or a similar Germanic source (compare Old English bord "side;" see board (n.2)). The form of the ending changed after c. 15

 plank 

 late 13c. (c. 1200 as a surname), "thick board used in construction," from Old North French planke, a variant of Old French planche "plank, slab, little wooden bridge" (12c.), from Late Latin planca "broad slab, board," probably from Latin plancus "flat, flat-footed," from a nasa

 starboard 

 "side of a vessel on one's right when facing the bow," Middle English sterebord, from Old English steorbord, literally "steer-board, side on which a vessel was steered," with bord "ship's side" (see board (n.2)) + steor "rudder, steering paddle," from Proto-Germanic *steuro "a st

 drawing 

 Drawing-board, "board on which paper is stretched for use in drawing," is from 1725; used in figurative expressions, with...the sense of "beginning, starting point" is by 1941 (in the Peter Arno "Well, back to the old drawing board" cartoon in...

 parcheesi 

 backgammon-like board game for four, 1800, pachisi, from Hindi pachisi, the name of a game played on a kind of cloth chess-board...

 clapboard 

 of Middle Dutch klapholt (borrowed into English late 14c. as clapholt), from klappen "to fit" + Low German holt "wood, board...small boards of split oak imported from northern Germany and cut by coopers to make barrel staves; the meaning "long, thin board...

 ashlar 

 "square stone for building or paving," mid-14c., from Old French aisseler, Medieval Latin arsella "a little board or shingle...," diminutive of Latin assis "a board, plank," also spelled axis, which is perhaps not the same axis that means "axle."...

 cater 

 c. 1600, "provide food for," from Middle English catour (n.) "buyer of provisions" (c. 1400; late 13c. as a surname), a shortening of Anglo-French achatour "buyer" (Old North French acatour, Old French achatour, 13c., Modern French acheteur), from Old French achater "to buy,

 trace 

 late 14c., "follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something," also figurative; "ponder, investigate," from Old French tracier "look for, follow, pursue" (12c., Modern French tracer), from Vulgar Latin *tractiare "delineate, score, trace" (source also of Spanish traza

 react 

 1640s, "to exert, as a thing acted upon, an opposite action upon the agent," from re- "back" + act (v.). Related: Reacted; reacting (1610s). For sense development, see reaction. The verb meaning "to perform again, do a second time" (often written re-act and given full pronunciati

 Share board 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/board Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/board">Etymology of board by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of board. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/board Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of board," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/board. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of board." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/board. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of board." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/board (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near board 
 BMX 
 bo tree 
 boa 
 Boanerges 
 boar 
 board 
 boarder 
 board-game 
 boarding 
 boardroom 
 boardwalk 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix