URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/series
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:04:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Series - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Series - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of series 

 series (n.) 

 1610s, "a number or set of things of one kind arranged in a line, a continued succession of similar things," also of events following in order, from Latin series "row, chain, series, sequence, succession," from serere "to join, link, bind together, arrange, attach, put; join in speech, discuss" (from PIE root *ser- (2) "to line up"). The earlier word was serie "sequence of thoughts, discussion of a subject" (late 14c.).

 The meaning "set of printed works published consecutively and having something in common" is from 1711. The meaning "set of radio or television programs with the same characters and themes" is attested from 1949. The baseball sense of "set of games on consecutive days between the same teams" is from 1862.
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to series 

 Laertes 

 king of Ithaca, father of Odysseus, his name is Greek, literally "gatherer of the people," or "urging the men," from laos "people" (see lay (adj.)) + eirein "to fasten together" (see series (n.)) or eirein "to speak, say" (see verb ).

 mini-series (n.) 

 also miniseries "television series of short duration and on a single theme," 1971, from mini- + series .

 serial 
 seriation 
 seriously 
 *ser- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 serial 

 "arranged or disposed in a rank or row; forming part of a series; coming in regular succession," 1840, from series + -al (1). French sérial also seems to originate around 1840. Popularized in English in reference to Dickens' novels, which were first published over time in periodi

 seriously 

 c. 1500, "in a serious manner, with serious thought or application," from serious (adj.) + -ly (2). By 1765 as "to a serious extent, so as to give grounds for alarm." To take (something) seriously "be earnest in one's attitude toward" is from 1782. Middle English also had serious

 scale 

 [standard of measure or estimation] late 14c., "series of registering marks; marks laid down to determine distance along...The meaning "succession or series of steps ascending or descending" is from c. 1600; that of "standard for estimation" (large...The musical sense of "definite and standard series of tones within a certain range," typically an octave (1590s), and the...

 rally 

 Sports sense of "long series of hits from one side to the other" in tennis, etc., is from 1881, earlier "series of back-and-forth...

 bone 

 especially in bone up "study," 1880s student slang, probably from or reinforced by "Bohn's Classical Library," the popular series...in higher education published by German-born English publisher Henry George Bohn (1796-1884) as part of a broad series of...

 operation 

 The surgical sense of "act or series of acts performed upon a patient's body," usually with instruments, is first attested...The military sense of "act of carrying out a preconcerted series of movements" is by 1749....

 Gondwana 

 The name was extended by geologists to a series of sedimentary rocks found there (1873), then to identical rocks in other...Because the fossils found in this series were used by geologists to reconstruct the map of the supercontinent which broke...

 progression 

 late 14c., progressioun, "action of moving from one condition to another," from Old French progression and directly from Latin progressionem (nominative progressio) "a going forward, advancement, growth, increase," noun of action from past-participle stem of progredi "go forward,

 order 

 c. 1200, "body of persons living under a religious discipline," from Old French ordre "position, estate; rule, regulation; religious order" (11c.), from earlier ordene, from Latin ordinem (nominative ordo) "row, line, rank; series, pattern, arrangement, routine," originally "a ro

 installment 

 also instalment, 1580s, "induction into office, act of installing," from install + -ment...."a partial payment on account of debt due," 1776, earlier "the arrangement of payment" (1732), an alteration of Anglo-French estaler "to fix payments," from Old French estal "fixed positio

 Share series 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/series Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/series">Etymology of series by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of series. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/series Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of series," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/series. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of series." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/series. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of series." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/series (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near series 
 serialization 
 serialize 
 seriatim 
 seriation 
 sericulture 
 series 
 serif 
 serine 
 seriocomic 
 serious 
 seriously 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close