URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sumac
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:19:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sumac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sumac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sumac 

 sumac (n.) 

 also sumach , c. 1300, "preparation of dried, chopped leaves of a plant of the genus Rhus " (used in tanning and dyeing and as an astringent), from Old French sumac (13c.), from Medieval Latin sumach , from Arabic summaq , from Syrian summaq "red." In reference to the tree or shrub itself from 1540s; later applied to a North American plant species.
 also from c. 1300 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 poison 

 Poison sumac (1817), causing an even more severe rash, is a swamp-border tree noted for the brilliant red of its leaves in...

 bush 

 "many-stemmed woody plant," from Old English bysc (found in place names), from West Germanic *busk "bush, thicket" (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with Old French (busche "firewood") and Medieval Latin

 wood 

 Old English wudu, earlier widu "tree, trees collectively, forest, grove; the substance of which trees are made," from Proto-Germanic *widu- (source also of Old Norse viðr, Danish and Swedish ved "tree, wood," Old High German witu "wood"), from PIE *widhu- "tree, wood" (source als

 brush 

 "instrument consisting of flexible material (bristles, hair, etc.) attached to a handle or stock," late 14c., "dust-sweeper, a brush for sweeping," from Old French broisse, broce "a brush" (13c., Modern French brosse), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *bruscia "a bunch of new shoots" (u

 shrub 

 "low-growing bush, a woody plant with stems branched from or near the ground," Middle English shrubbe, from Old English scrybb "brushwood, shrubbery," a rare and late word (but preserved also, perhaps, in Shrewsbury), possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Danish 

 steward 

 Middle English steuard, steward, "official in charge of the domestic affairs of a (large) household," from Old English stiward, stigweard "one who has charge of the affairs of the household or estate of another," from stig "hall, pen for cattle, part of a house" (see sty (n.1)) +

 concrete 

 late 14c., "actual, solid; particular, individual; denoting a substance," from Latin concretus "condensed, hardened, stiff, curdled, congealed, clotted," figuratively "thick; dim," literally "grown together;" past participle of concrescere "to grow together," from assimilated for

 secular 

 c. 1300, seculer, in reference to clergy, "living in the world, not belonging to a religious order," also generally, "belonging to the state" (as opposed to the Church), from Old French seculer, seculare (Modern French séculier) and directly from Late Latin saecularis "worldly, s

 brunette 

 of a woman, "dark in complexion, having a brownish tone to the skin and hair," 1660s, from French brunette, fem. of brunet, from Old French brunet "brownish, brown-haired, dark-complexioned," fem. diminutive of brun "brown" (12c.), of West Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *br

 spruce 

 "type of evergreen tree, spruce-fir," 1660s, from spruse (adj.) "made of spruce wood" (early 15c.), originally that imported from Prussia. It is literally "from Prussia," from Middle English Spruce, Sprws (late 14c.), unexplained alterations of Pruce "Prussia," which is from an O

 Share sumac 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sumac Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sumac">Etymology of sumac by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sumac. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sumac Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sumac," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sumac. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sumac." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sumac. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sumac." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sumac (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sumac 
 sultana 
 sultanate 
 sultry 
 sum- 
 sum 
 sumac 
 Sumatra 
 Sumerian 
 summa cum laude 
 summarily 
 summarise 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix