URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sack
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:37:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sack - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sack - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sack 

 sack (n.1) 

 "large oblong bag," Middle English sak , from Old English sacc (West Saxon), sec (Mercian), sæc (Old Kentish) "large cloth bag," also "sackcloth," from Proto-Germanic *sakkiz (source also of Middle Dutch sak , Old High German sac , Old Norse sekkr , but Gothic sakkus probably is directly from Greek), an early borrowing from Latin saccus (also source of Old French sac , Spanish saco , Italian sacco ), from Greek sakkos "bag (made of goat hair); sieve; burlap, large burlap cloak," which is from Semitic (compare Hebrew, Phoenician saq "sack, cloth of hair, bag, mourning-dress").

 The wide spread of this word for "a bag" probably is due to the incident in the Biblical story of Joseph in which a sack of corn figures (Genesis xliv). In English, the meaning "a sack or sack material used as an article of clothing" as a token of penitence or mourning is from c. 1200. The baseball slang sense of "a base" is attested from 1913.

 The slang meaning "bunk, bed" is by 1825, originally nautical, hence many slang phrases, originally nautical, such as sack duty "sleep;" the verb meaning "go to bed" is recorded from 1946. Sack-race (n.) is attested from 1805.

 sack (n.2) 

 "a dismissal from work," 1825, apparently from sack (n.1), perhaps from the notion of the worker going off with his tools in a bag. The original formula seems to have been give (someone) the sack . In early use sometimes also of a rejected suitor. It is attested earlier in French ( on luy a donné son sac , 17c.) and Dutch ( iemand de zak geven ). English was using bag (v.) in the same sense colloquially by 1848, and compare 20c. slang verbal phrase bag work "skip one's job" which puts the bag to different use. The verb sack "dismiss from office, employment, etc., 'give the sack,' " is attested by 1841 (in sacked ).
 also from 1825 

 sack (n.3) 

 "plunder; act of plundering, the plundering of a city or town after storming and capture," 1540s, from French sac "pillage, plunder," from or identical with Italian sacco (see sack (v.1)).
 also from 1540s 

 sack (n.4) 

 "sherry," 1530s, an alteration of French ( vin) sec "dry (wine)," from Latin siccus "dry" (see siccative ). Originally of strong, light-colored wine from Spain and the Canaries. OED notes that the vowel is "not a normal development from the original ' seck .' "
 also from 1530s 

 sack (v.1) 

 1540s, "to plunder, (a place) after storming and taking," from French sac (n.) "bag," in the phrase mettre à sac "put it in a bag," a military leader's command to his troops to plunder a city (from or cognate with Italian sacco , which had the same meanings), from Vulgar Latin *saccare "to plunder," originally "to put plundered things into a sack," from Latin saccus "bag" (see sack (n.1)). The notion beneath the verb probably is "fill your bags with booty."

 The U.S. football sense of "tackle the quarterback behind the line of scrimmage" (by 1969) probably is extended from the notion of "to plunder," though a felt sense of "put in a bag" might be involved. As a noun, "an act of tackling the quarterback for a loss," by 1972.
 also from 1540s 

 sack (v.2) 

 "put into a bag, pack in a sack" for preservation or transport, hence also generally "to lay up, hoard;" c. 1300, from sack (n.1). Related: Sacked; sacking . The sacked friars (c. 1400, sakked freres ) were a mendicant order noted for wearing sackcloth; they appeared in England mid-13c.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to sack 

 siccative (adj.) 

 early 15c. (Chauliac), of a medicine, "inducing or promoting dryness," from Late Latin siccativus "drying, siccative," from Latin siccatus , past participle of siccare "to dry, make dry; dry up," from siccus "dry, thirsty; without rain," from PIE root *seikw- "to flow out" (source also of Avestan hiku- "dry," Greek iskhnos "dry, withered," Lithuanian seklus "shallow," Middle Irish sesc "dry," Sanskrit sincati "makes dry"). The modern noun is attested by 1825; it also was a noun in Middle English.

 cul-de-sac (n.) 

 1738, as an anatomical term, "a diverticulum ending blindly," from French cul-de-sac , literally "bottom of a sack," from Latin culus "bottom, backside, fundament" (see tutu ). For first element, see tutu ; for second element, see sack (n.1). Application to a street or alley which has no outlet at one end is by 1819.

 haversack 
 knapsack 
 ransack 
 rucksack 
 sac 
 saccade 
 sackage 
 sackcloth 
 saque 
 satchel 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ransack 

 mid-13c., ransaken, "to plunder; to make a search, search thoroughly," from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rannsaka "to pillage," literally "search the house" (especially legally, for stolen goods), from rann "house," from Proto-Germanic *raznan (c.f. Gothic razn, Old En

 pouch 

 early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), pouche, "bag worn on one's person for carrying things," especially (late 14c.) "small bag in which money is carried," from Anglo-French puche, Old North French pouche (13c.), Old French poche "purse, poke," all from a Germanic source (compare 

 pocket 

 mid-14c., pokete, "small bag or pouch, small sack," from Anglo-French pokete (13c.), diminutive of Old North French poque "bag" (Old French pouche), from a Germanic source akin to Frankish *pokka "bag," from Proto-Germanic *puk- (see poke (n.1)). The narrower meaning "small bag w

 bulge 

 wallet, leather bag," from Old French bouge, boulge "wallet, pouch, leather bag," or directly from Latin bulga "leather sack...

 baggage 

 equipment of an army; plunder, loot," from Old French bagage "baggage, (military) equipment" (14c.), from bague "pack, bundle, sack...

 poke 

 "small sack," early 13c., probably from a merger of Old English pohha (Northumbrian poha, pocca) "bag, pocket" and Old Norse...

 sad 

 Slang sense of "inferior, pathetic" is from 1899; sad sack is 1920s, popularized by World War II armed forces (specifically...Armed Forces magazine "Yank"), probably a euphemistic shortening of the common military slang phrase sad sack of shit....

 case 

 early 13c., "what befalls one; state of affairs," from Old French cas "an event, happening, situation, quarrel, trial," from Latin casus "a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap," literally "a falling," from cas-, past-participle stem of cadere "to fall, sink, settle do

 take 

 Middle English taken, from late Old English tacan "to grip, seize by force, lay hold of," from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka "take, grasp, lay hold," past tense tok, past participle tekinn; also compare Swedish ta, past participle tagit). This is reconstructed to 

 Seneca 

 1610s, from Dutch Sennecas, collective name for the Iroquois tribes of what became upper New York, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Mahican name for the Oneida or their village. Earlier sinnekens, senakees; the form of the English word probably was influenced by the name of th

 Share sack 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sack Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sack">Etymology of sack by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sack. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sack Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sack," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sack. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sack." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sack. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sack." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sack (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sack 
 saccharin 
 saccharine 
 sacerdotal 
 sachem 
 sachet 
 sack 
 sackage 
 sackbut 
 sackcloth 
 sacral 
 sacrament 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix