URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fiction
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fiction - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fiction - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fiction 

 fiction (n.) 

 early 15c., ficcioun , "that which is invented or imagined in the mind," from Old French ficcion "dissimulation, ruse; invention, fabrication" (13c.) and directly from Latin fictionem (nominative fictio ) "a fashioning or feigning," noun of action from past participle stem of fingere "to shape, form, devise, feign," originally "to knead, form out of clay," from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build."

 Meaning "prose works (not dramatic) of the imagination" is from 1590s, at first often including plays and poems. Narrower sense of "the part of literature comprising novels and short stories based on imagined scenes or characters" is by early 19c. The legal sense ( fiction of law ) is from 1580s. A writer of fiction could be a fictionist (1827). The related Latin words included the literal notion "worked by hand," as well as the figurative senses of "invented in the mind; artificial, not natural": Latin fictilis "made of clay, earthen;" fictor "molder, sculptor" (also borrowed 17c. in English), but also of Ulysses as "master of deceit;" fictum "a deception, falsehood; fiction."
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to fiction 

 faction (n.2) 

 "fictional narrative based on real characters or events, 1967, a blend of fact and fiction .

 fan fiction (n.) 

 also fanfiction , "amateur fiction written by fans of a genre" by 1939, originally of fiction in sci-fi and fantasy fanzines. From fan (n.2) + fiction . Sometimes contrasted with profiction ( pro (n.1) + fiction ) by 1970. Meaning "amateur fiction based on existing books/films/etc." by 1957.

 There has been fan fiction and fan fiction, in the past. This fan fiction has been good, bad, and indifferent. The general consensus of opinion seems to be that most of it was not worth reading. [Don Wilson, Dream Quest , "Coming in the Next Issue" July 1947]

 Abbreviation fanfic is by 1987.

 fictional 
 fictive 
 non-fiction 
 science fiction 
 *dheigh- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fable 

 c. 1300, "falsehood, fictitious narrative; a lie, pretense," from Old French fable "story, fable, tale; drama, play, fiction; lie, falsehood" (12c.), from Latin fabula "story, story with a lesson, tale, narrative, account; the common talk, news," literally "that which is told," f

 pulp 

 As a genre name, pulp fiction is attested by 1943 (pulp writer "writer of pulp fiction" was in use by 1939)....

 mendacious 

 characteristics of a lie, false, untrue," 1610s, from French mendacieux and directly from Latin mendacium "a lie, untruth, falsehood, fiction...

 scoff 

 jest, mockery;" perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub-, *skuf- (source also of Old English scop "poet," Old High German scoph "fiction...

 Jemima 

 Previously Aunt Jemima was a name in various works of fiction and poetry, without racial aspect....

 astronaut 

 Rosny," pen name of Belgian-born science fiction writer Joseph Henri Honoré Boex, on model of aéronautique, and Astronaut...

 poem 

 replacing poesy in this sense), from French poème (14c.), from Latin poema "composition in verse, poetry," from Greek poēma "fiction...

 falsehood 

 c. 1300, falshede, "deceitfulness," also "a lie; that which is false," from false + -hood. Formed on the same pattern are Old Frisian falschede, Dutch valschheid, German Falschheit, Swedish falskhet. Former noun forms in English, now extinct, included falsage "wrongdoing" (late 1

 utopia 

 1551, from Modern Latin Utopia, literally "nowhere," coined by Thomas More (and used as title of his book, 1516, about an imaginary island enjoying the utmost perfection in legal, social, and political systems), from Greek ou "not" + topos "place" (see topos). The current (since 

 novel 

 "new, strange, unusual, previously unknown," mid-15c., but little used before 1600, from Old French novel, nouvel "new, young, fresh, recent; additional; early, soon" (Modern French nouveau, fem. nouvelle), from Latin novellus "new, young, recent," diminutive of novus "new" (see 

 Share fiction 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fiction Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fiction">Etymology of fiction by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fiction. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fiction Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fiction," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fiction. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fiction." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fiction. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fiction." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fiction (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fiction 
 -fication 
 fiche 
 fichu 
 fickle 
 fictile 
 fiction 
 fictional 
 fictionalization 
 fictionalize 
 fictitious 
 fictive 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix