URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dispatch
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:51:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dispatch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dispatch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dispatch 

 dispatch (v.) 

 1510s, "to send off, send to a destination," usually implying urgent importance or haste, from Spanish despachar "expedite, hasten" or cognate Italian dispacciare "to dispatch." For first element, see dis- .

 The second element apparently has been confused or corrupted, and its exact source and meaning is uncertain. One proposal is that it is Vulgar Latin *pactare "to fasten, fix" or *pactiare. Another says it is Latin -pedicare "to entrap" (from Latin pedica "shackle;" see impeach ), and the Spanish and Italian words seem to be related to (perhaps opposites of) Old Provençal empachar "impede." See OED for full discussion.

 Meaning "get rid of promptly by killing" is attested from 1520s; that of "attend to, finish, bring to an end, accomplish" is from 1530s. Related: Dispatched ; dispatching .
 also from 1510s 

 dispatch (n.) 

 1540s, "dismissal after settlement of business," from dispatch (v.). Meaning "speed, haste" is from 1570s. Sense of "a written message sent speedily" is first attested 1580s; that of "a sending off or away" is from c. 1600.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to dispatch 

 impeach (v.) 

 formerly also empeach , late 14c., empechen , "to impede, hinder, prevent;" early 15c., "cause to be stuck, run (a ship) aground," also "prevent (from doing something)," from Anglo-French empecher , Old French empeechier "to hinder, stop, impede; capture, trap, ensnare" (12c., Modern French empêcher ), from Late Latin impedicare "to fetter, catch, entangle," from assimilated form of in- "into, in" (from PIE root *en "in") + Latin pedica "a shackle, fetter," from pes (genitive pedis ) "foot" (from PIE root *ped- "foot").

 In law, at first in a broad sense, "to accuse, bring charges against" from late 14c.; more specifically, of the king or the House of Commons, "to bring formal accusation of treason or other high crime against (someone)" from mid-15c. The sense of "accuse a public officer of misconduct" had emerged from this by 1560s. The sense shift is perhaps via Medieval Latin confusion of impedicare with Latin impetere "attack, accuse" (see impetus ), which is from the Latin verb petere "aim for, rush at" (from PIE root *pet- "to rush, to fly").

 The Middle English verb apechen , probably from an Anglo-French variant of the source of impeach , was used from early 14c. in the sense "to accuse (someone), to charge (someone with an offense)." Related: Impeached ; impeaching .

 despatch 

 18c. variant of dispatch (q.v.), apparently the result of an error in the printing of Johnson's dictionary.

 dispatcher 
 spatchcock 
 dis- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hit 

 late Old English hyttan, hittan "come upon, meet with, fall in with, 'hit' upon," from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse hitta "to light upon, meet with," also "to hit, strike;" Swedish hitta "to find," Danish and Norwegian hitte "to hit, find," from Proto-Germanic *hitjan,

 off 

 by c. 1200 as an emphatic form of Old English of (see of), employed in the adverbial use of that word. The prepositional meaning "away from" and the adjectival sense of "farther" were not firmly fixed in this variant until 17c., but once they were they left the original of with t

 remove 

 early 14c., remouven, remuvien, remēven, "take (something) away; dismiss" from an office, post or situation; from Old French removoir "move, stir; leave, depart; take away," from Latin removere "move back or away, take away, put out of view, subtract," from re- "back, away" (see 

 telegram 

 "telegraphic dispatch," according to Bartlett's 1859 edition a coinage of E....May I suggest to such as are not contented with 'Telegraphic Dispatch' the rightly constructed word 'telegrapheme'?...

 pneumatic 

 The pneumatic-dispatch tube was so called by 1859 (in Paris, pneumatique)....

 send 

 Middle English senden, from Old English sendan "dispatch (as a messenger, on an errand); order or cause to go or pass (from...To send word "transmit or dispatch a message" (to someone) is from c. 1200....

 picturephone 

 Louis Post-Dispatch, Aug. 28, 1970]...

 complete 

 late 14c., "having no deficiency, wanting no part or element; perfect in kind or quality; finished, ended, concluded," from Old French complet "full," or directly from Latin completus, past participle of complere "to fill up, complete the number of (a legion, etc.)," transferred 

 ship 

 Middle English ship, "seagoing vessel," especially a large one, from Old English scip "ship, boat, vessel of considerable size adapted to navigation," from Proto-Germanic *skipa- (source also of Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Gothic skip, Danish skib, Swedish skepp, Middle Du

 account 

 c. 1300, "counting," especially "reckoning of money received and paid, detailed statement of funds owed or spent or property held," from Old French acont "(financial) account, reckoning, terminal payment," from a "to" (see ad-) + cont "counting, reckoning of money to be paid," fr

 Share dispatch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dispatch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dispatch">Etymology of dispatch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dispatch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dispatch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dispatch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dispatch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dispatch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dispatch. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dispatch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dispatch (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dispatch 
 disparage 
 disparagement 
 disparate 
 disparity 
 dispassionate 
 dispatch 
 dispatcher 
 dispel 
 dispensable 
 dispensary 
 dispensation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix