URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pediatric
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pediatric - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pediatric - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pediatric 

 pediatric (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to the medical care or diseases of children," 1849, from Latinized form of Greek paid- , stem of pais "child" (see pedo- ) + -iatric .
 also from 1849 

 Entries linking to pediatric 

 paediatric (adj.) 

 see pediatric ; also see pedo- , æ (1).

 pediatrician (n.) 

 "specialist or expert in pediatrics," 1884, from pediatric + -ian .

 pediatrics 
 -iatric 
 pedo- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 fantasy 

 early 14c., "illusory appearance," from Old French fantaisie, phantasie "vision, imagination" (14c.), from Latin phantasia, from Greek phantasia "power of imagination; appearance, image, perception," from phantazesthai "picture to oneself," from phantos "visible," from phainestha

 rhinoceros 

 "ungainly quadruped having tough, thick skin and usually one or two horns on the snout," once widespread but now limited to Africa and South Asia, c. 1300, rinoceros, "a rhinoceros," also "a horned beast, sometimes regarded as a species of unicorn" [Middle English Compendium], fr

 salvation 

 c. 1200, savacioun, saluatiun, sauvacioun, etc., originally in the Christian sense, "the saving of the soul, deliverance from the power of sin and admission to eternal bliss," from Old French salvaciun and directly from Late Latin salvationem (nominative salvatio, a Church Latin 

 smart 

 Middle English smerten, "to cause pain, to suffer pain," from Old English smeortan "be painful," in reference to wounds, from Proto-Germanic *smarta- (source also of Middle Dutch smerten, Dutch smarten, Old High German smerzan, German schmerzen "to pain," originally "to bite"). T

 anxiety 

 1520s, "apprehension caused by danger, misfortune, or error, uneasiness of mind respecting some uncertainty, a restless dread of some evil," from Latin anxietatem (nominative anxietas) "anguish, anxiety, solicitude," noun of quality from anxius "uneasy, troubled in mind" (see anx

 harlot 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), "vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue," from Old French herlot, arlot "vagabond, tramp, vagrant; rascal, scoundrel," with cognates in Old Provençal (arlot), Old Spanish (arlote), and Italian (arlotto), but of unknown origin. Usually ma

 admonish 

 mid-14c., amonesten "remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning," from Old French amonester "urge, encourage, warn" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere "bring to mind, remind (of a debt);" also "warn, advise, urge," from ad "to," here probably with frequenta

 barbarian 

 mid-14c., "foreign, of another nation or culture," from Medieval Latin barbarinus (see barbarian (n.)). The meaning "of or pertaining to savages, rude, uncivilized" is from 1590s....early 15c., in reference to classical history, "a non-Roman or non-Greek," earlier barbar (late 14

 chimera 

 fabulous monster of Greek mythology, slain by Bellerophon, late 14c., from Old French chimere or directly from Medieval Latin chimera, from Latin Chimaera, from Greek khimaira, name of a mythical fire-breathing creature (slain by Bellerophon) with a lion's head, a goat's body, an

 anatomy 

 late 14c., "study or knowledge of the structure and function of the human body" (learned by dissection); c. 1400, "anatomical structure," from Old French anatomie and directly from Late Latin anatomia, from late Greek anatomia for classical anatomē "dissection," literally "a cutt

 Share pediatric 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pediatric Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pediatric">Etymology of pediatric by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pediatric. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pediatric Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pediatric," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pediatric. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pediatric." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pediatric. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pediatric." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pediatric (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pediatric 
 peddler 
 pederast 
 pederasty 
 pedestal 
 pedestrian 
 pediatric 
 pediatrician 
 pediatrics 
 pedicel 
 pedicle 
 pediculosis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix