URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputter
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sputter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sputter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sputter 

 sputter (v.) 

 1590s, "emit in small amounts or flashes, spit with explosive sounds," cognate with Dutch sputteren , West Frisian sputterje , from Proto-Germanic *sput- (see spout (v.)).

 The meaning "speak rapidly and vehemently, seem to spit words, utter with spit flying" is from 1670s. Related: Sputtered ; sputtering . The noun is attested from 1670s, "noisy and confused talk," by 1837 as "act of sputtering."
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to sputter 

 spout (v.) 

 "issue forcibly; spit out" as a liquid, early 14c., spouten , a common Germanic word, ultimately imitative, related to Middle Dutch spoiten "to spout" (Dutch spuiten "to flow, spout"), North Frisian spütji "spout, squirt," Swedish sputa "to spout," from Proto-Germanic *sput- (from PIE *sp(y)eu- "to spew, spit;" see spew (v.)).

 The colloquial meaning "to talk, declaim, speak volubly" is from 1610s; the dismissive sense of "make great, lengthy speeches of little matter" is by 1756. Related: Spouted ; spouting .

 splutter (n.) 

 1670s, "bustle, confusion, noise, fuss," perhaps a variant of sputter , intensified by the consonant cluster of splash , splatter , etc.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scramble 

 1580s (intransitive), "make one's way by clambering, etc., struggle or wriggle along," also "strive with others or jostle and grasp rudely for a share or for mastery;" a word of obscure origin, perhaps a nasalized variant of scrabble (v.) "to struggle; to scrape quickly." OED poi

 shin 

 Middle English shin, from Old English scinu "fore part of the leg below the knee; shinbone," from Proto-Germanic *skino "thin piece" (source also of Dutch scheen, Middle Low German schene, Old High German scina "shin," German Schienbein "shin, shinbones"), from PIE root *skei- "t

 skin 

 c. 1200, "animal hide" (usually dressed and tanned), from Old Norse skinn "animal hide, fur," from Proto-Germanic *skinth- (source also of rare Old English scinn, Old High German scinten, German schinden "to flay, skin;" German dialectal schind "skin of a fruit," Flemish schinde 

 expectorate 

 c. 1600, "to clear out the chest or lungs," a literal use of Latin expectoratus, past participle of expectorare, which in classical use was figurative, "scorn, expel from the mind," literally "drive from the breast, make a clean breast," from ex "out" (see ex-) + pectus (genitive

 noise 

 c. 1200, "sound of a musical instrument;" mid-13c., "loud speech, outcry, clamor, shouting;" c. 1300, "a sound of any kind from any source," especially a loud and disagreeable sound, from Old French noise "din, disturbance, uproar, brawl" (11c., in modern French only in phrase ch

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 modify 

 late 14c., modifien, "alter, amend, adjust, change the properties, form, or function of;" also "set limits, keep within the bounds of reason; choose a middle course," from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare "to limit, measure off, restrain," from modus "measure, ma

 item 

 late 14c., originally an adverb, "moreover, in addition," from Latin item (adv.) "likewise, just so, moreover," probably from ita "thus," id "it" (see id) + adverbial ending -tem (compare idem "the same"). The Latin adverb was used to introduce a new fact or statement, and in Fre

 time 

 Old English tima "limited space of time," from Proto-Germanic *timon- "time" (source also of Old Norse timi "time, proper time," Swedish timme "an hour"), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- "to divide." The abstract sense of "time as an indefinite continuous duration" 

 mite 

 "tiny animal, minute arachnid," Old English mite "minute, parasitic insect or arachnid," from Proto-Germanic *miton (source also of Middle Dutch mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) meaning originally perhaps "the cutter," in reference to its bite, from Proto-Germ

 Share sputter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputter">Etymology of sputter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sputter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sputter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sputter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputter. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sputter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sputter (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sputter 
 spurn 
 spurrier 
 spurt 
 sputative 
 sputnik 
 sputter 
 sputum 
 spy 
 spyglass 
 spyware 
 squab 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix