URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiger
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tiger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tiger - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tiger 

 tiger (n.) 

 Middle English tigre , "large, beautifully striped carnivorous cat living in distant places or mentioned by ancient naturalists," from Old English tigras (plural), also in part from Old French tigre "tiger" (mid-12c.), both from Latin tigris "tiger," from Greek tigris , which is possibly from an Iranian source akin to Old Persian tigra- "sharp, pointed," Avestan tighri- "arrow," in reference to its springing on its prey, "but no application of either word, or any derivative, to the tiger is known in Zend." [OED, 1989].

 In reference to tiger-like persons from c. 1500. The meaning "shriek or howl at the end of a cheer" is recorded from 1845, American English, and is variously explained. For adjectives tigerish , tiger-like , tigerly (rare), tigerous (rare, obsolete), tigery have been tried. Tigerine (1650s) is especially in reference to colors.

 Tiger's-eye "yellowish-brown quartz as an ornamental stone" is so called by 1886. The tiger-lily (1824) is so called for its orange and black flowers; the tiger beetle (1826) for its aggressive predation.
 also from mid-12c. 

 Entries linking to tiger 

 liger (n.) 

 1938, the word, like the thing, a forced mating of lion and tiger .

 tigress (n.) 

 "female tiger," 1610s, from tiger + -ess .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 paper 

 Paper tiger (1952) translates Chinese tsuh lao fu, popularized by Mao Zedong....

 saber 

 Saber-toothed cat (originally tiger) is attested from 1849, so named for the long upper canine teeth....

 Tammany 

 The club's symbol was a tiger....

 leopard 

 from leon "lion" (see lion) + pardos "male panther," which generally is said to be connected to Sanskrit prdakuh "panther, tiger...

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 person 

 c. 1200, persoun, "an individual, a human being," from Old French persone "human being, anyone, person" (12c., Modern French personne) and directly from Latin persona "human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character," originally "a mask, a false face," such a

 soul 

 "A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks, and wills" [Century Dictionary], Middle English soule, from Old English sawol "spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence; life, living being," from Proto-Germanic *saiwalō (sour

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 somebody 

 c. 1300 as two words, from 16c. as one word, "indeterminate person, person unnamed or unknown," from some + body. Used in place of the name of a person whose name is to be unspoken, by c. 1600. The meaning "important person, person of consequence" is from 1560s. Related: Somebodi

 act 

 late 14c., "a thing done," from Latin actus "a doing; a driving, impulse, a setting in motion; a part in a play," and actum "a thing done" (originally a legal term), both from agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform," figuratively "incite to action; 

 Share tiger 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiger Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiger">Etymology of tiger by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tiger. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiger Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tiger," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiger. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tiger." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiger. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tiger." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tiger (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tiger 
 tierce 
 tie-up 
 tiff 
 tiffany 
 tig 
 tiger 
 tigger 
 tight 
 tight-assed 
 tighten 
 tightrope 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix