URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/boulevard
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:27:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Boulevard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Boulevard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of boulevard 

 boulevard (n.) 

 1769, "broad street or promenade planted with rows of trees," from French boulevard , originally "top surface of a military rampart" (15c.), from a garbled attempt to adopt Middle Dutch bolwerc "wall of a fortification" (see bulwark ) into French, which at that time lacked a -w- in its alphabet.

 The notion is of a promenade atop demolished city walls, which would be wider than the old streets. Originally in English with conscious echoes of Paris; in U.S., since 1929, used of multi-lane limited-access urban highways. Early French attempts to digest the Dutch word also include boloart , boulever , boloirque , and bollvercq .
 also from 1769 

 Entries linking to boulevard 

 bulwark (n.) 

 early 15c., "a fortification outside a city wall or gate; a rampart, barricade," from Middle Dutch bulwerke or Middle High German bolwerc , probably [Skeat] from bole "plank, tree trunk" (from Proto-Germanic *bul- , from PIE root *bhel- (2) "to blow, swell") + werc "work" (see work (n.)). Thus "bole-work," a construction of logs. Figurative sense "means of defense or security" is from mid-15c. A doublet of boulevard .

 boulevardier (n.) 

 1856, a French word in English, "one who frequents the boulevard ;" i.e. "man-about-town, one fond of urban living and society."

 rampart 
 *bhel- 
 *werg- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rampart 

 "earthen elevation around a place for fortification," capable of resisting cannon shot and sometimes also including parapets, 1580s, from French rempart, rampart, from remparer "to fortify," from re- "again" (see re-) + emparer "fortify, take possession of," from Old Provençal am

 avenue 

 c. 1600, "a way of approach" (originally a military word), from French avenue "way of access" (16c.), from Old French avenue "act of approaching, arrival," noun use of fem. of avenu, past participle of avenir "to come to, arrive," from Latin advenire "to come to, reach, arrive at

 tester 

 "one who tests, puts to trial, or assays," 1660s, agent noun from test (v.). Earlier "a crucible" for trying metals by heating them (mid-15c.)...."canopy over a four-post bed," mid-14c., from Medieval Latin testerium, from testera "head-stall" of the bridle of a horse, extended u

 street 

 Middle English strete, "road in a city or town," also "road from one city or town to another," from Old English stret (Mercian, Kentish), stræt (West Saxon) "street, high road," from Late Latin strata, used elliptically for via strata "paved road." Latin strata is fem. past parti

 daffodil 

 1540s, "asphodel," a variant of Middle English affodill "asphodel" (c. 1400), from Medieval Latin affodillus, from Latin asphodelus, from Greek asphodelos, which is of unknown origin. The initial d- is perhaps from merging of the article in Dutch de affodil, the Netherlands being

 gallery 

 mid-15c., "covered walk or passageway, narrow and partly open passageway along a wall," from Old French galerie "a long portico" (14c.), from Medieval Latin galeria, of unknown origin. Perhaps an alteration of galilea "church porch," which is probably from Latin Galilaea "Galilee

 hallucinate 

 "to have illusions," 1650s, from Latin alucinatus (later hallucinatus), past participle of alucinari "wander (in the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought," probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein "wander in mind, be at a loss, be beside oneself (with grief, joy, p

 skill 

 early 12c., "knowledge, divine wisdom;" late 12c., "power of discernment, sound judgment; that which is reasonable," senses all now obsolete, from Old Norse skil "distinction, ability to make out, discernment, adjustment," which is related to skilja (v.) "to separate; discern, un

 providence 

 late 14c., "foresight, prudent anticipation, timely care or preparation," from Old French providence "divine providence, foresight" (12c.) and directly from Latin providentia "foresight, precaution, foreknowledge," abstract noun from present-participle stem of providere "look ahe

 university 

 c. 1300, "institution of higher learning," also "body of persons constituting a university," from Anglo-French université, Old French universite "universality; academic community" (13c.), from Medieval Latin universitatem (nominative universitas), "the whole, aggregate," in Late 

 Share boulevard 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/boulevard Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/boulevard">Etymology of boulevard by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of boulevard. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/boulevard Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of boulevard," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/boulevard. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of boulevard." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/boulevard. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of boulevard." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/boulevard (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near boulevard 
 boughten 
 bougie 
 bouillabaisse 
 bouillon 
 boulder 
 boulevard 
 boulevardier 
 bounce 
 bouncer 
 bouncing 
 bouncy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix