URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tunic
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:55:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tunic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tunic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tunic 

 tunic (n.) 

 mid-12c., tunice , "ancient garment like a shirt or short gown, often worn as an undergarment," from Old French tunique (12c.) or directly from Latin tunica "undergarment worn by either sex" (source of Spanish tunica , Italian tonica , Old High German tunihha ), probably from a Semitic source (compare Hebrew kuttoneth "coat," Aramaic kittuna ). Compare chitin , from a Greek name for a similar garment, also probably from a Semitic source.

 The borrowing from Old French replaced Old English tunece , directly from Latin. In antiquity worn by either sex. In reference to modern costume from 1660s, extended as a general term to all garments worn depending from the neck; especially as a women's garment from mid-18c. A fine, thin, or delicate example is a tunicle .
 also from mid-12c. 

 Entries linking to tunic 

 chitin (n.) 

 "organic substance forming the wing cases of beetles and other insects," 1836, from French chitine , from Latinized form of Greek khiton "frock, tunic, garment without sleeves worn directly on the body;" in reference to soldiers, "coat of mail," used metaphorically for "any coat or covering." "Probably an Oriental word" [Liddell & Scott]; Klein compares Hebrew (Semitic) kuttoneth "coat," Aramaic kittana , Arabic kattan "linen;" Beekes compares Phoenician ktn "linen garment." Related: Chitinous .

 supertunic (n.) 

 also super-tunic , "any garment worn over a tunic," 1620s, from super- + tunic .

 tunicate (adj.) 

 "coated or covered with integuments" (in zoology); having or enclosed in a tunic," 1760, from Latin tunicatus "clothed with a tunic only (i.e. without a toga), in shirt-sleeves," past-participle adjective from tunicare "to clothe in a tunic," from tunica (see tunic ). As a noun from 1848.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kirtle 

 Old English cyrtel, "a man's tunic; a woman's skirt," which is related to Old Norse kyrtill "tunic;" both are regarded as...

 jacket 

 mid-15c., "short garment for men," from Old French jaquet "short coat with sleeves," diminutive of jaque, a kind of tunic...Iakke, jakke "a short, close-fitting stuffed or quilted tunic, often serving as a defensive garment" is attested in English...(from Old French jaque), and by c. 1400 was being used for "woman's short tunic."...

 surplice 

 surplice," literally "an over fur (garment)," from Latin super "over" (see super-) + Medieval Latin pellicium "fur garment, tunic...

 manacle 

 ; armor for the hands," from Latin manicula "handle," literally "little hand," diminutive of manicae "long sleeves of a tunic...

 jersey 

 The meaning "woolen knitted close-fitting tunic," especially one worn during sporting events, is from 1845....

 coat 

 early 14c., "principal outer garment, tunic, kirtle," typically made of cloth and usually with sleeves, worn alone or under...a mantle, from Old French cote "coat, robe, tunic, overgarment," from Frankish *kotta "coarse cloth" or some other Germanic...

 chemise 

 cemes "shirt, undershirt," from Old French chemise "shirt, undertunic, shift," or directly from Late Latin camisia "shirt, tunic...

 cloak 

 late 13c., "long, loose outer garment without sleeves," from Old North French cloque (Old French cloche, cloke) "traveling cloak," from Medieval Latin clocca "travelers' cape," literally "a bell," so called from the garment's bell-like shape (the word is thus a doublet of clock (

 tabard 

 "sleeveless overgarment," c. 1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French tabart "simple sleeveless overtunic," also "heavy over-mantel" (12c.), a word of unknown origin; Diez suggests Latin tapete "figured cloth." Compare Medieval Latin tabardum, early Spanish tabardo, Italian

 compromise 

 early 15c., "a joint promise to abide by an arbiter's decision," from Old French compromis (13c.), from Late Latin compromissus, past participle of compromittere "to make a mutual promise" (to abide by the arbiter's decision), from com "with, together" (see com-) + promittere "to

 Share tunic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tunic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tunic">Etymology of tunic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tunic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tunic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tunic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tunic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tunic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tunic. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tunic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tunic (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tunic 
 tuner 
 tunesmith 
 tune-up 
 tung 
 tungsten 
 tunic 
 tunicate 
 tuning 
 tuning fork 
 Tunisian 
 tunnel 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix