URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/oblong
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:00:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Oblong - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Oblong - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of oblong 

 oblong (adj.) 

 "elongated, having one principal axis considerably longer than the others," early 15c., from Latin oblongus "more long than broad," originally "somewhat long," from ob "in front of; towards" here perhaps intensive (see ob- ) + longus "long" (see long (adj.)). As a noun, "an oblong figure," from c. 1600.
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to oblong 

 long (adj.) 

 Old English lang "having a great linear extent, that extends considerably from end to end; tall; lasting," from Proto-Germanic *langa- (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang , Old High German and German lang , Old Norse langr , Middle Dutch lanc , Dutch lang , Gothic laggs "long").

 The Germanic words perhaps are from PIE *dlonghos- (source also of Latin longus "long, extended; further; of long duration; distant, remote," Old Persian darga- , Persian dirang , Sanskrit dirghah "long"), from root *del- (1) "long" (source also of Greek dolikhos "long," endelekhes "perpetual"). Latin longus (source of prolong , elongate , longitude , etc.) thus is probably cognate with, but not the source of, the Germanic words. The word illustrates the Old English tendency for short "a" to become short "o" before -n- (also retained in bond / band and West Midlands dialectal lond from land and hond from hand ).

 Also in Old English in reference to time, "drawn out in duration," with overtones of "serious." The old sense of "tall" now appears to be dialectal only, or obsolete. For long "during a long time" is from c. 1300. To be long on something, "have a lot" of it, is from 1900, American English slang. A long vowel (c. 1000) originally was pronounced for an extended time. Mathematical long division is from 1808. Sporting long ball is from 1744, originally in cricket. Long jump as a sporting event is attested from 1864. A long face , one drawn downward in expression of sadness or solemnity, is from 1786. Long in the tooth (1841 of persons) is from horses showing age by recession of gums (but not in this sense until 1870). Long knives , name Native Americans gave to white settlers (originally in Virginia/Kentucky) is from 1774, perhaps a reference to their swords. Long time no see , supposedly imitative of American Indian speech, is first recorded 1919 as Chinese English.

 ob- 

 word-forming element meaning "toward; against; before; near; across; down," also used as an intensive, from Latin ob (prep.) "in the direction of, in front of, before; toward, to, at, upon, about; in the way of; with regard to, because of," from PIE root *epi , also *opi "near, against" (see epi- ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 thyroid 

 khondros thyreoeides "shield-shaped cartilage," used by Galen to describe the "Adam's apple" in the throat), from thyreos "oblong...

 blanket 

 c. 1300, "coarse white woolen stuff," also "a large oblong piece of woolen cloth used for warmth as a bed-covering" (also...

 date 

 Said to be so called because of fancied resemblance between oblong fruit of the date palm and human digits, but some say...

 galley 

 The printing sense of galley, "oblong tray that holds the type once set," is from 1650s, from French galée in the same sense...

 eclair 

 "a small, oblong pastry with sweet filling and glazed or iced," 1861, from French éclair, literally "lightning," from Old...The original shape seems to have been not oblong, but round. The reason for the name is unclear....

 basilica 

 1540s, "type of building based on the Athenian royal portico, large oblong building with double columns and a semicircular...

 circus 

 late 14c., in reference to the large, oblong, unroofed enclosures used for races, etc., in ancient Rome, from Latin circus...

 insight 

 c. 1200, innsihht, "sight with the 'eyes' of the mind, mental vision, understanding from within," from in (prep.) + sight (n.). But the meaning often seems to be felt as "sight into" (something else), and so the sense shifted to "penetrating understanding into character or hidden

 romance 

 c. 1300, romaunce, "a story, written or recited, in verse, telling of the adventures of a knight, hero, etc.," often one designed principally for entertainment, from Old French romanz "verse narrative" (Modern French roman), also "the vulgar language." It was originally an adverb

 ghetto 

 1610s, "part of a city in which Jews are compelled to live," especially in Italy, from Italian ghetto "part of a city to which Jews are restricted," of unknown origin. The various theories trace it to: Yiddish get "deed of separation;" a special use of Venetian getto "foundry" (t

 Share oblong 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/oblong Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/oblong">Etymology of oblong by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of oblong. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/oblong Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of oblong," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oblong. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of oblong." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oblong. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of oblong." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/oblong (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near oblong 
 obliquity 
 obliterate 
 obliteration 
 oblivion 
 oblivious 
 oblong 
 obloquy 
 obmutescence 
 obnoxious 
 obnubilate 
 obnubilation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix