URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/amalgam
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Amalgam - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Amalgam - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of amalgam 

 amalgam (n.) 

 c. 1400, "a blend of mercury with another metal; soft mass formed by chemical manipulation," from Old French amalgame or directly from Medieval Latin amalgama , "alloy of mercury (especially with gold or silver)," c. 1300, an alchemists' word, probably from Arabic al-malgham "an emollient poultice or unguent for sores (especially warm)" [Francis Johnson, "A Dictionary of Persian, Arabic, and English"], which is itself perhaps from Greek malagma "softening substance," from malassein "to soften," from malakos "soft" (from PIE *meldh- , from root *mel- (1) "soft"). The figurative meaning "compound of different things" is from 1790.
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to amalgam 

 amalgamate (v.) 

 1650s, "mix (a metal) with mercury," a back-formation from amalgamation , or else from the obsolete adjective amalgamate (1640s) from amalgam (q.v.). Originally in metallurgy. The figurative transitive sense of "to unite" (races, etc.) is attested from 1802; the intransitive sense of "to combine, unite into one body" is from 1797. Related: Amalgamated ; amalgamating . Earlier verbs were amalgam (1540s); amalgamize (1590s).

 amalgamize (v.) 

 1590s, "reduce to a soft mass by combination with mercury," from amalgam + -ize . Related: Amalgamized ; amalgamizing .

 *mel- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "soft," with derivatives referring to soft or softened materials.

 It might form all or part of: amblyopia ; bland ; blandish ; blenny ; emollient ; enamel ; malacia ; malaxation ; malt ; melt ; mild ; Mildred ; milt ; moil ; mollify ; Mollusca ; mollusk ; mulch ; mullein ; mutton ; schmaltz ; smelt (v.); smelt (n.).

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit mrdh "to neglect," also "to be moist;" Greek malakos "soft," malthon "weakling;" Latin mollire "soften," mollis "soft;" Old Irish meldach "tender."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 combination 

 late 14c., combinacyoun, "act of uniting (two things) in a whole; state of being so united," from Old French combination (14c., Modern French combinaison), from Late Latin combinationem (nominative combinatio) "a joining two by two," noun of action from past participle stem of co

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 alloy 

 early 14c. "relative freedom of a noble metal from alloy or other impurities," from Anglo-French alai, Old French aloi "alloy," from aloiier (see alloy (v.)). The meaning " base metal alloyed with a noble metal" is from c. 1400. The modern spelling from late 17c. The meaning "any

 loyal 

 "true or faithful in allegiance," 1530s, in reference to subjects of sovereigns or governments, from French loyal, from Old French loial, leal "of good quality; faithful; honorable; law-abiding; legitimate, born in wedlock," from Latin legalem, from lex "law" (see legal). Identic

 dental 

 1590s, "of or pertaining to teeth," from French dental "of teeth" or Medieval Latin dentalis, from Latin dens (genitive dentis) "tooth" (from PIE root *dent- "tooth"). As "connected with or used in dentistry," 1826. In grammar, "formed or pronounced at or near the front upper tee

 conspicuous 

 1540s, "open to view, catching the eye," from Latin conspicuus "visible, open to view; attracting attention, striking," from conspicere "to look at, observe, see, notice," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + specere "to look at" (from PIE

 persuasion 

 late 14c., persuasioun, "action of inducing (someone) to believe (something) by appeals to reason (not by authority, force, or fear); an argument to persuade, inducement," from Old French persuasion (14c.) and directly from Latin persuasionem (nominative persuasio) "a convincing,

 believe 

 Middle English bileven, from Old English belyfan "to have faith or confidence" (in a person), earlier geleafa (Mercian), gelefa (Northumbrian), gelyfan (West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *ga-laubjan "to believe," perhaps literally "hold dear (or valuable, or satisfactory), to love

 conundrum 

 1590s, an abusive term for a person, perhaps meaning "a pedant;" c. 1600, "a whim;" 1640s, "pun or word-play," a word of unknown origin, said in 17c. to be Oxford University slang. Perhaps the sort of ponderous mock-Latin word that was once the height of humor in learned circles;

 security 

 early 15c., securite, "state or condition of being safe from danger or harm;" mid-15c., "freedom from care or anxiety" (a sense now archaic), from Old French securite and directly from Latin securitas "freedom from care," from securus "free from care" (see secure (adj.)). This fo

 Share amalgam 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/amalgam Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/amalgam">Etymology of amalgam by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of amalgam. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/amalgam Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of amalgam," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amalgam. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of amalgam." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amalgam. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of amalgam." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/amalgam (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near amalgam 
 Alzheimer's disease 
 am 
 amable 
 amah 
 amain 
 amalgam 
 amalgamate 
 amalgamation 
 amalgamize 
 Amanda 
 amanuensis 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix