URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/astrolabe
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Astrolabe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Astrolabe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of astrolabe 

 astrolabe (n.) 

 "instrument for measuring the altitude of the sun and stars," mid-14c., from Old French astrelabe , from Medieval Latin astrolabium , from Greek astrolabos (organon) "star-taking (instrument)," from astron "star" (from PIE root *ster- (2) "star") + lambanien "to take" (see lemma ).
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to astrolabe 

 lemma (n.) 

 1560s, in mathematics, from Greek lemma (plural lemmata ) "something received or taken; an argument; something taken for granted," from root of lambanein "to take," from PIE root *(s)lagw- "to seize, take" (source also of Sanskrit labhate , rabhate "seizes;" Old English læccan "to seize, grasp;" Greek lazomai "I take, grasp;" Old Church Slavonic leca "to catch, snare;" Lithuanian lobis "possession, riches"). Related: Lemmatical .

 *ster- (2) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "star." Buck and others doubt the old suggestion that it is a borrowing from Akkadian istar "venus." The source of the common Balto-Slavic word for "star" (Lithuanian žvaigždė , Old Church Slavonic zvezda , Polish gwiazda , Russian zvezda ) is not explained.

 It might form all or part of: aster ; asterisk ; asterism ; asteroid ; astral ; astro- ; astrobiology ; astrobleme ; astrognosy ; astroid ; astrolabe ; astrolatry ; astrology ; astromancy ; astronaut ; astronomy ; AstroTurf ; constellation ; disaster ; Estella ; Esther ; instellation ; interstellar ; lodestar ; star ; stardust ; starfish ; starlet ; starlight ; starry ; stellar ; stellate .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit star- ; Hittite shittar , Greek aster "star," with derivative astron ; Latin stella , Breton sterenn , Welsh seren "star."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 scale 

 14c., "series of registering marks; marks laid down to determine distance along a line," (in Chaucer's description of the astrolabe...

 sextant 

 instrument for determining latitude in navigation and surveying, 1620s, from Modern Latin sextans, which is said to have been first used in this sense c. 1600 by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, from Latin sextans "a sixth, a sixth part," from sex "six" (see six). So called because

 apprehension 

 late 14c., "perception, comprehension," from Old French apreension "comprehension, something learned" or directly from Latin apprehensionem (nominative apprehensio) "a seizing upon, laying hold of; understanding," noun of action from past-participle stem of apprehendere "take hol

 portmanteau 

 1580s, "flexible traveling case or bag for clothes and other necessaries," from Middle French portemanteau "traveling bag," originally "court official who carried a prince's mantle" (1540s), from porte, imperative of porter "to carry" (see porter (n.1)) + manteau "cloak" (see man

 conscience 

 c. 1200, "faculty of knowing what is right," originally especially to Christian ethics, later "awareness that the acts for which one feels responsible do or do not conform to one's ideal of right," later (late 14c.) more generally, "sense of fairness or justice, moral sense." Thi

 hallucinate 

 "to have illusions," 1650s, from Latin alucinatus (later hallucinatus), past participle of alucinari "wander (in the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought," probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein "wander in mind, be at a loss, be beside oneself (with grief, joy, p

 apply 

 late 14c., "join or combine (with); attach (to something), adhere," from Old French aploiier "apply, use, attach" (12c., Modern French appliquer), from Latin applicare "attach to, join, connect;" figuratively, "devote (oneself) to, give attention," from ad "to" (see ad-) + plicar

 apocalypse 

 late 14c., "revelation, disclosure," from Church Latin apocalypsis "revelation," from Greek apokalyptein "uncover, disclose, reveal," from apo "off, away from" (see apo-) + kalyptein "to cover, conceal" (from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover, conceal, save"). The Christian end-of-the

 merry 

 Middle English mirie, from Old English myrge "pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet, exciting feelings of enjoyment and gladness" (said of grass, trees, the world, music, song); also as an adverb, "pleasantly, melodiously," from Proto-Germanic *murgijaz, which probably originally 

 blunt 

 c. 1200, blunt, blont, "dull, obtuse" (of persons), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra "to shut one's eyes" (see blunder (v.)). Or from Old English blinnan (past participle blon) "to stop, cease, come to an end." Of tools or weapons, "not sharp, wit

 Share astrolabe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/astrolabe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/astrolabe">Etymology of astrolabe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of astrolabe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/astrolabe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of astrolabe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/astrolabe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of astrolabe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/astrolabe. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of astrolabe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/astrolabe (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near astrolabe 
 astrobiology 
 astrobleme 
 astrognosy 
 astrography 
 astroid 
 astrolabe 
 astrolatry 
 astrologer 
 astrological 
 astrology 
 astromancy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix