URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Asia
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:26:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Asia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Asia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Asia 

 Asia 

 c. 1300, from Latin Asia , from Greek Asia , speculated to be from Akkadian asu "to go out, to rise," in reference to the sun, thus "the land of the sunrise." Used by the early Greeks of what later was known as Asia Minor; by Pliny of the whole continent.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to Asia 

 Asian (n.) 

 late 14c., "inhabitant of Asia (Minor)," from Latin Asianus (adjective and noun, "belonging to the province of Asia;" "an inhabitant of Asia"), from Greek Asianos "Asiatic," from Asia (see Asia ). It ousted Asiatic as the preferred term mid-20c.

 The term "Asiatic" has come to be regarded with disfavour by those to whom it is applied, and they feel entitled to be brought into line with usage in regard to Europeans, Americans and Australians. [Times Literary Supplement, Feb. 6, 1953]

 As an adjective in English, "of or pertaining to Asia," from 1560s; common from c. 1930. Related: Asianic (1879).

 Asiatic (adj.) 

 "belonging to or characteristic of Asia," 1630s, from Latin Asiaticus (surname of general Lucius Cornelius Scipio), from Greek Asiatikos , from Asia (see Asia ; also compare Asian ). As a noun, "native or inhabitant of Asia," by 1763. In ancient Rome, Asiatici oratores was florid and overly ornate prose.

 Australasia 
 Eurasia 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Indies 

 Commonly applied to Asia and the East generally; later in a time of geographical confusion, it was applied to the Caribbean...basin, which was distinguished from Asia proper by being called the West Indies....

 old-world 

 Latin Mundus Novus for the lands of the western hemisphere found by Columbus and others, indicating they were not part of Asia...The Known World is usually divided into four Parts, Europe, Asia, Africk and America....Viz. the Known World, first into two Parts, the Old and the New World; then the Old World into three, Europe, Asia, and Africa...

 India 

 "the Indian subcontinent, central Asia south of the Himalayas," formerly sometimes used generally for "Asia;" since 1947...

 magnolia 

 plant genus indigenous to subtropical Asia and eastern North America, very ornamental and frequently cultivated, 1748, named...

 frieze 

 variant of frigium, which is probably from Latin Phrygium "Phrygian; Phrygian work," from Phrygia, the ancient country in Asia...

 sambo 

 "person of mixed blood in America and Asia," 1748, perhaps from Spanish zambo "bandy-legged," which is probably from Latin...

 weeping 

 The tree is native to Asia; the first brought to England were imported 1748, from the Euphrates....

 panel 

 early 14c., "a piece of cloth," especially a rectangular piece, from Old French panel "piece of cloth, piece, saddle cushion" (Modern French panneau), from Vulgar Latin *pannellus, diminutive of Latin pannus "piece of cloth" (see pane). Anglo-French legalese sense of "piece of pa

 penal 

 "of or pertaining to punishment by law," mid-15c., from Old French peinal (12c., Modern French pénal) and directly from Medieval Latin penalis, from Latin poenalis "pertaining to punishment," from poena "punishment," from Greek poinē "blood-money, fine, penalty, punishment," from

 plane 

 "flat surface, simplest of all geometrical surfaces," c. 1600, from Latin planum "flat surface, plane, level, plain," noun use of neuter of adjective planus "flat, level, even, plain, clear," from PIE *pla-no- (source also of Lithuanian plonas "thin;" Celtic *lanon "plain;" perha

 Share Asia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Asia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Asia">Etymology of Asia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Asia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Asia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Asia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Asia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Asia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Asia. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Asia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Asia (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Asia 
 ash-pit 
 ashram 
 ash-tray 
 Ashura 
 ashy 
 Asia 
 Asiago 
 Asian 
 Asiatic 
 aside 
 asine 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix