URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cipher
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:34:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cipher - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cipher - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cipher 

 cipher (n.) 

 late 14c., "arithmetical symbol for zero," from Old French cifre "nought, zero," Medieval Latin cifra , which, with Spanish and Italian cifra , ultimately is from Arabic sifr "zero," literally "empty, nothing," from safara "to be empty;" a loan-translation of Sanskrit sunya-s "empty." Klein says Modern French chiffre is from Italian cifra . 

 The word came to Europe with Arabic numerals. From "zero," it came to mean "any numeral" (early 15c.), then (first in French and Italian) "secret way of writing; coded message" (a sense first attested in English 1520s), because early codes often substituted numbers for letters. Meaning "the key to a cipher or secret writing" is by 1885, short for cipher key (by 1835).

 Figurative sense of "something or someone of no value, consequence, or power" is from 1570s.
 also from late 14c. 

 cipher (v.) 

 also cypher , 1520s, "to do arithmetic" (with Arabic numerals), from cipher (n.). Transitive sense "reckon in figures, cast up" is from 1860. Meaning "to write in code or occult characters" is from 1560s. Related: Ciphered ; ciphering .
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to cipher 

 ciphering (n.) 

 1530s, "writing in secret code or occult characters," verbal noun from cipher (v.). Meaning "action of using figures in arithmetic" is from 1610s.

 decipher (v.) 

 1520s, "find out, discover" (a sense now obsolete); 1540s, "interpret (a coded writing, etc.) by the use of a key," from de- + cipher (v.). Perhaps in part a loan-translation from French déchiffrer . From c. 1600 in the transferred sense of "discover or explain the meaning of what is difficult to understand." Sense of "succeed in reading what is written in obscure or partially obliterated characters" is by 1710. Related: Deciphered ; deciphering .

 zero (n.) 

 0 , the arithmetical figure which stands for nought in the Arabic notation, also "the absence of all quantity considered as quantity," c. 1600, from French zéro or directly from Italian zero , from Medieval Latin zephirum , from Arabic sifr "cipher," a translation of Sanskrit sunya-m "empty place, desert, naught" (see cipher (n.)).

 As "initial point of progress or reckoning" in general by 1849, from the point or line on a graduated scale from which reckoning begins (1795). By 1820 as "lowest point or degree" (as in absolute zero ). Figuratively, the bottom of any scale.

 Abstractly, "nothing, nought," by 1823. The meaning "worthless person or thing, someone who amounts to nothing" is recorded from 1813.

 As an adjective from 1810. Zero tolerance is attested by 1972 in U.S. political language. Zero-sum in game theory, indicating that if one player wins X amount the other or others must lose X amount, is from 1944 (von Neumann).

 A brief history of the invention of "zero" can be found here .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 code 

 c. 1300, "systematic compilation of laws," from Old French code "system of laws, law-book" (13c.), from Latin codex "systematic classification of statutory law," earlier caudex "book," literally "tree trunk," hence, book made up of wooden tablets covered with wax for writing. De 

 nothing 

 "no thing, not any thing, not something," Middle English, from Old English naþing, naðinc, from nan "not one" (see none) + þing "thing" (see thing). Meaning "insignificant thing, thing of no consequence" is from c. 1600. As an adverb, "not at all, in no degree," late Old English.

 nada 

 slang for "nothing," 1933 (Hemingway), from Spanish nada "nothing," from Latin (res) nata "small, insignificant thing," literally "(thing) born," from natus, past participle of nasci "to be born" (Old Latin gnasci), from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget." First in Hemingway's "

 slang 

 The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the characters of a cipher are substitutes...

 pipsqueak 

 also pip-squeak, contemptuous name for an insignificant person, 1910, from the trivial noise a young or weak creature makes. In World War I it was the soldier's slang name for a small German shell "which makes both a pip and a squeak when it comes over the trenches" [Farrow, "Dic

 reckon 

 c. 1200, recenen, rekenen, "enumerate, count up; name one by one; relate, recount; make calculations," from Old English gerecenian "to explain, relate, recount; arrange in order," from Proto-Germanic *(ga)rakinaz "ready, straightforward" (source also of Old Frisian rekenia, Middl

 calculate 

 1560s, "ascertain by computation, estimate by mathematical means," from Latin calculatus, past participle of calculare "to reckon, compute," from calculus (see calculus). It replaced earlier calculen (mid-14c.), from Old French calculer. The meaning "to plan, devise" is attested 

 digit 

 late 14c., "numeral below 10," from Latin digitus "finger or toe" (also with secondary meanings relating to counting and numerals), considered to be related to dicere "to say, speak" (from PIE root *deik- "to show," also "pronounce solemnly"). The numerical sense is because numer

 write 

 Old English writan "to score, outline, draw the figure of," later "to set down in writing" (class I strong verb; past tense wrat, past participle writen), from Proto-Germanic *writan "tear, scratch" (source also of Old Frisian writa "to write," Old Saxon writan "to tear, scratch,

 aught 

 "something, anything," late 12c., from Old English awiht "aught, anything, something," literally "e'er a whit," from a- "ever" (from Proto-Germanic *aiwi- "ever," extended form of PIE root *aiw- "vital force, life; long life, eternity") + *wihti "thing, anything whatever" (see wi

 Share cipher 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cipher Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cipher">Etymology of cipher by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cipher. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cipher Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cipher," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cipher. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cipher." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cipher. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cipher." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cipher (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cipher 
 cinnamon 
 cinquain 
 cinque 
 cinquecento 
 cinquefoil 
 cipher 
 ciphering 
 circa 
 circadian 
 Circassian 
 Circe 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close