URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tide
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:37:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tide - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tide - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tide 

 tide (n.) 

 Middle English tide "time, season; recurring interval, space of time," especially as regards a particular purpose or natural process, from Old English tīd "point or portion of time, due time, period, season; feast-day, canonical hour," from Proto-Germanic *tīdi- "division of time" (source also of Old Saxon tid , Dutch tijd , Old High German zi t, German Zeit "time"), according to Watkins from PIE *di-ti- "division, division of time," suffixed form of root *da- "to divide."

 The "time" senses in English mostly are archaic. Compare tidings , betide , tidy (adj.), also Middle English anytide "any time," tideful "seasonable, opportune, timely, fitting" (c. 1300). Old English uhtan-tid was early morning, the period before dawn (with  uhte  "daybreak"); tide-song was the divine service peculiar to a canonical hour.

 In the alliterative pairing of time and tide (early 13c.) the words are synonyms, originally indicating "on all occasions" or "as warranted." Nares writes that the Puritans preferred -tide in festival names to -mas .

 The main modern meanings "time of the tide" (c. 1300), "rise and fall of the sea, flow of the tidal current" (mid-14c.) probably are via the notion of "fixed time" (compare Old English morgentid "dawn," Middle English dai-tide "daytime"), specifically "time of high water." This is either a native evolution or from Middle Low German getide (compare Middle Dutch tijd , Dutch tij , German Gezeiten "flood tide, tide of the sea"). Figurative use by late 14c.

 Old English seems to have had no specific word for this, using flod and ebba to refer to the rise and fall. Old English heahtid "high tide" meant "festival, high day."

 Tide-mark "limit of the ebb or flow of a tide" is by 1753; tide-pool , left by regress of the sea, is by 1849. Tide-table , showing the times of the daily tides, is by 1590s.

 tide (v.) 

 1620s, nautical, "float or drift with the tide," from tide (n.). Earlier, from the older sense of the noun, it meant "occur, come about, happen" (Old English tidan ; see tidings ). Also from 1620s figuratively, "carry as the tide does," hence "carry through, manage; succeed in surmounting," usually with over (adv.). Related: Tided ; tiding .
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to tide 

 betide (v.) 

 late 12c., bitiden , "to happen, come to pass," from be- + tiden "to happen" (see tide (n.) in its original sense). The transitive sense of "happen to (someone)" is from early 13c.

 It survives, if at all, in the expression woe betide! (late 14c.). Middle English also had itide "happen, come to pass," from Old English getidan ; the phrase itide what bitide (c. 1300) was "come what may."

 tidings (n.) 

 "news, information about a situation, announcement of an event or occurrence not previously made known," late 12c., plural of tiding "report of an occurrence or event." from late Old English tidung "event, occurrence, piece of news," verbal noun from Old English tidan "to happen," or in part from Old Norse tiðendi (plural) "events, news," from tiðr (adj.) "occurring."

 Both are from Proto-Germanic * tīdōjanan , reconstructed to be from PIE *di-ti- "division, division of time" (see tide (n.)). Similar formation in Norwegian tidende "tidings, news," Dutch tijding , German Zeitung "newspaper."

 tidy 
 Christmas-tide 
 eventide 
 flood-tide 
 hour 
 springtide 
 tidal 
 tideland 
 tidewater 
 time 
 untimely 
 yuletide 
 zeitgeist 
 *da- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hour 

 c. 1200, "divine office prescribed for each of the seven canonical hours; the daily service at the canonical hours;" c. 1300, "time of day appointed for prayer, one of the seven canonical hours," from Old French ore, hore "canonical hour; one-twelfth of a day" (sunrise to sunset)

 tidy 

 mid-13c., "in good condition, healthy," probably originally "in season, timely, opportune, excellent" (though this sense is not attested until mid-14c.), from tide (n.) in the sense of "season, time" + -y (2). Of persons, "of neat and orderly habits," from 1706. Similar formation

 surge 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "fountain, spring of water" (a sense now obsolete), a word of uncertain origin, probably from French sourge-, stem of sourdre "to rise, swell," from Latin surgere "to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack," contraction of surrigere, from assimilated fo

 neap 

 which have the least difference of height between the flood and ebb, late 15c., from Old English nepflod "neap flood," the tide...As a noun from 1580s, "a neap tide," also sometimes in modern use "the ebb or lowest point of a tide."...

 rip 

 Hence rip tide (by 1862), which seems at first to have been applied to strong tidal flows, as in the Pacific Northwest....An 1896 letter from Alaska, published in a California newspaper, describes a rip tide as  "a rapid tide against a strong...For this, precisians prefer the more accurate rip current, introduced for the purpose in 1936, but rip tide remains the popular...

 stem 

 Phrase stem the tide was originally "hold back the tide" and belongs to this verb but often is confused with stem (v.2) "...

 flood 

 Old English flōd "a flowing of water, tide, an overflowing of land by water, a deluge, Noah's Flood; mass of water, river...

 flow 

 Old English flowan "to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow" (class VII strong verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flowan "to flow" (source also of Middle Dutch vloyen, Dutch vloeien, vloeijen "to flow," Old Norse floa "to d

 wolf 

 Old English wulf "wolf, wolfish person, devil," from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (source also of Old Saxon wulf, Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root *wlkwo- "wolf" (source also of Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k

 fowl 

 Old English fugel "bird, feathered vertebrate," from Proto-Germanic *fuglaz, the general Germanic word for "bird" (source also of Old Saxon fugal, Old Frisian fugel, Old Norse fugl, Middle Dutch voghel, Dutch vogel, German vogel, Gothic fugls "a fowl, a bird"), perhaps a dissimil

 Share tide 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tide Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tide">Etymology of tide by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tide. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tide Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tide," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tide. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tide." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tide. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tide." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tide (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tide 
 ticky-tacky 
 Ticonderoga 
 tidal 
 tidbit 
 tiddlywinks 
 tide 
 tideland 
 tidewater 
 tidings 
 tidy 
 tie 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close