URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustache
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:22:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mustache - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mustache - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mustache 

 mustache (n.) 

 also moustache (chiefly British), "the hair that grows upon the upper lip of men," 1580s, from French moustache (15c.), from Italian mostaccio , from Medieval Greek moustakion , diminutive of Doric mystax (genitive mystakos ) "upper lip, mustache," related to mastax "jaws, mouth," literally "that with which one chews" (perhaps from PIE root *mendh- "to chew;" see mandible ), but Beekes says this whole group of Greek words may be of Pre-Greek origin.

 Borrowed earlier (1550s) as mostacchi , from the Italian word or its Spanish derivative mostacho . The plural form of this, mustachios , lingers in English (the mustache sometimes was considered as the hair on either side of the lip, hence the use of the plural form). Slang shortening stache attested from 1985. Old English had cenep "mustache," which is related to cnafa "boy" (see knave ). Mustache-cup , one with a fixed cover over part of its top, allowing one to drink without dipping the mustache, is by 1868.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to mustache 

 knave (n.) 

 Middle English knave , from late Old English cnafa "boy, male child; male servant," from Proto-Germanic *knabon- ; it is probably related to Old English cnapa "boy, youth, servant," Old Norse knapi "servant boy," Dutch knaap "a youth, servant," Middle High German knappe "a young squire," German Knappe "squire, shield-bearer." The original sense is unknown; Klein suggests the prehistoric meaning might have been "stick, piece of wood." For pronunciation, see kn- .

 The sense of "rogue, rascal" is recorded by c. 1200, presumably via sense evolution from "a menial" to "one of low birth," and the low character supposed to be characteristic of such a condition. But through Middle English it kept also its non-pejorative meaning, as in knave-child (Scottish knave-bairn ) "male child." In playing cards, "the lowest court card," 1560s in the game of all-fours (compare jack (n.3)).

 Other Germanic cognates include Old High German knabo "boy, youth, servant," German knabe "boy, lad."

 mandible (n.) 

 late 14c., "jaw, jawbone," from Late Latin mandibula "jaw," from Latin mandere "to chew," which is perhaps from PIE root *mendh- "to chew" (source also of Greek mastax "the mouth, that with which one chews; morsel, that which is chewed," masasthai "to chew," mastikhan "to gnash the teeth"). But de Vaan suggests a semantic development from a PIE root meaning "to stir, whirl," source also of Sanskrit manthanti "to whirl round, rub," Lithuanian mesti "to mix," Old Church Slavonic mesti , Russian mjasti "to trouble, disturb." Of insect mouth parts from 1826.

 moustache 
 mustachioed 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 twerk 

 There is a verb twirk from 1599, "to pull, tug, twirl," what a man does with his mustache, but OED regards this as possibly...

 beard 

 lower face, normally characteristic of an adult male" (that of the upper lip being distinguished in Modern English as the mustache...

 bread 

 "kind of food made from flour or the meal of some grain, kneaded into a dough, fermented, and baked," Old English bread "bit, crumb, morsel; bread," cognate with Old Norse brauð, Danish brød, Old Frisian brad, Middle Dutch brot, Dutch brood, German Brot. According to one theory [

 debar 

 early 15c., "to shut out, exclude" (from a place), also "prevent, prohibit" (an action), from French débarrer, from Old French desbarer (12c., which, however, meant only "to unbar, unbolt," from des- "do the opposite of" (see dis-) + barrer "to bar," from barre "bar" (see bar (n.

 kind 

 "class, sort, variety," from Old English gecynd "kind, nature, race," related to cynn "family" (see kin), from Proto-Germanic *kundjaz "family, race," from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget," with derivatives referring to procreation and familial and tribal groups. Ælfric's rend

 ghost 

 Old English gast "breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon; person, man, human being," in Biblical use "soul, spirit, life," from Proto-West Germanic *gaistaz (source also of Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German Geist "spirit, ghost"). This i

 clever 

 1580s, "handy, dexterous, having special manual ability," apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver "expert at seizing," perhaps from East Frisian klüfer "skillful," or Norwegian dialectic klover "ready, skillful," and perhaps influenced by Old English clifer "claw, hand" (ea

 flirt 

 1550s, "to turn up one's nose, sneer at;" later "to rap or flick, as with the fingers" (1560s); "throw with a sudden movement," also "move in short, quick flights" (1580s). Perhaps imitative (compare flip (v.), also East Frisian flirt "a flick or light blow," flirtje "a giddy gir

 shibboleth 

 late 14c., in Bible translations, the Hebrew word shibboleth, meaning "flood, stream," also "ear of corn," as used in Judges xii.4-6. During the slaughter at the fords of Jordan, the Gileadites took it as a password to distinguish their men from fleeing Ephraimites, because Ephra

 Albuquerque 

 city in New Mexico, founded 1706 and named for Spanish administrator and viceroy of Mexico Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, Duque de Alburquerque (1617-1676); the name subsequently was altered by association with Portuguese hero Alfonso d'Albuquerque (1453-1515), the "Portuguese 

 Share mustache 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustache Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustache">Etymology of mustache by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mustache. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustache Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mustache," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustache. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mustache." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustache. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mustache." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mustache (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mustache 
 muss 
 mussel 
 Mussulman 
 mussy 
 must 
 mustache 
 mustachioed 
 mustang 
 mustard 
 mustee 
 mustelid 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix