URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/desiccate
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:37:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Desiccate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Desiccate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of desiccate 

 desiccate (v.) 

 1570s, transitive, "to dry, deprive of moisture," from Latin desiccatus , past participle of desiccare "to make very dry," from de- "thoroughly" (see de- ) + siccare "to dry" (see siccative ). Intransitive sense of "become dry" is from 1670s. The Middle English translation of Chauliac (early 15c.) has a past-participle adjective desiccate "dried up." Related: Desiccated ; desiccating .
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to desiccate 

 desiccated (adj.) 

 "deprived of or freed from moisture, having dried up," 1670s, past-participle adjective from desiccate .

 siccative (adj.) 

 early 15c. (Chauliac), of a medicine, "inducing or promoting dryness," from Late Latin siccativus "drying, siccative," from Latin siccatus , past participle of siccare "to dry, make dry; dry up," from siccus "dry, thirsty; without rain," from PIE root *seikw- "to flow out" (source also of Avestan hiku- "dry," Greek iskhnos "dry, withered," Lithuanian seklus "shallow," Middle Irish sesc "dry," Sanskrit sincati "makes dry"). The modern noun is attested by 1825; it also was a noun in Middle English.

 de- 

 active word-forming element in English and in many verbs inherited from French and Latin, from Latin de "down, down from, from, off; concerning" (see de ), also used as a prefix in Latin, usually meaning "down, off, away, from among, down from," but also "down to the bottom, totally" hence "completely" (intensive or completive), which is its sense in many English words.

 As a Latin prefix it also had the function of undoing or reversing a verb's action, and hence it came to be used as a pure privative — "not, do the opposite of, undo" — which is its primary function as a living prefix in English, as in defrost (1895), defuse (1943), de-escalate (1964), etc. In some cases, a reduced form of dis- .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 raid 

 early 15c., "mounted military expedition," Scottish and northern English form of rade "a riding, journey," from Old English rad "a riding, ride, expedition, journey; raid," (see road). The word fell into obscurity by 17c., but it was revived by Scott ("The Lay of the Last Minstre

 preserve 

 late 14c., preserven, "keep safe or free from harm," also "act so as to insure that something does not occur," from Anglo-French preservare, Old French preserver, Medieval Latin preservare "keep, preserve," all from Late Latin praeservare "guard beforehand," from Latin prae "befo

 keep 

 Middle English kēpen, from late Old English cepan (past tense cepte) "to seize, hold; seek after, desire," also "to observe or carry out in practice; look out for, regard, pay attention to," from Proto-Germanic *kopjan, which is of uncertain origin. Old English cepan was used c. 

 dry 

 Middle English drie "without moisture, comparatively free from water or fluid," from Old English dryge, from Proto-Germanic *draugiz (source also of Middle Low German dröge, Middle Dutch druge, Dutch droog, Old High German trucchon, German trocken, Old Norse draugr), from Germani

 battery 

 1530s, "action of battering," in law, "the unlawful beating of another," from French batterie, from Old French baterie "beating, thrashing, assault" (12c.), from batre "to beat," from Latin battuere (see batter (v.)). The meaning shifted in French from "bombardment" ("heavy blows

 salty 

 mid-15c., salti, "tasting of salt, somewhat salt, impregnated with salt," from salt (n.) + -y (2). The meaning "racy, sexy" is from 1866, from salt in the sense of "that which gives life or pungency" (1570s, originally in reference to words or wit); salt (adj.) also was used of l

 dispense 

 mid-14c., dispensen, "to dispose of, deal or divide out," from Old French dispenser "give out" (13c.), from Latin dispensare "disburse, administer, distribute (by weight)," frequentative of dispendere "pay out," from dis- "out" (see dis-) + pendere "to hang, cause to hang; weigh;

 edifice 

 late 14c., from Old French edifice "building" (12c.), from Latin aedificium "building," from aedificare "to erect a building," from aedis, variant of aedes "temple, sanctuary," usually a single edifice without partitions, also, in the plural, "dwelling house, building," originall

 tribe 

 mid-13c., "one of the twelve divisions of the ancient Hebrews," from Old French tribu or directly from Latin tribus "one of the three political/ethnic divisions of the original Roman state" (Tites, Ramnes, and Luceres, corresponding, perhaps, to the Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans

 luck 

 c. 1500, "fortune good or bad, what happens to one by chance (conceived as being favorable or not); good luck, quality of having a tendency to receive desired or beneficial outcomes," not found in Old English, probably from early Middle Dutch luc, shortening of gheluc "happiness,

 Share desiccate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/desiccate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/desiccate">Etymology of desiccate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of desiccate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/desiccate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of desiccate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/desiccate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of desiccate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/desiccate. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of desiccate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/desiccate (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near desiccate 
 deserving 
 desex 
 desexualize 
 desi 
 desiccant 
 desiccate 
 desiccated 
 desiccation 
 desiderata 
 desiderative 
 desideratum 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix