URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/class
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:13:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Class - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Class - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of class 

 class (n.) 

 c. 1600, "group of students," in U.S. especially "number of pupils in a school or college of the same grade," from French classe (14c.), from Latin classis "a class, a division; army, fleet," especially "any one of the six orders into which Servius Tullius divided the Roman people for the purpose of taxation;" traditionally originally "the people of Rome under arms" (a sense attested in English from 1650s), and thus akin to calare "to call (to arms)." This is reconstructed to be from PIE root *kele- (2) "to shout" (Watkins). In early use in English also in Latin form classis .

 The meaning "an order or rank of persons, a number of persons having certain characteristics in common" is from 1660s. School and university sense of "course, lecture" (1650s) is from the notion of a form or lecture reserved to scholars who had attained a certain level. The natural history sense "group of related plants or animals" is from 1753.

 The meaning "high quality" is from 1874. The sense of "a division of society according to status" (with upper , lower , etc.) is attested by 1763. Class-consciousness (1903) is from German Klassenbewusst .

 The fault, the evil, in a class society is when privilege exists without responsibility and duty. The evil of the classless society is that it tends to equalize the responsibility, to atomize it into responsibility of the whole population—and therefore everyone becomes equally irresponsible. [T.S. Eliot, BBC interview with Leslie Paul, 1958]
 also from c. 1600 

 class (v.) 

 1705, "to divide into classes, place in ranks or divisions," from class (n.) or French classer . Sense of "to place into a class" is from 1776. Related: Classed ; classing .
 also from 1705 

 Entries linking to class 

 category (n.) 

 1580s, in Aristotle's logic, "a highest notion," from French catégorie , from Late Latin categoria , from Greek katēgoria "accusation, prediction, category," verbal noun from katēgorein "speak against; to accuse, assert, predicate," from kata "down to" (or perhaps "against;" see cata- ) + agoreuein "to harangue, to declaim (in the assembly)," from agora "public assembly" (from PIE root *ger- "to gather").

 The Greek verb's original sense of "accuse" had weakened to "assert, name" by the time Aristotle applied katēgoria to his 10 classes of "expressions that are in no way composite," perhaps "things that can be named simply." Precisely what he meant by it "has been disputed almost from his own day till the present" [OED, 1989].

 What, exactly, is meant by the word "category," whether in Aristotle or in Kant and Hegel, I must confess that I have never been able to understand. I do not myself believe that the term "category" is in any way useful in philosophy, as representing any clear idea. [Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy," 1945]

 The sense of "any very wide and distinctive class, any comprehensive class of persons or things" is from 1660s.

 category  should be used by no-one who is not prepared to state (1) that he does not mean class , & (2) that he knows the difference between the two .... [Fowler]

 classic (adj.) 

 1610s, "of or belonging to the highest class; approved as a model," from French classique (17c.), from Latin classicus "relating to the (highest) classes of the Roman people," hence, "superior," from classis (see class (n.)). Originally in English, "of the first class;" meaning "belonging to or characteristic of standard authors of Greek and Roman antiquity" is attested from 1620s.

 classify 
 classism 
 classless 
 classmate 
 classroom 
 classy 
 declasse 
 first-class 
 high-class 
 low-class 
 middle class 
 outclass 
 second-class 
 subclass 
 superclass 
 underclass 
 underclassman 
 *kele- 
 See All Related Words (20) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 declasse 

 "having lost one's place in the social order," 1887, from French déclassé, past participle of déclasser "to cause to lose class," from de-, privative prefix (see de-) + classer "to class," from classe (n.), from Latin classis  (see class (n.)). In italics in English until c.

 second-class 

 "belonging to the class next after the first," 1824, of goods, from the noun phrase (1797) indicating the second of a ranked series of classes (in a university, society, church, etc., later of railroad accommodations, etc.), from second (adj.) + class (n.). The phrase second-clas

 category 

 1580s, in Aristotle's logic, "a highest notion," from French catégorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek katēgoria "accusation, prediction, category," verbal noun from katēgorein "speak against; to accuse, assert, predicate," from kata "down to" (or perhaps "against;" see ca

 proletarian 

 "member of the lowest or poorest class of a community;" 1660s (adj.)..."of or belonging to the lowest class of people," hence "mean, vile, vulgar;" with -ian + Latin proletarius "citizen of the...lowest class" (as an adjective, "relating to offspring"), from proles "offspring, progeny" (see prolific)....

 mudsill 

 Senate, alluding to the necessary lowest class of society....In all social systems there must be a class to do the menial duties, to perform the drudgery of life....This is a class requiring but a low order of intellect and but little skill....Such a class you must have, or you would not have that other class which leads progress, civilization, and refinement....

 proletariat 

 also proletariate, "the lowest and poorest class," 1853, from French prolétariat, from Latin proletarius (see proletarian...In political economics, "indigent wage-earners, , the class of wage-workers dependent on daily or casual employment" from...

 bourgeoisie 

 1707, "body of freemen in a French town," hence, "the French middle class," also extended to that of other countries, from...Communist use for "the capitalist class generally" is attested from 1886....

 conference 

 1550s, "act of consulting together," from French confrence (15c.), from Medieval Latin conferentia, from Latin conferens, present participle of conferre "to bring together; deliberate, talk over," literally "to bring together," from assimilated form of com "together" (see con-) +

 stereotype 

 1798, "method of printing from a plate," from French stéréotype (adj.) "printed by means of a solid plate of type," from Greek stereos "solid" (see stereo-) + French type "type" (see type (n.)). The meaning was extended to the stereotype plate itself by 1817. The plate saves time

 commons 

 mid-14c., "the people collectively," especially "the common people as distinguished from the rulers and nobility and the clergy; the freemen of England as represented in Parliament" (late 14c.), from common (n.). Meaning "the lower house of Parliament, consisting of commoner

 Share class 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/class Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/class">Etymology of class by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of class. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/class Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of class," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/class. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of class." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/class. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of class." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/class (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near class 
 Clark 
 clash 
 clasp 
 clasp-hook 
 clasp-knife 
 class 
 classic 
 classical 
 classicism 
 classics 
 classifiable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix