URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ammunition
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T15:54:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ammunition - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ammunition - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ammunition 

 ammunition (n.) 

 1620s, "military stores and provisions," from French soldiers' faulty separation of French la munition , as if *l'amunition ; from Latin munitionem (nominative munitio ) "a fortifying" (see munition ).

 The mistake in the word perhaps was by influence of French a(d)monition "warning." The error was corrected in French (Modern French munition ), but retained in English, with the unetymological double -m- spelling to conform to words in Latin. At first it meant all military supplies in general; in modern use it means only material used in the discharge of firearms and ordnance.
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to ammunition 

 munition (n.) 

 1530s, "fortification, action of fortifying or defending" (a sense now obsolete), also "materials used in war," from French municion "fortification, defense, defensive wall" (14c.), from Latin munitionem (nominative munitio ) "a defending, fortification, protecting," noun of action from past-participle stem of munire "to fortify," from moenia "defensive walls," related to murus "wall" (see mural ). Female workers in British shell factories in World War I were called munitionettes .

 ammo (n.) 

 1917, shortened form of ammunition . Also see -o .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bandolier 

 The meaning "ammunition belt for a musket" is from 1590s; hence bandolero "highwayman, robber" (1832), from Spanish, literally...

 arsenal 

 The meaning "public place for making or storing weapons and ammunition" is from 1570s....

 depot 

 Military sense of "fort where stores, ammunition, etc. are deposited" is from 1798; meaning "railway station, building for...

 shrapnel 

 hollow cannon ball, filled with shot, which burst in mid-air in front of the enemy; his name for it was spherical case ammunition...

 magazine 

 1580s, "warehouse, place for storing goods, especially military ammunition," from French magasin "warehouse, depot, store...

 live 

 glowing;" 1640s of things, conditions, etc., "full of active power;" sense of "containing unspent energy or power" (live ammunition...

 cartridge 

 1570s, cartage, "case of cardboard, tin, etc., holding a charge of gunpowder" (also with the bullet or shot in firearms), corruption of French cartouche "a full charge for a pistol," originally wrapped in paper (16c.), from Italian cartoccio "roll of paper," an augmentative form 

 material 

 mid-14c., "real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world" (contrasted with spiritual, mental, supernatural), a term in scholastic philosophy and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis (adj.) "of or belonging to matter,

 information 

 late 14c., informacion, "act of informing, communication of news," from Old French informacion, enformacion "advice, instruction," from Latin informationem (nominative informatio) "outline, concept, idea," noun of action from past participle stem of informare "to train, instruct,

 crater 

 1610s, "bowl-shaped mouth of a volcano," from a specialized use of Latin crater, from Greek krater "large bowl from which red wine mixed with water was served to guests," from kera- "to mix," from PIE root *kere- "to mix, confuse; cook" (see rare (adj.2)). The extension to volcan

 Share ammunition 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ammunition Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ammunition">Etymology of ammunition by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ammunition. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ammunition Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ammunition," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ammunition. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ammunition." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ammunition. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ammunition." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ammunition (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ammunition 
 ammo 
 Ammon 
 ammonia 
 ammoniac 
 ammonite 
 ammunition 
 amnemonic 
 amnesia 
 amnesiac 
 amnesic 
 amnestic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close