URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/staff
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:38:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Staff - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Staff - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of staff 

 staff (n.) 

 Middle English staf , "stick or pole," especially one about 5 or 6 feet long and carried in the hand, from Old English stæf (plural stafas ), "walking stick, strong pole used for carrying, rod used as a weapon, pastoral staff," probably originally *stæb , from Proto-Germanic *stab- (source also of Old Saxon staf , Old Norse stafr , Danish stav , Old Frisian stef , Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staf , Old High German stab , German Stab , Gothic *stafs "element;" Middle Dutch stapel "pillar, foundation").

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE root *stebh- "post, stem, to support, place firmly on, fasten" (source also of Old Lithuanian stabas "idol," Lithuanian stiebas "staff, pillar;" Old Church Slavonic stoboru "pillar;" Sanskrit stabhnati "supports;" Greek stephein "to tie around, encircle, wreathe," staphyle "grapevine, bunch of grapes;" Old English stapol "post, pillar"). It is thus thought to be not connected to stiff .

 Many extended senses are from the notion of "that which upholds or supports, that which sustains" such as staff of life "bread," from the Biblical phrase break the staff of bread meaning "cut off the supply of food" (Leviticus xxvi.26), translating Hebrew matteh lekhem . As "pole from which a flag is flown," 1610s. In reference to the horizontal lines in musical notation, from 1660s.

 Sense of "group of military officers that assists a commander but are not in charge of troops" is attested from 1702, apparently from German, from the notion of the baton that is a badge of office or authority (a sense attested in English from 1530s); hence staff officer (1702), staff-sergeant (1811). In this sense staffs is the usual plural. The meaning "group of employees (as at an office or hospital)" is attested by 1837.

 Old English stæf , in plural, was the common word for "letter of the alphabet, character," hence "writing, literature," and its use in Old English compounds having to do with writing, such as stæfcræft "grammar," stæfcræftig "lettered," stæflic "literary," stæfleahtor "grammatical error," with leahtor "vice, sin, offense."

 staff (v.) 

 "to provide with a body of assistants," 1859, from staff (n.). Related: Staffed ; staffing .
 also from 1859 

 Entries linking to staff 

 stiff (adj.) 

 Middle English stif , from Old English stif "rigid, inflexible, not easily bent," in physical senses often suggesting rigor mortis, from Proto-Germanic *stifaz "inflexible" (source also of Dutch stijf , Old Frisian stef , Old High German stif , German steif "stiff;" Old Norse stifla "choke").

 The Germanic word is said to be from a PIE *stipos- , from the root *steip- "press together, pack, cram" (source also of Sanskrit styayate "coagulates," stima "slow;" Greek stia , stion "small stone," steibo "press together;" Latin stipare "pack down, compress," perhaps also stipes "post, tree trunk;" Lithuanian stipti "to stiffen, grow rigid," stiprus "strong;" Old Church Slavonic stena "wall"). However Boutkan suggests the possibility that the Germanic words are a metaphoric use from words for staff (n.).

 By extension, "strong, violent; difficult to master or overcome:" In reference to battles and competitions, "fierce, stubborn, contested," mid-13c.; of winds or currents c. 1300; of liquor from 1813. In Middle English also "powerful, staunch, unmoving, resolute," and paired alliteratively with strong .

 Of substances, "not fluid, thick and tenacious," early 15c. As "not natural or easy in movement," c. 1300. As "rigidly ceremonious, not easy or gracious in manner," c. 1600. To keep a stiff upper lip is attested from 1811. Related: Stiffly .

 distaff (n.) 

 Old English distæf "long, cleft stick that holds flax for spinning," from dis- "bunch of flax" (cognates: Middle Low German dise , Low German diesse "a bunch of flax on a distaff;" compare bedizen ) + stæf "stick, staff" (see staff (n.) ).

 Figurative of "women's work" from late 14c.; a synonym in English for "a woman, the female sex, female authority in the family," at least since late 15c., presumably because spinning was typically done by women of all ranks. Hence distaff side (1848) a 19c. collective name (affecting to be older) for the female members of a family, especially with reference to relationship and descent (opposed to the spear side ).

 St. Distaff's Day (1640s) was Jan. 7, when "women resumed their spinning and other ordinary employments after the holidays" [OED].

 flagstaff 
 grammar 
 packstaff 
 pikestaff 
 quarterstaff 
 short-staff 
 staffer 
 staff-room 
 stamp 
 staphylococcus 
 staple 
 stave 
 step 
 tipstaff 
 waitstaff 
 See All Related Words (17) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 grammar 

 late 14c., "Latin grammar, rules of Latin," from Old French gramaire "grammar; learning," especially Latin and philology, also "(magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo" (12c., Modern French grammaire), an "irregular semi-popular adoption" [OED, 2nd ed. 1989] of Latin grammatica 

 quarterstaff 

 also quarter-staff, 1540s (quarter-stroke "stroke with a quarterstaff" is attested from early 15c.), an old weapon formed from a stout pole, six to eight feet long (six-and-a-half sometimes is given as the standard length), tipped with iron, formerly a weapon characteristic of th

 stamp 

 Middle English stampen "pound, mash, beat, crush," from Old English stempan "to pound, crush, or bruise in or as in a mortar," from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (source also of Old Norse stappa, Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen "to stamp wi

 baton 

 1540s, "a staff used as a weapon," from French bâton "stick, walking stick, staff, club, wand," from Old French baston (12c..."stick, staff, rod," from Late Latin bastum "stout staff," which probably is of Gaulish origin or else from Greek *baston...The meaning "staff carried as a symbol of office" is from 1580s; the musical sense of "conductor's wand" is by 1823, from...

 crozier 

 "long staff ending in a hook or curve, carried by or before a bishop or archbishop on solemn occasions," late 13c., croiser...(mid-13c. as a surname), "one who bears a bishop's staff, prelate's crosier-bearer," from Old French crocier, from Medieval...Technically, "the bearer of a bishop's pastoral staff;" erroneously applied to the staff itself since 1733....

 bacteria 

 an organized nucleus," and sometimes cause disease, 1847, plural of Modern Latin bacterium, from Greek bakterion "small staff...," diminutive of baktron "stick, rod, staff, cudgel."...The Greek word is from a PIE *bak- "staff used for support, peg" (compare Latin baculum "rod, walking stick;" Irish bacc,...Welsh bach "hook, crooked staff;" Middle Dutch pegel "peg, pin, bolt")....

 scepter 

 "staff of office peculiar to royalty or independent sovereignty," c. 1300, ceptre, from Old French ceptre, sceptre (12c.)...and directly from Latin sceptrum "royal staff," from Greek skēptron "staff to lean on," in a Persian and Asian context,...

 crutch 

 Middle English crucche, "a support for the lame in walking consisting of a staff of proper length with a crosspiece at one end shaped to fit conveniently under the armpit," from Old English crycce "crutch, staff," from Proto-Germanic *krukjo (source also of Old Saxon krukka, Midd

 verse 

 late Old English (replacing Old English fers, an early West Germanic borrowing directly from Latin), "line or section of a psalm or canticle," later "line of poetry" (late 14c.), from Anglo-French and Old French vers "line of verse; rhyme, song," from Latin versus "a line, row, l

 serve 

 late 12c., serven, "to render habitual obedience to, owe allegiance to," also "minister, give aid, give help," from Old French servir "to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with," from Latin servire "be a servant, be in service, be enslave

 Share staff 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/staff Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/staff">Etymology of staff by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of staff. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/staff Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of staff," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/staff. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of staff." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/staff. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of staff." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/staff (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near staff 
 staccato 
 stack 
 stacked 
 stadial 
 stadium 
 staff 
 staffer 
 Stafford 
 staff-room 
 stag 
 stage 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close