URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cycle
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:13:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cycle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cycle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cycle 

 cycle (n.) 

 late 14c., cicle , "perpetual circulating period of time, on the completion of which certain phenomena return in the same order," especially and originally in reference to astronomical phenomena, from Old French cicle and directly from Late Latin cyclus , from Greek kyklos "circle, wheel, any circular body," also "circular motion, cycle of events," from PIE kw(e)-kwl-o- , a suffixed, reduplicated form of the root *kwel- (1) "to revolve, move round."

 From 1660s as "any recurring round of operations or events" (as in life cycle ). From 1821 as "single complete period in a cycle." Extended by 1842 to "any long period of years, an age." In literary use, "the aggregate of the legends or traditions around some real or mythical event or character" (1835).

 By 1884 as "recurring series of oscillations or operations in an engine, etc." From 1870 as short for motorcycle ; by 1881 as short for bicycle or tricycle .
 also from late 14c. 

 cycle (v.) 

 1842, "revolve in cycles, occur or recur in cycles," from cycle (n.). Meaning "to ride a bicycle" is by 1881 (implied in cycling ). Related: Cycled .
 also from 1842 

 Entries linking to cycle 

 bicycle (n.) 

 1868, from bi- "two" + a Latinized form of Greek kyklos "circle, wheel" (see cycle (n.)), on the pattern of tricycle ; both the word and the vehicle superseding earlier velocipede .

 The English word is said in some dictionaries to be probably not from French, but the 1868 citations are in a French context:

 The velocipedes, about which the Parisians have run mad at the present moment, are of various kinds. ... The two wheel velocipedes, the bicycles as they are styled, are intended for the male sex only, and are by far the swiftest machines. ["Supplement to the Courant," Hartford, Conn., Dec. 16, 1868].

 Pierre Lallement, employee of a French carriage works, improved Macmillan's 1839 pedal velocipede in 1865 and took the invention to America. See also pennyfarthing . As a verb, from 1869.

 The velocipede of 1869 was worked by treadles operating cranks on the axle oi the front wheel. This was modified in the earliest form of the bicycle by greatly increasing the relative size of the driving-wheel and bringing the rider directly over it. Later the "safety" bicycle was introduced, in which the wheels were made of equal or nearly equal size, and for the direct action upon the front wheel was substituted indirect action upon the rear wheel, by means of a chain and sprocket-wheels .... [Century Dictionary]

 cyclic (adj.) 

 1794, "pertaining to or moving in a cycle or circle," from French cyclique (16c.), from Latin cyclicus , from Greek kyklikos "moving in a circle," from kyklos "circle, wheel, any circular body, circular motion, cycle of events" (see cycle (n.)). Sense of "connected to a literary cycle" is by 1822.

 cyclosporiasis 
 encyclopedia 
 kilocycle 
 Ku Klux Klan 
 life-cycle 
 megacycle 
 recycle 
 tricycle 
 *kwel- 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pedal 

 1610s, "lever (on an organ) worked by foot," from French pédale "feet, trick with the feet," from Italian pedale "treadle, pedal," from Late Latin pedale "(thing) of the foot," neuter of Latin pedalis "of the foot," from pes (genitive pedis) "foot," which is from the PIE root *pe

 wheel 

 Old English hweol, hweogol "wheel," from Proto-Germanic *hwewlaz (source also of Old Norse hvel, Old Swedish hiughl, Old Frisian hwel, Middle Dutch weel), from PIE *kw(e)-kwl-o- "wheel, circle," suffixed, reduplicated form of root *kwel- (1) "revolve, move round; sojourn, dwell."

 motorcycle 

 "a large bicycle propelled by a small motor," 1895, a hybrid from motor + -cycle, from bicycle. Motocycle also was used late 19c. The horse follows the crooks of a country road, but then the training of the "motorcycle" (horrid name) will inevitably straighten out the crooks in 

 period 

 early 15c., periode, "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and...directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle...of the Greek games," from Greek periodos "cycle, circuit, period of time," literally "a going around," from peri "around...Sense of "repeated cycle of events" led to that of "interval of time."...

 periodic 

 "proceeding in a series of successive revolutions; pertaining to or of the nature of a cycle or period" 1640s, from French...(14c.), from Late Latin periodicus "that returns at stated intervals of time," from Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle...

 chrysalis 

 "form in the life-cycle of butterflies, moths, etc., between larval and adult, consisting of a dormant pupa in a hard outer...

 Ramadan 

 In the Islamic lunar calendar, it passes through all seasons in a cycle of about 33 years, but evidently originally it was...

 oscillation 

 "kind of vibration in which a body swings backward and forward," 1650s, from French oscillation and directly from Latin oscillationem (nominative oscillatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of oscillare "to swing," from oscillum "a swing," which usually is identified wi

 repetition 

 early 15c., repeticioun, "act of saying over again," from Old French repetition and directly from Latin repetitionem (nominative repetitio) "a repeating," noun of action from past-participle stem of repetere "do or say again" (see repeat (v.)). Of actions or events recurring or d

 rate 

 early 15c., "estimated value or worth, proportional estimation according to some standard; monetary amount; a proportional part," from Old French rate "price, value" and directly from Medieval Latin rata (pars) "fixed (amount)," from Latin rata "fixed, settled," fem. past partici

 Share cycle 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cycle Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cycle">Etymology of cycle by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cycle. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cycle Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cycle," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cycle. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cycle." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cycle. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cycle." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cycle (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cycle 
 cybernetics 
 cyberspace 
 cyborg 
 cycad 
 cyclamen 
 cycle 
 cyclic 
 cyclical 
 cyclist 
 cyclo- 
 cyclone 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close