URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/along
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:00:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Along - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Along - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of along 

 along (adv., prep.) 

 Middle English, from Old English andlang "entire, continuous; extended" (adj.); also "alongside of" (prep.); from and- "opposite, against" (from Proto-Germanic *andi- , *anda- , from PIE *anti "against," locative singular of root *ant- "front, forehead") + lang "long" (see long (adj.)).

 Reinforced by its Old Norse cognate endlang . The prepositional sense was extended in Old English to "through the whole length of." Of position, "lengthwise," from c. 1200; of movement, "onward," from c. 1300. The meaning "in company, together" is from 1580s. All along "throughout" is attested from 1690s.

 Entries linking to along 

 long (adj.) 

 Old English lang "having a great linear extent, that extends considerably from end to end; tall; lasting," from Proto-Germanic *langa- (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang , Old High German and German lang , Old Norse langr , Middle Dutch lanc , Dutch lang , Gothic laggs "long").

 The Germanic words perhaps are from PIE *dlonghos- (source also of Latin longus "long, extended; further; of long duration; distant, remote," Old Persian darga- , Persian dirang , Sanskrit dirghah "long"), from root *del- (1) "long" (source also of Greek dolikhos "long," endelekhes "perpetual"). Latin longus (source of prolong , elongate , longitude , etc.) thus is probably cognate with, but not the source of, the Germanic words. The word illustrates the Old English tendency for short "a" to become short "o" before -n- (also retained in bond / band and West Midlands dialectal lond from land and hond from hand ).

 Also in Old English in reference to time, "drawn out in duration," with overtones of "serious." The old sense of "tall" now appears to be dialectal only, or obsolete. For long "during a long time" is from c. 1300. To be long on something, "have a lot" of it, is from 1900, American English slang. A long vowel (c. 1000) originally was pronounced for an extended time. Mathematical long division is from 1808. Sporting long ball is from 1744, originally in cricket. Long jump as a sporting event is attested from 1864. A long face , one drawn downward in expression of sadness or solemnity, is from 1786. Long in the tooth (1841 of persons) is from horses showing age by recession of gums (but not in this sense until 1870). Long knives , name Native Americans gave to white settlers (originally in Virginia/Kentucky) is from 1774, perhaps a reference to their swords. Long time no see , supposedly imitative of American Indian speech, is first recorded 1919 as Chinese English.

 alongshore (adj.) 

 "existing or employed along a shore or coast," 1779, from along + shore (n.). Compare along-ships (adv.) "lengthwise to the ship" (1680s), alongside .

 alongside 
 endlong 
 get along 
 lone 
 sing-along 
 *ant- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 endlong 

 c. 1200, "from end to end, lengthwise; through or over the length of," from Old English andlang "from end to end, lengthwise" (see along) with Middle English substitution of ende (see end (n.)) for first element. Meaning "at full length, horizontally" is from early 15c. In Middle

 lone 

 late 14c., "having no companion, solitary, apart from any other," shortening of alone (q.v.) by weakening of stress or else by misdivision of what is properly all one. Used attributively, while the full form is used in the predicate. Compare live (adj.), from alive; colloquial 'l

 on 

 "in a position above and in contact with; in such a position as to be supported by;" also noting the goal to which some action is or has been directed; "about, concerning, regarding; in a position to cover;" as an adverb, "in or into a position in contact with and supported by th

 belong 

 mid-14c., "to go along with, properly relate to," from be- intensive prefix, + longen "to go," from Old English langian "...pertain to, to go along with," which is of uncertain origin but perhaps related to the root of long (adj.)....

 pad 

 "to walk, travel on foot, tramp slowly or wearily along," 1550s, probably from Middle Dutch paden "walk along a path, make...

 frog-march 

 him face-down between four people, each holding a limb; the connection with frog (n.1) perhaps being the notion of going along...much more efficient (but less frog-like) method of getting someone in an arm-behind-the-back hold and hustling him or her along...

 traduce 

 from Latin traducere "change over, convert," also "lead in parade, make a show of, dishonor, disgrace," originally "lead along...English is from 1580s, from Latin traducere in the sense of "scorn or disgrace," a figurative use from the notion of "to lead along...

 no 

 "not in any degree, not at all," Middle English, from Old English na, from ne "not, no" + a "ever." The first element is from Proto-Germanic *ne (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old High German ne, Gothic ni "not"), from PIE root *ne- "not." Second element is from Proto-Ge

 suppose 

 c. 1300, supposen, "hold as a belief or opinion; make a hypothesis, assume as the basis of argument" without regard to truth or falsehood, from Old French suposer "to assume" (13c.), probably a replacement (influenced by Old French poser "put, place") of *suppondre, from Latin su

 expose 

 early 15c., "to leave without shelter or defense," from Old French esposer, exposer "lay open, set forth, speak one's mind, explain" (13c.), from Latin exponere "set forth, lay open, exhibit, reveal, publish," from ex "from, forth" (see ex-) + ponere "to put, place" (see position

 Share along 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/along Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/along">Etymology of along by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of along. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/along Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of along," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/along. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of along." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/along. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of along." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/along (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near along 
 alms-house 
 aloe 
 aloft 
 aloha 
 alone 
 along 
 alongshore 
 alongside 
 aloof 
 alopecia 
 alot 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix