URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lac
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:24:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lac 

 lac (n.) 

 red resinous substance (an incrustation deposited by females of an insect on twigs of certain trees in southern Asia), 1550s, perhaps immediately from French lacce , displacing or absorbing earlier English lacca (early 15c. in medical texts as a substance in making pills), from Medieval Latin lacca . All these are from Persian lak , from Hindi lakh (Prakrit lakkha ), from Sanskrit laksha "red dye," which is of uncertain origin.

 According to Klein and Century Dictionary, it means literally "one hundred thousand" and is a reference to the insects that gather in great numbers on the trees and create the resin. But other sources say lakh is perhaps an alteration of Sanskrit rakh , from an IE root word for "color, dye" [Watkins]. Still another guess is that Sanskrit laksha is related to English lax, lox "salmon," and the substance perhaps was so called from being somewhat the color of salmon [Barnhart].

 Also see shellac (n.). Related: Lacic ; lacinic .
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to lac 

 shellac (n.) 

 also shell lac , "lac melted and formed into thin plates," 1713, from shell (n.) + lac ; so called for its form. It translates French laque en écailles "lac in thin plates." Commercially, lac came as stick lac (still on the twigs, insects and all), seed-lac (resin without the twigs and insects, partly processed), and fully processed plates of shell lac .

 lacquer (n.) 

 1570s, "dye obtained from lac;" 1670s as "gold-colored solution of shellac," from obsolete French lacre , name for a kind of sealing wax, from Portuguese lacre , unexplained variant of lacca "resinous substance," from Arabic lakk , from Persian lak (see lac ).

 lake 
 litmus 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lake 

 "body of water surrounded by land and filling a depression or basin," early 12c., from Old French lack (12c., Modern French lac) and directly from Latin lacus "pond, pool, lake," also "basin, tank, reservoir" (related to lacuna "hole, pit"), from PIE *laku- "body of water, lake, 

 litmus 

 "blue dye-stuff obtained from certain lichens," early 14c., lit-mose, probably from an Old Norse word related to Norwegian dialectal litmose, from Old Norse lita "to dye, to stain" (from litr "color, dye;" see lit (n.1)) + mos "moss." Said to be also in part from Middle Dutch lij

 lack 

 Perhaps it is from an unrecorded Old English *lac, or else borrowed from Middle Dutch lak "deficiency, fault;" in either...

 slack 

 from Proto-Germanic *slakas (source also of Old Saxon slak, Old Norse slakr, Old High German slah "slack," Middle Dutch lac...

 superior 

 strongly in French (as in les étages supérieur "the upper stories"), and in Lake Superior, a loan-translation of French Lac...

 sale 

 Middle English sale, from late Old English sala "a sale, act of selling," which according to OED probably is from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse sala "sale," but in either case from Proto-Germanic *salo (source also of Old High German sala, Swedish salu, Danish salg), fr

 seal 

 "design stamped on wax," especially an impressed figure attached to a document as evidence of authenticity, c. 1200, sel, sele, from Old French seel, seal "seal on a letter" (Modern French sceau), from Vulgar Latin *sigellum (source of Italian suggello, Spanish sello; also Old Fr

 shoe 

 Middle English sho, "low-cut covering for the human foot," from Old English scoh, from Proto-Germanic *skokhaz (source also of Old Norse skor, Danish and Swedish sko, Old Frisian skoch, Old Saxon skoh, Middle Dutch scoe, Dutch schoen, Old High German scuoh, German Schuh, Gothic s

 week 

 Old English wucu, wice, etc., from Proto-Germanic *wikō(n)- (source also of Old Norse vika, Old Frisian wike, Middle Dutch weke, Old High German wecha, German woche), probably originally with the sense of "a turning" or "succession" (compare Gothic wikon "in the course of," Old N

 inchoate 

 "recently or just begun," 1530s, from Latin inchoatus, past participle of inchoare, alteration of incohare "commence, begin," probably originally "to hitch up," traditionally derived from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + a verb from cohum "strap (fastened to the oxen's yoke),"

 Share lac 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lac Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lac">Etymology of lac by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lac. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lac Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lac," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lac. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lac." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lac. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lac." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lac (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lac 
 labret 
 labrum 
 laburnum 
 labyrinth 
 labyrinthine 
 lac 
 lace 
 Lacedaemonian 
 laceman 
 lacerate 
 laceration 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix