URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheat
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:49:46Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Wheat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Wheat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of wheat 

 wheat (n.) 

 the cereal grain that furnishes flour, the chief breadstuff of temperate lands; also the plant which yields it; Middle English whete , from Old English hwæte "wheat," from Proto-Germanic *hwaitjaz (source also of Old Saxon hweti , Old Norse hveiti , Norwegian kveite , Old Frisian hwete , Middle Dutch, Dutch weit , Old High German weizzi , German Weizen , Gothic hvaiteis "wheat").

 The word is is etymologically, "that which is white" (in reference to the color of the grain or the meal), from PIE *kwoid-yo- , suffixed variant form of root *kweid- , *kweit- "to shine" (see white ; and compare Welsh gwenith "wheat," related to gwenn "white"). As a name for a pale gold color like ripe wheat, it is attested by 1915.

 The Old World grain was introduced into New Spain in 1528. Wheat germ , the embryo of the wheat grain, valued for nutrition, is by 1897 (see germ (n.)). Wheaties , the cereal brand name, was patented 1925.

 Entries linking to wheat 

 germ (n.) 

 mid-15c., "bud, sprout;" 1640s, "rudiment of a new organism in an existing one," from French germe "germ (of egg); bud, seed, fruit; offering," from Latin germen (genitive germinis ) "spring, offshoot; sprout, bud," which is of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget," with derivatives referring to procreation and familial and tribal groups.

 The older sense is preserved in wheat germ and germ of an idea ; sense of "seed of a disease" first recorded 1796 in English; that of "harmful micro-organism" dates from 1871. Germ warfare is recorded from 1919.

 white (adj.) 

 Middle English whit , "of the color of milk or snow, fully luminous and devoid of hue," from Old English hwit "bright, radiant; clear, fair," also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-Germanic *hweit- , according to Watkins from suffixed form of PIE root *kweit- "white; to shine."

 As a surname, originally with reference to fair hair or complexion, it is one of the oldest in English, being well-established before the Conquest. By late 13c. as the color of hair in old age. In early use also the color of lustrous metal, especially "silver," hence such expressions as white the hand "bribe" (early 14c.).

 The meaning "morally pure" was in Old English. In Middle English the figurative use was "gracious, friendly, favorable." The color's association with royalist causes dates to late 18c.

 The slang sense of "honorable, fair" is by 1877, American English, based on race prejudice. The meaning "of those races (chiefly European or of European extraction) characterized by light complexion" is recorded from c. 1600; the meaning "characteristic of or pertaining to white people" is from 1852, American English. White folks for "white people" in Black English is by 1929.

 White supremacy is attested from 1868 [John H. Van Evrie, M.D., "White Supremacy and Negro Subordination," New York, 1868]. White-chauvinism is by 1946. White flight of caucasians out of inner-city areas is attested by 1966, American English. White privilege , "preferential treatment of caucasians" is from 1960, originally in South African contexts, although there is an isolated American use from 1928.

 White way "brightly illuminated street in a big city" is from 1908. The white flag of truce or surrender is attested from c. 1600. White lie is attested from 1741. White Christmas in reference to snow is attested from 1847. White water "river rapids" is recorded from 1580s. White lightning "inferior whiskey" is from 1921.

 White Russian "language of Byelorussia" is recorded from 1850; the mixed drink is by 1968 (with the note of the alternative name Russian Bear .) Astronomical white dwarf is from 1924. White witch , one who uses the power for good, is from 1620s. White House as the name of the U.S. presidential residence is recorded from 1811.

 Germanic cognates include Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit , Old Norse hvitr , Dutch wit , Old High German hwiz , German weiß , Gothic hveits .

 The PIE root is also reconstructed to be the source of Sanskrit svetah "white;" Old Church Slavonic sviteti "to shine," svetu "light;" Lithuanian šviesti "to shine," švaityti "to brighten."

 buckwheat 
 wheatear 
 wheaten 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 straw 

 Middle English strau, from Old English streaw (rare) "dried stems or stalks of certain grains after threshing," apparently literally "that which is scattered or strewn," related to streowian (see strew). This is from Proto-Germanic *straw- "that which is scattered" (source also o

 farina 

 1707, "dust, powdery substance," from Latin farina "ground wheat, flour, meal," from far (genitive farris) "husked wheat,...

 simnel 

 kind of sweet cake or bun made of fine flour, c. 1200, from Old French simenel "fine wheat flour; flat bread cake, Lenten...cake," probably by dissimilation from Vulgar Latin *siminellus (also source of Old High German semala "the finest wheat...

 durum 

 species of hard wheat especially used in making macaroni, by 1904, from Latin durum, neuter of durus "hard," from PIE *dru-ro...Previous to 1901 this wheat could not usually be sold at the elevators or mills at any price and was rarely grown—in small...

 grain 

 early 14c., "a small, hard seed," especially of one of the cereal plants, also as a collective singular, "seed of wheat and...In the U.S., where corn has a specialized sense, it is the general word (used of wheat, rye, oats, barley, etc.)....From early 15c. in English as the smallest unit of weight (originally the weight of a plump, dry grain of wheat or barley...

 pyramid 

 Greek pyramis also meant "kind of cake of roasted wheat-grains preserved in honey," and in this sense is said to derive from...pyros "wheat" on the model of sesamis....

 flower 

 .); especially "wheat meal after bran and other coarse elements have been removed, the best part of wheat" (mid-13c.)....

 spelt 

 type of grain, Old English spelt "spelt, corn," perhaps an early borrowing from Late Latin spelta "spelt" (noted as a foreign word), which is perhaps from a Germanic *spilt-, from PIE *speld-, extended form of root *spel- (1) "to split, to break off" (probably in reference to the

 yellow 

 Middle English yelwe, from Old English geolu, geolwe, "yellow," from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish gul "yellow"), from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to sh

 cereal 

 1832, "grass yielding edible grain and cultivated for food," originally an adjective (1818) "having to do with edible grain," from French céréale (16c., "of Ceres;" 18c. in grain sense), from Latin Cerealis "of grain," originally "of Ceres," from Ceres, Italic goddess of agricult

 Share wheat 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheat Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheat">Etymology of wheat by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of wheat. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheat Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of wheat," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheat. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of wheat." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheat. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of wheat." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/wheat (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near wheat 
 what-if 
 whatness 
 whatnot 
 whatsoever 
 wheal 
 wheat 
 wheatear 
 wheaten 
 whee 
 wheedle 
 wheel 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix