URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/million
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:22:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Million - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Million - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of million 

 million (n.) 

 "ten hundred thousand, a thousand thousands," late 14c., milioun , from Old French million (late 13c.), from Italian millione (now milione ), literally "a great thousand," augmentative of mille "thousand," from Latin mille , which is of uncertain origin. From the start often used indefinitely for "a very great number or quantity."

 In the West it was used mainly by mathematicians until 16c., but India, with its love of large numbers, had names before 3c. for numbers well beyond a billion. The ancient Greeks had no name for a number greater than ten thousand, the Romans for none higher than a hundred thousand. "A million" in Latin would have been decies centena milia , literally "ten hundred thousand." Million to one as a type of "long odds" is attested from 1761. Related: Millions .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to million 

 billion (n.) 

 1680s, from French billion (originally byllion in Chuquet's unpublished "Le Triparty en la Science des Nombres," 1484; copied by De la Roche, 1520); see bi- "two" + million .

 A million million in Britain and Germany (numeration by groups of sixes), which was the original sense; subsequently altered in French to "a thousand million" (numeration by groups of threes) and picked up in that form in U.S., "due in part to French influence after the Revolutionary War" [David E. Smith, "History of Mathematics," 1925].

 France reverted to the original meaning in 1948. British use is truer to the etymology, but U.S. sense is said to be increasingly common there in technical writing.

 In Italian arithmetics from the last quarter of the fifteenth century the words bilione or duilione , trilione , quadrilione or quattrilione , quintilione , cinquilione , or quinquilione , sestione or sestilione , settilione , ottilione , noeilione and decilione occur as common abbreviations of due volte millioni , tre volte millione , etc. In other countries these words came into use much later, although one French writer, Nicolas Chuquet, mentions them as early as 1484, in a book not printed until 1881. The Italians had, besides, another system of numeration, proceeding by powers of a thousand. The French, who like other northern peoples, took most if not all their knowledge of modern or Arabic arithmetic from the Italians, early confounded the two systems of Italian numeration, counting in powers of a thousand, but adopting the names which properly belong to powers of a million. [Century Dictionary]

 For a time in Britain gillion (1961), based on giga- , was tried as "a thousand million" to avoid ambiguity. Compare milliard .

 centillion (n.) 

 in France and U.S., "1,000 to the hundredth power," 1846, from centi- "one hundred" (in reference to the 100 groups of three zeroes it has beyond the first group of three zeroes) + ending from million , etc. Compare French centillion (by 1841). Generally used indefinitely for "a very large number." Related: Centillionth .

 jillion 
 mil 
 milfoil 
 mill 
 millenarian 
 millenary 
 millennium 
 milliard 
 millionaire 
 millionfold 
 millionth 
 millipede 
 quintillion 
 septillion 
 sextillion 
 trillion 
 milli- 
 See All Related Words (19) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mill 

 Middle English mille, "building fitted to grind grain," Old English mylen "a mill" (10c.), an early Germanic borrowing from Late Latin molina, molinum "mill" (source of French moulin, Spanish molino), originally fem. and neuter of molinus "pertaining to a mill," from Latin mola "

 millenarian 

 1670s, "one who believes in the coming of the (Christian) millennium" (by 1550s in Latin plural form millenarii), from Latin millenarius "containing a thousand," from millenia "a thousand each," from mille "thousand" (see million). With -ian. As an adjective, "pertaining to the (

 millennium 

 1630s, "the 1,000-year period of Christ's anticipated rule on Earth" (Revelation xx.1-5); from Modern Latin millennium, from Latin mille "thousand" (see million) + annus "year" (see annual); formed on analogy of biennium, triennium, etc. For vowel change, see biennial. General (n

 Oligocene 

 1856, in geology, "pertaining to the Tertiary period between the Eocene and the Miocene," now defined roughly as 34 million...to 23 million years before the present, coined in German (1854) by paleontologist Heinrich Ernst von Beyrich (1815-1896)...

 Pliocene 

 Roughly 5.3 million to 2.6 million years ago, it is distinguished from the other two epochs by having more fossils of still-existing...

 rayon 

 [T]he production of rayon in American plants, which in 1920 had been only eight million pounds, had by 1925 reached fifty-three...million pounds....

 platinum 

 advice column in New York "Daily News," Jan. 25, 1927]  As a designation for a recording that has sold at least one million...copies, platinum is attested from 1960 ("The Battle of New Orleans"); in the late '50s it had been used to commemorate 3 million...sales of a record (Pat Boone "Love Letters in the Sand"), and, from 1954, 25 million in total record sales (Jo Stafford,...

 zillion 

 by 1916, arbitrary humorous coinage with no definite numerical value; a 1922 representation of youthful exaggeration in a magazine story has billion-rillion-zillion years. Compare jillion, gazillion. "They'll be as common as gunnysacks in Oakland in another year, I've been told.

 one 

 "being but a single unit or individual; being a single person, thing, etc. of the class mentioned;" as a pronoun, "a single person or thing, an individual, somebody;" as a noun, "the first or lowest of the cardinal numerals; single in kind, the same; the first whole number, consi

 thousand 

 "10 times one hundred; the number which is ten times one hundred; a symbol representing this number;" Old English þusend, from Proto-Germanic *thusundi (source also of Old Frisian thusend, Dutch duizend, Old High German dusunt, German tausend, Old Norse þusund, Gothic þusundi). R

 Share million 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/million Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/million">Etymology of million by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of million. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/million Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of million," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/million. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of million." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/million. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of million." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/million (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near million 
 milliliter 
 millimeter 
 milliner 
 millinery 
 milling 
 million 
 millionaire 
 millionfold 
 millionth 
 millipede 
 millisecond 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix