URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/standard
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:58:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Standard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Standard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of standard 

 standard (n.1) 

 mid-12c., "distinctive flag or other conspicuous object displayed from a position in battle to serve as a rallying point for a military force," from shortened form of Old French estandart "military standard, banner" (Anglo-French estandard ) and in part from Medieval Latin standardum .

 According to Barnhart, Watkins and others, these are probably from Frankish *standhard , literally "stand fast or firm," a compound of unrecorded Frankish words cognate with stand (v.) and hard (adj.). It would have been so called because the flag was fixed to a pole or spear and stuck in the ground to stand upright.

 The other theory [OED, etc.] calls this folk-etymology and connects the Old French word to estendre "to stretch out," from Latin extendere (see extend ).

 Some senses (such as "upright pole," mid-15c.) seem to be influenced by, if they are not from, stand (v.). It was used in Middle English of a wider variety of standing or upright things: a pole, a tall stump, a candlestick, a tower.

 The cognate words in other modern Germanic languages are likewise from French or Italian. Standard-bearer in the figurative sense is from 1560s (the literal sense is by mid-15c.).
 also from mid-12c. 

 standard (adj.) 

 "serving as a standard," by 1620s, perhaps mid-15c., from standard (n.2). Earlier it meant "stationary" (early 15c.), "upright" (1530s). Standard-bred (adj.), "bred up to some agreed-upon standard of excellence" is from 1878, generally of horses but originally of fowls. Standard time (1870) is that based on the local meridian in reference to Greenwich.
 also from 1620s 

 standard (n.2) 

 "weight, measure, or instrument by which the accuracy of others is determined," late 14c., apparently a particular use of standard (n.1) "military standard, banner," but the sense evolution is "somewhat obscure" [OED].

 The official standard weights and measures were set by royal ordinance and were known by 14c. as the king's standard , so perhaps the use is metaphoric, the royal standard coming to stand for royal authority in matters such as the setting of weights and measures.

 Or [Century Dictionary] the word might come directly from the battle-flag sense and the notion might be "that to which one turns" or "that which is set up."

 Especially in reference to the proportion of fine metal in coinage as established by authority (mid-15c.). Hence the meaning "authoritative or recognized exemplar of quality or correctness" (late 15c.).

 The meaning "rule, principal or means of judgment" is from 1560s. That of "definite level of attainment" is attested from 1711 (as in standard of living , which is by 1903).
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to standard 

 extend (v.) 

 early 14c., "to value, assess," from Anglo-French estendre (late 13c.), Old French estendre "stretch out, extend, increase," transitive and intransitive (Modern French étendre ), from Latin extendere "stretch out, spread out; increase, enlarge, prolong, continue," from ex "out" (see ex- ) + tendere "to stretch," from PIE root *ten- "to stretch."

 Original sense in English is obsolete. From late 14c. as "lengthen or extend in time," also "straighten" (an arm, wing. etc.). Meaning "make longer and/or broader in space" is from early 15c., as is intransitive sense of "cover an area, have a certain extent in space;" sense of "expand, grow distended" is from 1753. Related: Extended ; extending .

 hard (adj.) 

 Old English heard "solid and firm, not soft," also, "difficult to endure, carried on with great exertion," also, of persons, "severe, rigorous, harsh, cruel," from Proto-Germanic *hardu- (source also of Old Saxon hard , Old Frisian herd , Dutch hard , Old Norse harðr "hard," Old High German harto "extremely, very," German hart , Gothic hardus "hard"), from PIE *kortu- , suffixed form of root *kar- "hard."

 The meaning "difficult to do" is from c. 1200. Of water, in reference to the presence of mineral salts, 1650s; of consonants, 1775. Hard of hearing preserves obsolete Middle English sense of "having difficulty in doing something." In the sense "strong, spiritous, fermented" from 1789 (as in hard cider , etc.), and this use probably is the origin of that in hard drugs (1955).

 Hard facts is from 1853; hard news in journalism is from 1918. Hard copy (as opposed to computer record) is from 1964; hard disk is from 1978; the computer hard drive is from 1983. Hard rock as a pop music style is so called by 1967.

 Hard times "period of poverty" is from 1705, also more broadly in political economy, "period of diminished productivity, falling prices, and declining confidence." Hard money (1706) is specie, silver or gold coin, as opposed to paper. Hence 19c. U.S. hard (n.) "one who advocates the use of metallic money as the national currency" (1844). To play hard to get is from 1945. To do something the hard way is from 1907.

 stand 
 double standard 
 non-standard 
 standardize 
 stanine 
 sub-standard 
 *kar- 
 *sta- 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stand 

 Middle English stonden, standen, from Old English standan "occupy a place; stand firm; congeal; stay, continue, abide; be valid, take place; oppose, resist attack; stand up, be on one's feet; consist, amount to" (class VI strong verb; past tense stod, past participle standen). Th

 banner 

 c. 1200, "piece of cloth attached to the upper end of a pole or staff," from Old French baniere "flag, banner, standard" (12c., Modern French bannière), from Late Latin bandum "standard," borrowed from Frankish or another West Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *bandwa- "identi

 measure 

 early 14c., mesuren, "to exercise moderation;" mid-14c., "to deal out or divide up by measure," also "to ascertain spatial dimensions, quantity, or capacity of by comparison with a standard;" from Old French mesurer "measure; moderate, curb" (12c.), from Late Latin mensurare "to 

 diatonic 

 c. 1600, in ancient Greek music, in reference to one of the three standard tetrachords, from French diatonique, from Latin...In modern music, "using tones, intervals, and harmonies of the standard major and minor scales without chromatic alteration...

 troy 

 late 14c., standard system of weights for gems and precious metals, from Troyes, city in France (Roman (Civitas) Tricassium...Many medieval towns had their own standard weights. The pound troy contains 5,760 grains and is divided into 12 ounces....

 deviation 

 From 1630s as "departure from a certain standard or rule of conduct or original plan."...Statistical sense is from 1858; standard deviation is from 1894. Related: Deviational....

 scale 

 [standard of measure or estimation] late 14c., "series of registering marks; marks laid down to determine distance along...The meaning "succession or series of steps ascending or descending" is from c. 1600; that of "standard for estimation" (large...The musical sense of "definite and standard series of tones within a certain range," typically an octave (1590s), and the...

 norm 

 "a standard, pattern, or model," 1821 (Coleridge), from French norme, from Latin norma "carpenter's square, rule, pattern," a word of unknown origin. Klein suggests a borrowing (via Etruscan) of Greek gnōmōn "carpenter's square." The Latin form of the word, norma, was used in Eng

 morn 

 "the first part of the day, the morning," late 14c., contracted from Middle English morwen, morghen, from Old English (Mercian) margen (dative marne), earlier morgen (dative morgne) "morning, forenoon, sunrise," from Proto-Germanic *murgana- "morning" (source also of Old Saxon mo

 control 

 early 15c., countrollen, "check the accuracy of, verify; regulate," from Anglo-French contreroller "exert authority," from Medieval Latin contrarotulus "a counter, register," from Latin contra "against" (see contra) + rotulus, diminutive of rota "wheel" (see roll (n.)). The word 

 Share standard 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/standard Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/standard">Etymology of standard by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of standard. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/standard Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of standard," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/standard. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of standard." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/standard. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of standard." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/standard (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near standard 
 stanch 
 stanchion 
 stand 
 stand for 
 stand-alone 
 standard 
 standardization 
 standardize 
 stand-by 
 standholder 
 stand-in 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close