URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/starve
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Starve - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Starve - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of starve 

 starve (v.) 

 Middle English sterven , "perish, die, cease to exist," also "die spiritually," from Old English steorfan "to die" (past tense stearf , past participle storfen ), etymologically "become stiff," from Proto-Germanic *sterbanan "be stiff, starve" (source also of Old Frisian sterva , Old Saxon sterban , Dutch sterven , Old High German sterban "to die"). This is reconstructed to be from an extended form of PIE root *ster- (1) "stiff."

 The conjugation became weak in English by 16c. The word seems to have been used especially of lingering or wasting deaths, and came to especially mean "die of cold" (14c.); "die from want of nourishment, suffer from hunger" (mid-15c.). The transitive meaning "afflict or kill with hunger" is recorded by 1520s (Middle English starve of hunger in the same sense is from early 12c.; hunger-storven "dead from hunger" is from late 14c.).

 The "die of cold" sense is marked "Now chiefly Eng." in Century Dictionary (1902) and "Now only North. " in OED (1989). Wedgwood (1878) notes that "In the Midland Counties to clem is to perish from hunger ; to starve , to suffer from cold."

 "Dear me," continued the anxious mother, "what a sad fire we have got, and I dare say you are both starved with cold. Draw your chair nearer, my dear. ..." ["Mansfield Park," 1814] 

 German cognate sterben "to die" retains the original sense of the word, but the English has come so far from its origins that starve to death (1910) is now common. The verb is not found in Scandinavian, but compare Old Norse stjarfi "tetanus."

 Entries linking to starve 

 die (v.) 

 mid-12c., dien, deighen , of sentient beings, "to cease to live," possibly from Old Danish døja or Old Norse deyja "to die, pass away," both from Proto-Germanic *dawjan (source also of Old Frisian deja "to kill," Old Saxon doian , Old High German touwen , Gothic diwans "mortal"), from PIE root *dheu- (3) "to pass away, die, become senseless" (source also of Old Irish dith "end, death," Old Church Slavonic daviti , Russian davit' "to choke, suffer").

 It has been speculated that Old English had *diegan , from the same source, but it is not in any of the surviving texts and the preferred words were steorfan (see starve ), sweltan (see swelter ), wesan dead ("become dead"), also forðgan and other euphemisms.

 Languages usually don't borrow words from abroad for central life experiences, but "die" words are an exception; they often are hidden or changed euphemistically out of superstitious dread. A Dutch euphemism translates as "to give the pipe to Maarten."

 Regularly spelled dege through 15c., and still pronounced "dee" by some in Lancashire and Scotland. Of plants, "become devitalized, wither," late 14c.; in a general sense of "come to an end" from mid-13c. Meaning "be consumed with a great longing or yearning" (as in dying to go ) is colloquial, from 1709. Used figuratively (of sounds, etc.) from 1580s; to die away "diminish gradually" is from 1670s. To die down "subside" is by 1834. Related: Died ; dies .

 To die out "become extinct" is from 1865. To die game "preserve a bold, resolute, and defiant spirit to the end" (especially of one facing the gallows) is from 1793. Phrase never say die "don't give up or in" is by 1822; the earliest contexts are in sailors' jargon.

 "Never look so cloudy about it messmate," the latter continued in an unmoved tone—"Cheer up man, the rope is not twisted for your neck yet. Jack's alive; who's for a row? Never say die while there's a shot in the locker. Whup;" [Gerald Griffin, "Card Drawing," 1842]

 starvation (n.) 

 1778, "extreme suffering from hunger," hybrid noun of action from starve ; see -tion . Famously (but not certainly) introduced into English by Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville, during debate in the House of Commons in 1775 on American affairs. The remark earned him the nickname "Starvation Dundas," though sources disagree on whether this was to fix his name shamefully to the harsh suggestion of starving the rebels into submission, or in derision at the barbarous formation of the word.

 It is noted as one of the earliest instances of -ation used with a native Germanic word ( flirtation is earlier), based on a false analogy with vex / vexation , etc.

 As to Lord Chatham, the victories, conquests, extension of our empire within these last five years, will annihilate his fame of course, and he may be replaced by Starvation Dundas, whose pious policy suggested that the devil of 
 rebellion could be expelled only by fasting , though that never drove him out of Scotland. [Horace Walpole, letter to the Rev. William Mason, April 25, 1781] 

 The general sense of "deprivation of any element essential to nutrition or health," often figurative, is by 1866. In common with starve (v.) it also was used occasionally with reference to suffering from exposure to cold.

 starveling 
 swelter 
 *ster- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 swelter 

 mid-14c., swelteren, "faint or grow weak with heat, be ready to die with heat," frequentative of swelten "be faint" (especially with heat), from Old English sweltan "to die, perish," from Proto-Germanic *swiltan- (source also of Old Saxon sweltan "to die," Old Norse svelta "to pu

 feed 

 Old English fedan "nourish, give food to, sustain, foster" (transitive), from Proto-Germanic *fodjan (source also of Old Saxon fodjan, Old Frisian feda, Dutch voeden, Old High German fuotan, Old Norse foeða, Gothic fodjan "to feed"), from PIE root *pa- "to feed." Intransitive sen

 famish 

 "cause to hunger," c. 1400, famyschen, "alteration of famen (late 14c.), a shortening of Old French afamer (12c., Modern French affamer), from Vulgar Latin *affamare "to bring to hunger," from ad famem, from Latin fames "hunger" (see famine). Ending changed mid-14c. to -ish under

 pine 

 Middle English pinen "cause to starve" (c. 1300), from Old English pinian "to torture, torment, afflict, cause to suffer,...

 celery 

 We can't starve." "That's funny," he replied. "I thought we could." [Chuck Jones, "Chuck Amuck," 1989]...

 perish 

 late 13c., perishen, "to die, be killed, pass away; suffer spiritual death, be damned," from periss- present participle stem of Old French perir "perish, be lost, be shipwrecked" (12c.), from Latin perire "to be lost, perish," literally "to go through," from per "through, complet

 want 

 c. 1200, "to be lacking," from Old Norse vanta "to lack, want," earlier *wanaton, from Proto-Germanic *wanen, from PIE *weno-, suffixed form of root *eue- "to leave, abandon, give out." The meaning "desire, wish for, feel the need of" is recorded by 1706....c. 1200, "deficiency, 

 hunger 

 Old English hunger, hungor "unease or pain caused by lack of food, debility from lack of food, craving appetite," also "famine, scarcity of food in a place," from Proto-Germanic *hungraz (source also of Old Frisian hunger, Old Saxon hungar, Old High German hungar, Old Norse hungr

 nock 

 "a notch," specifically, in archery, "the notch on the horn of a bow," where the string is fastened, also "notch on the end of an arrow," which rests on the string, late 14c., nokke, a word of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source (such as Swedish nock "notch"), o

 choke 

 c. 1300, transitive, "to stop the breath by preventing air from entering the windpipe;" late 14c., "to make to suffocate, deprive of the power of drawing breath," of persons as well as swallowed objects; a shortening of acheken (c. 1200), from Old English aceocian "to choke, suff

 Share starve 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/starve Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/starve">Etymology of starve by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of starve. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/starve Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of starve," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/starve. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of starve." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/starve. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of starve." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/starve (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near starve 
 start 
 starter 
 startle 
 start-up 
 starvation 
 starve 
 starveling 
 stash 
 stasis 
 stat 
 -stat 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close