URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/melancholy
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:09:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Melancholy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Melancholy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of melancholy 

 melancholy (n.) 

 c. 1300, melancolie , malencolie , "mental disorder characterized by sullenness, gloom, irritability, and propensity to causeless and violent anger," from Old French melancolie "black bile; ill disposition, anger, annoyance" (13c.), from Late Latin melancholia , from Greek melankholia "sadness," literally (excess of) "black bile," from melas (genitive melanos ) "black" (see melano- ) + khole "bile" (see cholera ).

 Old medicine attributed mental depression to unnatural or excess "black bile," a secretion of the spleen and one of the body's four "humors," which help form and nourish the body unless altered or present in excessive amounts.

 Melancholy , The grossest of the foure corporall humours , which if it abound too much , causeth heavinesse and sadnes of minde. [Cockeram, English Dictionarie, 1623]

 The word also was used in Middle English for "sorrow, gloom" (brought on by love, disappointment, etc.), by mid-14c. As belief in the old physiology of humors faded out in the 18c. the word remained with a sense of "a gloomy state of mind," particularly when habitual or prolonged.

 The Latin word also is the source of Spanish melancolia , Italian melancolia , German Melancholie , Danish melankoli , etc. Old French variant malencolie (also in Middle English) is by false association with mal "sickness."

 When I go musing all alone,

 Thinking of divers things fore-known,

 When I build castles in the air,

 Void of sorrow and void of fear,

 Pleasing myself with phantasms sweet,

 Methinks the time runs very fleet.

   All my joys to this are folly,

   Naught so sweet as melancholy.

 When I lie waking all alone,

 Recounting what I have ill done,

 My thoughts on me then tyrannise,

 Fear and sorrow me surprise,

 Whether I tarry still or go,

 Methinks the time moves very slow.

   All my griefs to this are jolly,

   Naught so sad as melancholy.

 [Robert Burton, from "Anatomy of Melancholy," 17c.]

 also from c. 1300 

 melancholy (adj.) 

 late 14c., malencolie , "mixed with or caused by black bile;" also, of persons, "sullen, gloomy, sad, affected by low spirits," from melancholy (n.). Meaning "expressive of sadness" is from 1590s; sense of "deplorable, fitted to produce sadness or gloom" (of a fact or state of things) is by 1710.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to melancholy 

 cholera (n.) 

 late 14c., "bile, melancholy" (originally the same as choler ), from French cholera or directly from Late Latin cholera , from Greek kholera "a type of disease characterized by diarrhea, supposedly caused by bile" (Celsus), from khole "gall, bile," so called for its color, related to khloazein "to be green," khlōros "pale green, greenish-yellow," from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with derivatives denoting "green, yellow," and thus "bile, gall." But another sense of khole was "drainpipe, gutter."

 Revived 1560s in classical sense as a name for a severe digestive disorder (rarely fatal to adults); and 1704 (especially as cholera morbus ), for a highly lethal disease endemic in India, periodically breaking out in global epidemics, especially that reaching Britain and America in the early 1830s.

 atrabilious (adj.) 

 "affected by melancholy," 1650s, from Latin atra bilis , translating Greek melankholia "black bile" (see melancholy ; also compare bile ). Atra is fem. of ater "black, dark, gloomy," and is perhaps "blackened by fire," from PIE root *ater- "fire." Related: Atrabiliousness .

 melancholia 
 melancholic 
 melano- 
 *ghel- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 melancholic 

 late 14c., "containing black bile," a physiological sense now obsolete, from melancholy + -ic, or else from from Late Latin melancholicus, from Greek melankholikos "choleric," from melankholia "sadness," literally "(excess of) black bile" (see melancholy). Of persons or temperame

 hypochondria 

 "unfounded belief that one is sick," by 1816; a narrowing from the earlier sense "depression or melancholy without real cause...The sense "morbid melancholy" reflects the ancient belief that the viscera of the hypochondria (liver, gall bladder, spleen...) were the seat of melancholy and the source of the vapors that caused such feelings....In the 1830s hypochondria could mean merely "morbid melancholy," also "apprehension of evil respecting health, without sufficient...

 disconsolate 

 late 14c., "causing discomfort, dismal;" c. 1400, "unhappy, dejected, melancholy, wanting consolation or comfort," from Medieval...

 pensive 

 late 14c., pensif, "sad, sorrowful, melancholy;" also "engaged in serious thought, meditative, contemplative;" from Old French...

 chagrin 

 1650s, "melancholy," from French chagrin "melancholy, anxiety, vexation" (14c.), from Old North French chagreiner or Angevin...

 depression 

 For "melancholy, depression" an Old English word was grevoushede....A melancholy leading to desperation, and known to theologians under the name of 'acedia,' was not uncommon in monasteries...

 mumps 

 Mumps also was used from 17c. to mean "a fit of melancholy, sullenness, silent displeasure."...

 humor 

 mid-14c., "fluid or juice of an animal or plant," from Old North French humour "liquid, dampness; (medical) humor" (Old French humor, umor; Modern French humeur), from Latin umor "body fluid" (also humor, by false association with humus "earth"); related to umere "be wet, moist,"

 gloom 

 1590s, originally Scottish, "a sullen look," probably from gloom (v.) "look sullen or displeased" (late 14c., gloumen), of unknown origin; perhaps from an unrecorded Old English verb or from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian dialectal glome "to stare somberly"), or from Mi

 bile 

 "yellow bitter liquid secreted by the liver that aids in digestion," 1660s, from French bile (17c.) "bile," also, informally, "anger," from Latin bilis "fluid secreted by the liver," also in old medicine one of the four humors (also known as choler), thus "bitterness of feeling, 

 Share melancholy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/melancholy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/melancholy">Etymology of melancholy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of melancholy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/melancholy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of melancholy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/melancholy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of melancholy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/melancholy. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of melancholy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/melancholy (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near melancholy 
 Mekong 
 *mel- 
 melancholia 
 melancholiac 
 melancholic 
 melancholy 
 Melanesia 
 melange 
 Melanie 
 melanin 
 melanism 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix