URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fetch
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:49:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fetch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fetch - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fetch 

 fetch (v.) 

 Middle English fecchen , from Old English feccan "to bring, bring to; seek, gain, take," apparently a variant of fetian , fatian "bring near, bring back, obtain; induce; marry," which is probably from Proto-Germanic *fetan (source also of Old Frisian fatia "to grasp, seize, contain," Old Norse feta "to find one's way," Middle Dutch vatten , Old High German sih faggon "to mount, climb," German fassen "to grasp, contain"). This would connect it to the PIE verb for "to walk" derived from root *ped- "foot."

 With widespread sense development: to "reach," "deliver," "effect," "make (butter), churn" (19c.), "restore to consciousness" (1620s), also various nautical senses from 16c.-17c.; meaning "to bring in as equivalent or price" is from c. 1600. In 17c. writers on language didn't derive a word's etymology; they fetched it. As what a dog does, c. 1600, originally fetch-and-carry . Variant form fet , a derivation of the original Old English version of the word, survived as a competitor until 17c. Related: Fetched ; fetching .

 fetch (n.1) 

 "apparition of a living person, specter, a double," 1787, an English dialect word of unknown origin (see OED for discussion).

 A peculiarly weird type of 
 apparition is the wraith (q.v.) or double, of which the Irish fetch is a variant. The wraith is an exact facsimile of a living person, who may himself see it. Goethe, Shelley, and other famous men are said to have seen their own wraiths. The fetch makes its appearance shortly before the death of the person it represents, either to himself or his friends, or both. [Lewis Spence, "An Encyclopedia of Occultism," 1920]
 also from 1787 

 fetch (n.2) 

 "act of fetching," 1540s, from fetch (v.). As a dog game, by 1960; "fetch" is recommended by 1889 as a command to use in training a hunting dog.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to fetch 

 fetching (adj.) 

 1580s, "crafty, scheming," present-participle adjective from fetch (v.), in one of its extended senses, here "bring or draw into a desired relation or condition." The sense of "alluring, fascinating" is by 1880, from the verb in the sense "allure, attract, fascinate" (c. 1600). Related: Fetchingly .

 far-fetched (adj.) 

 also far fetched , farfetched , 1560s, "brought from afar," from far (adv.) + past participle of fetch (v.). An earlier form was far fet (1530s). Figurative sense is from c. 1600.

 fettle 
 *ped- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bring 

 Old English bringan "to bear, convey, take along in coming; bring forth, produce, present, offer" (past tense brohte, past participle broht), from Proto-Germanic *brangjanan (source also of Old Frisian branga "attest, declare, assure," Middle Dutch brenghen, Old High German bring

 get 

 c. 1200, from Old Norse geta (past tense gatum, past participle getenn) "to obtain, reach; to be able to; to beget; to learn; to be pleased with," a word of very broad meaning, often used almost as an auxilliary verb, also frequently in phrases (such as geta rett "to guess right"

 Stepin Fetchit 

 It is a play on the phrase step and fetch it), and is said to have been applied to persons before....

 petition 

 past-participle stem of petere "to make for, go to; attack, assail; seek, strive after; ask for, beg, beseech, request; fetch...

 salary 

 The Via Salaria was so called because the Sabines used it to fetch sea-salt near the Porta Collina....

 hello 

 OED cites Old High German hala, hola, emphatic imperative of halon, holon "to fetch," "used especially in hailing a ferryman...

 take 

 Middle English taken, from late Old English tacan "to grip, seize by force, lay hold of," from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka "take, grasp, lay hold," past tense tok, past participle tekinn; also compare Swedish ta, past participle tagit). This is reconstructed to 

 transport 

 late 14c., transporten, "convey from one place to another," from Old French transporter "carry or convey across; overwhelm (emotionally)" (14c.) or directly from Latin transportare "carry over, take across, convey, remove," from trans "beyond, across" (see trans-) + portare "to c

 action 

 mid-14c., accioun, "cause or grounds for a lawsuit," from Anglo-French accioun, Old French accion, action (12c.) "action; lawsuit, case," from Latin actionem (nominative actio) "a putting in motion; a performing, a doing; public acts, official conduct; lawsuit, legal action" (sou

 Share fetch 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fetch Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fetch">Etymology of fetch by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fetch. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fetch Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fetch," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fetch. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fetch." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fetch. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fetch." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fetch (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fetch 
 festschrift 
 festucine 
 Festus 
 feta 
 fetal 
 fetch 
 fetching 
 fete 
 fetial 
 feticide 
 fetid 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix