URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lid
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:00:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lid - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lid 

 lid (n.) 

 "movable or removable cover for a pot, etc.," mid-13c., from Old English hlid "covering, opening, gate," from Proto-Germanic *hlidan "a cover," literally "that which bends over" (source also of Old Norse hlið "gate, gap," Swedish lid "gate," Old French hlid , Middle Dutch lit , Dutch lid , Old High German hlit "lid, cover"), from PIE *klito- , from root *klei- "to lean."

 Meaning "eyelid" is from early 13c. Slang sense of "hat, cap" is attested from 1896. As a measure of marijuana, one ounce, 1967, presumably the amount of dried weed that would fit in some commercial jar lid. Slang phrase put a lid on "clamp down on, silence, end" is from 1906; many figurative senses are from the image of a pot boiling over.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to lid 

 eyelid (n.) 

 mid-13c., from eye (n.) + lid (n.).

 lidded (adj.) 

 "having a lid" (of a specified kind), Old English gehlidod , a past-participle form, but no verb *hlidan is attested. See lid (n.).

 lidless 
 *klei- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hat 

 Old English hæt "hat, head covering" (variously glossing Latin pileus, galerus, mitra, tiara), from Proto-Germanic *hattuz "hood, cowl" (source also of Frisian hat, Old Norse hattr, höttr "a hood or cowl"), of uncertain etymology; it has been compared with Lithuanian kuodas "tuft

 propitiatory 

 Earlier in English as a noun, propiciatorie, c. 1300, "the mercy seat, lid or cover of the ark of the covenant," from Late...

 L 

 In some words (ladder, lady, laughter, leap, listen, lid) it represents Old English hl-....

 flip 

 Sense of "get excited" is first recorded 1950; flip (one's) lid "lose one's head, go wild" is from 1949, American English...

 roof 

 khrofam (source also of Old Frisian rhoof "roof," Middle Dutch roof, rouf "cover, roof," Dutch roef "deckhouse, cabin, coffin-lid...

 chest 

 Middle English chest, from Old English cest "box, coffer, casket," usually large and with a hinged lid, from Proto-Germanic...

 mason 

 The Mason jar (by 1868), a type of molded glass jar with an airtight screw lid, used for home preserves, is named for John...

 box 

 "rectangular wooden container," usually with a lid, Old English box, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from Greek pyxis "boxwood," pyxion "writing table, box," made of boxwood, from pyxos "box tree," which is of uncertain origin. Beekes suggests a loan-word

 optic 

 late 14c., optik, "of or pertaining to the eye as the organ of vision," from Old French optique, obtique (c. 1300) and directly from Medieval Latin opticus "of sight or seeing," from Greek optikos "of or having to do with sight," from optos "seen, visible," related to ōps "eye," 

 topic 

 1630s, "a class of considerations from which probable arguments can be drawn," singular form of "Topics" (1560s), the name of a work by Aristotle on logical and rhetorical generalities, from Latin Topica, from Greek Ta Topika, literally "matters concerning topoi," "commonplaces,"

 Share lid 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lid Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lid">Etymology of lid by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lid. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lid Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lid," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lid. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lid." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lid. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lid." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lid (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lid 
 lickety-split 
 licking 
 lickspittle 
 licorice 
 lictor 
 lid 
 lidded 
 lidless 
 Lido 
 lie 
 Liebfraumilch 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix