URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangster
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:08:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gangster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gangster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gangster 

 gangster (n.) 

 "member of a criminal gang," 1896, American English, from gang (n.) in its criminal sense + -ster . Earlier (by 1886) in a purely political context, "member of a clique in control of the local government." Related: Gangsterism (1918).
 also from 1896 

 Entries linking to gangster 

 gang (n.) 

 from Old English gang "a going, journey, way, passage," and Old Norse gangr "a group of men, a set," both from Proto-Germanic *gangaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Danish, Dutch, Old High German, German gang , Old Norse gangr , Gothic gagg "act of going"), of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *ghengh- "to step" (source also of Sanskrit jangha "shank," Avestan zanga- "ankle," Lithuanian žengiu "I stride"). Not considered to be related to go .

 The sense evolution is probably via meaning "a set of articles that usually are taken together in going" (mid-14c.), especially a set of tools used on the same job. By 1620s this had been extended in nautical speech to mean "a company of workmen," and by 1630s the word was being used, with disapproving overtones, for "any band of persons traveling together," then "a criminal gang or company" ( gang of thieves , gang of roughs , etc.). By 1855 gang was being used in the sense "group of criminal or mischievous boys in a city." In American English, especially of slaves working on plantations (1724). Also formerly used of animal herds or flocks (17c.-19c.). Gangway preserves the original sense of the word, as does gang-plank .

 gangsta 

 rap style generally credited to West Philly hip hop artist Schoolly D, but as for the word itself, his " Gangster Boogie" (1984) used the conventional spelling; NWA was spelling it gangsta by 1988.

 -ster 

 Old English -istre , from Proto-Germanic *-istrijon , feminine agent suffix used as the equivalent of masculine -ere (see -er (1)). Also used in Middle English to form nouns of action (meaning "a person who ...") without regard for gender.

 The genderless agent noun use apparently was a broader application of the original feminine suffix, beginning in the north of England, but linguists disagree over whether this indicates female domination of weaving and baking trades, as represented in surnames such as Webster , Baxter , Brewster , etc. (though modern spinster probably carries an originally female ending). For Dempster , see deem (v.).

 Also compare whitester "one who bleaches cloth;" kempster (c. 1400; Halliwell has it as kembster ) "woman who cleans wool." Chaucer ("Merchant's Tale") has chidester "an angry woman" (the 17c. had scoldster ). "Piers Plowman" (late 14c.) has waferster "woman who bakes or sells wafers." A c. 1400 psalter has yongling tabourester "girl drummer" (for Latin puellarum tympanistriarum ).

 Also compare Middle English shepster (late 14c.) "dressmaker, female cutter-out," literally "shapester," sleestere (mid-15c.) "murderess, female killer" ("slay-ster"). Sewster "seamstress" (Middle English seuestre , late 13c. as a surname, also used of men) is still in Jonson but was obsolete or provincial after 17c.

 In Modern English, the suffix has been productive in forming derivative nouns such as gamester (compare gamer ), roadster , punster , rodster "angler," throwster "gambler," etc. But still with consciousness of sex; Thackeray (1850) has jocular spokester "female speaker or spokesman." Tonguester "talkative, loquacious person" seems to be a nonce-word (1871). "American Speech" in 1935 reported that "Singers are now tunesters to advertising writers for vaudeville and other entertainments." A 1798 dictionary of thieves' jargon has yapster "a dog."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share gangster 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangster Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangster">Etymology of gangster by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gangster. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangster Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gangster," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangster. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gangster." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangster. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gangster." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gangster (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gangster 
 gangly 
 gang-plank 
 gangrene 
 gangrenous 
 gangsta 
 gangster 
 gangway 
 ganja 
 gank 
 gannet 
 gantlet 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix