URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gladiator
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:11:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gladiator - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gladiator - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gladiator 

 gladiator (n.) 

 mid-15c., "Roman swordsman," from Latin gladiator (fem. gladiatrix ) "fighter in the public games; swordsman," from gladius "sword" (there is no verb *gladiare ), which probably is from Gaulish (compare Welsh cleddyf , Cornish clethe , Breton kleze "sword;" see claymore ). Old Irish claideb is from Welsh.

 The close connection with Celtic words for 'sword', together with the imperfect match of initial consonants, and the semantic field of weaponry, suggests that Latin borrowed a form 
 *gladio- or 
 *kladio- (a hypothetical variant of attested British Celtic 
 *kladimo- 'sword') from [Proto-Celtic] or from a third language. [de Vaan]
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to gladiator 

 claymore (n.) 

 1749, "two-edged, heavy broadsword of ancient Scottish Highlanders," from Gaelic claidheamh mor "great sword," from claidheb "sword" (compare Welsh cleddyf ), which is possibly from a PIE root *kel- "to strike" (see holt ) + mor "great" (compare Welsh mawr ; see more ).

 An antiquarian word made familiar again by Scott's novels. It was sometimes applied inaccurately to 16c.-18c. one-handed basket-hilted broad swords. Modern military application to a type of pellet-scattering anti-personnel mine is first attested 1962.

 gladiatorial (adj.) 

 1712, from Latin gladiatorius (see gladiator ) + -al (1). Earlier was gladiatory (c. 1600), from French gladiatoire , from Latin gladiatorius .

 gladiolus 
 glaive 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gladiolus 

 "wild iris," c. 1000, from Latin gladiolus "wild iris, sword-lily," literally "small sword," diminutive of gladius "sword" (see gladiator); the plant so called by Pliny in reference to its sword-shaped leaves. The Old English form of the word was gladdon. Form gladiol is attested

 glaive 

 late 13c., used in Middle English of various weapons, especially ones with a long shaft ending in a point or an attached blade, from Old French glaive "lance, spear, sword" (12c.), also figuratively used for "violent death," probably from Latin gladius "sword" (see gladiator); in

 Roman holiday 

 holidays for gladiatorial combat; the expression seems to be entirely traceable to an oft-quoted passage on a dying barbarian gladiator...

 champion 

 from Old French champion "combatant, champion in single combat" (12c.), from Late Latin campionem (nominative campio) "gladiator...

 thumb 

 and thumbs down (1906) were said to be from expressions of approval or the opposite in ancient amphitheaters, especially gladiator...

 pugilist 

 "one who fights with the fists," 1789, from Latin pugil "boxer, fist-fighter," related to pugnus "a fist" (from suffixed form of PIE root *peuk- "to prick") + -ist. For sense development, compare punch (v.), also from a root meaning "to pierce." Related: Pugilistic "of or pertain

 welterweight 

 1831, "heavyweight horseman," later "boxer or wrestler of a certain weight" (1896), from earlier welter "heavyweight horseman or boxer" (1804), possibly from welt (v.) "beat severely" (c. 1400). ... but at the end of the first German mile, Nature gave way, and this excellent mar

 freight 

 early 15c. "transporting of goods and passengers by water," variant of fraght, which is from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German vracht, vrecht (see fraught). Danish fragt, Swedish frakt apparently also are from Dutch or Frisian. Also from Low German are Portuguese frete, Spanish f

 altruism 

 1853, "unselfishness, devotion to the welfare of others, the opposite of egoism," from French altruisme, coined or popularized 1830 by French philosopher Auguste Comte, with -ism + autrui (Old French altrui) "of or to others," from Latin alteri, dative of alter "other" (see alter

 shambles 

 "meat or fish market," early 15c., from schamil "table, stall for vending" (c. 1300), from Old English scamol, scomul "stool, footstool" (also figurative); "bench or stall in a market on which goods are exposed for sale, table for vending." Compare Old Saxon skamel "stool," Middl

 Share gladiator 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gladiator Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gladiator">Etymology of gladiator by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gladiator. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gladiator Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gladiator," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gladiator. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gladiator." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gladiator. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gladiator." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gladiator (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gladiator 
 glacis 
 glad 
 glad hand 
 gladden 
 glade 
 gladiator 
 gladiatorial 
 gladiolus 
 gladly 
 gladness 
 gladsome 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix