URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/group
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:54:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Group - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Group - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of group 

 group (n.) 

 1690s, originally an art criticism term, "assemblage of figures or objects forming a harmonious whole in a painting or design," from French groupe "cluster, group" (17c.), from Italian gruppo "group, knot," which probably is, with Spanish grupo , from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *kruppaz "round mass, lump," part of the general group of Germanic kr- words with the sense "rounded mass" (such as crop (n.).

 Extended to "any assemblage, a number of individuals related in some way" by 1736. Meaning "pop music combo" is from 1958. As it was borrowed after the Great Vowel Shift in English, the pronunciation of the -ou- follows French rather than English models.
 also from 1690s 

 group (v.) 

 "form into a group or groups," 1718 (transitive), 1801 (intransitive), from group (n.). Related: Grouped ; grouping .
 also from 1718 

 Entries linking to group 

 crop (n.) 

 Old English cropp "head or top of a sprout or herb, any part of a medicinal plant except the root," also "bird's craw" (the common notion is "protuberance"), cognate with Old High German kropf , Old Norse kroppr .

 "The word has a remarkable variety of special senses ..." [Century Dictionary]. OED writes that "OE. had only sense 1. 'craw of a bird' and 3. 'rounded head or top of a herb'; the latter is found also in High German dialects (Grimm, Kropf , 4 c ); the further developments of 'head or top' generally, and of 'produce of the field, etc.' appear to be exclusively English."

 Meaning "grain and other cultivated plants grown and harvested" (especially "the grain yield of one year") is from early 14c. (in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.). Probably this sense development is via the verbal meaning "cut off the top of a plant" (c. 1200).

 From the notion of "top" comes the sense "upper part of a whip," hence "handle of a whip" (1560s), hence "a kind of whip used by horsemen in the hunting field" (1857). "It is useful in opening gates, and differs from the common whip in the absence of a lash" [Century Dictionary].

 General sense of "anything gathered when ready or in season" is from 1570s. Meaning "a thick, short head of hair" is from 1795. Meaning "top or highest part of anything" is from late 14c. In Middle English crop and rote "the whole plant, crop and root," was figurative of totality or perfection. Crop-circle is attested by 1974.

 grouping (n.) 

 "act, process, or result of arranging in a group," 1748, verbal noun from group (v.).

 age-group 
 groupie 
 groupthink 
 newsgroup 
 regroup 
 subgroup 
 supergroup 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 radical 

 late 14c., "originating in the root or ground;" of body parts or fluids, "vital to life," from Latin radicalis "of or having roots," from Latin radix (genitive radicis) "root" (from PIE root *wrād- "branch, root"). The basic sense of the word in all meanings is "pertaining or rel

 rout 

 French route "disorderly flight of troops," literally "a breaking off, rupture," from Vulgar Latin *rupta "a dispersed group...," literally "a broken group," from noun use of Latin rupta, fem. past participle of rumpere "to break" (see rupture (n.)...The archaic English noun rout "group of persons, assemblage," is the same word, from Anglo-French rute, Old French route..."host, troop, crowd," from Vulgar Latin rupta "a dispersed group," here with sense of "a division, a detachment."...

 cohort 

 nominative cohors) "enclosure," with meaning extended to "infantry company" in the Roman army through the notion of "enclosed group...Sense of "accomplice" is first recorded 1952, American English, from meaning "group united in common cause" (1719)....In demographics, "group of persons having a common statistical characteristic" (originally being born in the same year),...

 unit 

 Meaning "single thing regarded as a member of a group" is attested from 1640s....Sense of "group of wards in a hospital" is attested from 1893....

 pantagamy 

 "communistic group marriage," in which every man in the group is regarded as equally the husband of every woman in it and...

 seminar 

 1887, "special group-study class for advanced students pursuing real research," from German Seminar "group of students working...

 band 

 "an organized group," originally especially of armed men, late 15c., from French bande, which is traceable to the Proto-Germanic...root of band (n.1), perhaps via a band of cloth worn as a mark of identification by a group of soldiers or others (compare...The extension to "group of musicians" is c. 1660, originally musicians attached to a regiment of the army and playing instruments...

 assort 

 late 15c., "to distribute into groups or classes," from Old French assorter "to assort, match" (15c., Modern French assortir), from a- "to" (see ad-) + sorte "kind, category," from Latin sortem (nominative sors) "lot; fate, destiny; share, portion; rank, category; sex, class, ora

 mass 

 late 14c., "irregular shaped lump; body of unshaped, coherent matter," from Old French masse "lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot, bar" (11c.), and directly from Latin massa "kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like dough," probably from Greek maza "barley c

 hoi polloi 

 1837, from Greek hoi polloi (plural) "the people," literally "the many" (plural of polys, from PIE root *pele- (1) "to fill"). Used in Greek by Dryden (1668) and Byron (1822), in both cases preceded by the, even though Greek hoi means "the," a mistake repeated often by subsequent

 Share group 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/group Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/group">Etymology of group by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of group. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/group Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of group," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/group. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of group." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/group. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of group." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/group (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near group 
 groundling 
 grounds 
 ground-swell 
 groundwater 
 groundwork 
 group 
 grouper 
 groupie 
 grouping 
 groupthink 
 grouse 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close