URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/antimony
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:35:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Antimony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Antimony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of antimony 

 antimony (n.) 

 early 15c., "black antimony, antimony sulfide" (a powder used medicinally and in alchemy), from Old French antimoine and directly from Medieval Latin antimonium (11c.), a word of obscure origin.

 Probably it is a Latinization of later Greek stimmi "powdered antimony, black antimony" (a cosmetic used to paint the eyelids), from an Arabic source (such as al 'othmud ), unless the Arabic word is from the Greek and the Latin is from Arabic (which would explain the a- as the Arabic direct article al- ). Probably it is ultimately from Egyptian stm "powdered antimony;" the substance was used there as a cosmetic from at least 3000 B.C.E.

 In French, by folk etymology, it became anti-moine "monk's bane." As the name of a brittle metallic element in a pure form, it is attested in English from 1788. Its chemical symbol Sb is for Stibium , the Latin name for "black antimony," which word also was used in English for black antimony. Related: Antimonial ; antimoniac .
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to antimony 

 stibial (adj.) 

 "like or resembling antimony," 1660s, with -al (1) + stibium , Latin for "black antimony," also used as a word in English. Alternative stibic (from Medieval Latin stibicus ) is from c. 1600. Compare antimony .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 alcohol 

 1540s (early 15c. as alcofol), "fine powder produced by sublimation," from Medieval Latin alcohol "powdered ore of antimony...

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 vesper 

 late 14c., "the evening star," from Old French vespre "evening, nightfall" (12c., Modern French vêpre), from Latin vesper (masc.), vespera (fem.) "evening star, evening, west," related to Greek hesperos, and ultimately from PIE *uekero- "evening, night" (source also of Armenian g

 astronomy 

 c. 1200, "astronomy, astrology, scientific or occult study of heavenly bodies," from Old French astrenomie "astronomy, astrology," from Latin astronomia, from Greek astronomia, abstract noun from astronomos, literally "star-regulating," from astron "star" (from PIE root *ster- (2

 focus 

 1640s, "point of convergence," from Latin focus "hearth, fireplace" (also, figuratively, "home, family"), which is of unknown origin. Used in post-classical times for "fire" itself; taken by Kepler (1604) in a mathematical sense for "point of convergence," perhaps on analogy of t

 moon 

 "heavenly body which revolves about the earth monthly," Middle English mone, from Old English mona, from Proto-Germanic *menon- (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German mano, Old Frisian mona, Old Norse mani, Danish maane, Dutch maan, German Mond, Gothic mena "moon"), from P

 negotiation 

 early 15c., negotiacioun, "a dealing with people, trafficking," from Old French negociacion "business, trade," and directly from Latin negotiationem (nominative negotiatio) "business, traffic," noun of action from past participle stem of negotiari "carry on business, do business,

 errand 

 Old English ærende "message, mission; answer, news, tidings," from Proto-Germanic *airundija- "message, errand" (source also of Old Saxon arundi, Old Norse erendi, Danish ærinde, Swedish ärende, Old Frisian erende, Old High German arunti "message"), which is of uncertain origin. 

 Share antimony 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/antimony Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/antimony">Etymology of antimony by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of antimony. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/antimony Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of antimony," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/antimony. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of antimony." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/antimony. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of antimony." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/antimony (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near antimony 
 Anti-Mason 
 antimatter 
 antimetabole 
 anti-militarist 
 antimnemonic 
 antimony 
 anti-node 
 antinomian 
 antinomianism 
 antinomy 
 Antioch 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix