URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmos
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:16:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cosmos - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cosmos - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cosmos 

 cosmos (n.) 

 c. 1200, "the universe, the world" (but not popular until 1848, when it was taken as the English equivalent to Humboldt's Kosmos in translations from German), from Latinized form of Greek kosmos "order, good order, orderly arrangement," a word with several main senses rooted in those notions: The verb kosmein meant generally "to dispose, prepare," but especially "to order and arrange (troops for battle), to set (an army) in array;" also "to establish (a government or regime);" "to deck, adorn, equip, dress" (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of "ornaments of a woman's dress, decoration" (compare kosmokomes "dressing the hair," and cosmetic ) as well as "the universe, the world."

 Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to "the universe," perhaps originally meaning "the starry firmament," but it later was extended to the whole physical world, including the earth. For specific reference to "the world of people," the classical phrase was he oikoumene (ge) "the inhabited (earth)." Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene . Kosmos also was used in Christian religious writing with a sense of "worldly life, this world (as opposed to the afterlife)," but the more frequent word for this was aiōn , literally "lifetime, age."

 The word cosmos often suggested especially "the universe as an embodiment of order and harmony."
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to cosmos 

 cosmetic (n.) 

 c. 1600, "the art of beautifying, art of anointing or decorating the human body," from Latinized form of Greek kosmetike (tekhnē) "the art of dress and ornament," from fem. of kosmetikos "skilled in adornment or arrangement," from kosmein "to arrange, adorn," from kosmos "order; ornament" (see cosmos ). The adjective is feminine because tekhn ē is a feminine noun.

 Meaning "a preparation for beautifying, preparation that renders the n soft and pure or improves the complexion" (originally also the hair) is attested from 1640s. Related: Cosmetics .

 cosmetic (adj.) 

 1640s, "pertaining to beauty, improving beauty," from French cosmétique (16c.), from Latinized form of Greek kosmetikos "skilled in adornment or arrangement," from kosmein "to arrange, adorn," from kosmos "order; ornament" (see cosmos ). Related: Cosmetical (1550s). Of surgery, from 1926. Figurative sense of "superficial, affecting the appearance only" is from 1955. Related: Cosmetically .

 cosmetology 
 cosmic 
 cosmogony 
 cosmology 
 cosmopolite 
 macrocosm 
 microcosm 
 mundane 
 secular 
 cosmo- 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cosmic 

 1640s, "worldly, of this world," a sense now obsolete, from Latinized form of Greek kosmikos "worldly, earthly, of the world," from kosmos "world-order, world" (see cosmos). Cosmical "related to the earth" is attested from 1580s.  Modern sense of "of or pertaining to the uni

 cosmogony 

 1690s, "a theory of the creation;" 1766 as "the creation of the universe;" 1777 as "science of the origin of the universe," from Latinized form of Greek kosmogonia "creation of the world," from kosmos "world, universe" (see cosmos) + -gonia "a begetting," from gonos "birth" (from

 cosmology 

 1650s, "general science or theory of the material universe as an ordered whole," from Modern Latin cosmologia, from Greek kosmos (see cosmos) + -logia "discourse" (see -logy). By 1753 as "the branch of metaphysics which discusses the ultimate philosophical problems relating to th

 universe 

 1580s, "the whole world, cosmos, the totality of existing things," from Old French univers (12c.), from Latin universum "...

 sphere 

 a re-Latinized spelling, attested beginning mid-15c., of Middle English spere (c. 1300) "cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow...From late 14c. in reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos believed...

 level 

 Garretson, "Professional Education," in "The Dental Cosmos," Philadelphia, 1865] Modern use is mostly from computer gaming...

 world 

 Old English woruld, worold "human existence, the affairs of life," also "a long period of time," also "the human race, mankind, humanity," a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt,

 macrocosm 

 c. 1600, "the great world" (the universe, as distinct from the "little world" of man and human societies), from French macrocosme (c. 1300) and directly from Medieval Latin macrocosmus, from Greek makros "large, long" (from PIE root *mak- "long, thin") + kosmos "world," also "ord

 existence 

 late 14c., "reality," from Old French existence, from Medieval Latin existentia/exsistentia, from existentem/exsistentem (nominative existens/exsistens) "existent," present participle of Latin existere/exsistere "stand forth, come out, emerge; appear, be visible, come to light; a

 galaxy 

 late 14c., from French galaxie or directly from Late Latin galaxias "the Milky Way" as a feature in the night sky (in classical Latin via lactea or circulus lacteus), from Greek galaxias (adj.), in galaxias kyklos, literally "milky circle," from gala (genitive galaktos) "milk" (f

 Share cosmos 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmos Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmos">Etymology of cosmos by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cosmos. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmos Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cosmos," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmos. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cosmos." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmos. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cosmos." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cosmos (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cosmos 
 cosmological 
 cosmology 
 cosmonaut 
 cosmopolitan 
 cosmopolite 
 cosmos 
 cosplay 
 Cossack 
 cosset 
 cost 
 costa 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix