URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyena
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hyena - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hyena - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hyena 

 hyena (n.) 

 mid-14c., from Old French hiene , from Latin hyaena , from Greek hyaina "hyena," apparently a fem. formation from hys "pig," from PIE *su- "swine" (see sow (n.)). With fem. suffix -aina . So called for its bristles. Applied to cruel, treacherous, and greedy persons at least since 1670s. Adjectival forms that have been attempted in English include hyenaish , hyenaesque , hyenic , hyenine , hyenoid .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to hyena 

 sow (n.) 

 Middle English soue , from Old English sugu , su "female of the swine, adult female hog," from Proto-Germanic *su- (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German su , German Sau , Dutch zeug , Old Norse syr ).

 This is held to be from PIE root *su- (source also of Sanskrit sukarah "wild boar, swine;" Avestan hu "wild boar;" Greek hys "swine;" Latin sus "swine," swinus "pertaining to swine;" Old Church Slavonic svinija "swine;" Lettish sivens "young pig;" Welsh hucc , Irish suig "swine; Old Irish socc "snout, plowshare"). The root is possibly imitative of pig noise, a notion reinforced by the fact that Sanskrit sukharah means "maker of (the sound) 'su.' "

 Related to swine . As a term of abuse for a woman, attested from c. 1500. Sowbug "hog-louse, pill-bug" is from 1750; sow in reference to any terrestrial isopod that can roll itself into a ball is from 15c. Also sow-lice (1650s).

 hyaena (n.) 

 see hyena .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 catfish 

 The name is based on glanos "hyena," the fish being "thus called because of its voracity and the sound it makes" [Beekes]...

 castor 

 late 14c., "a beaver," from Old French castor (13c.), from Latin castor "beaver," from Greek kastor "beaver," perhaps literally "he who excels," and thus identical with the name of one of the divine twins (with Pollux), worshipped by women in ancient Greece as a healer and preser

 stake 

 "pointed stick or post; stick of wood sharpened at one end for driving into the ground, used as part of a fence, as a boundary-mark, as a post to tether an animal to, or as a support for something (a vine, a tent, etc.)," Old English staca "pin, stake," from Proto-Germanic *stako

 spurious 

 1590s, of persons, "born out of wedlock, bastard," from Latin spurius "illegitimate, false" (source also of Italian spurio, Spanish espurio), from spurius (n.) "illegitimate child," probably from Etruscan spural "public." The sense of "having an irregular origin, not properly con

 battery 

 1530s, "action of battering," in law, "the unlawful beating of another," from French batterie, from Old French baterie "beating, thrashing, assault" (12c.), from batre "to beat," from Latin battuere (see batter (v.)). The meaning shifted in French from "bombardment" ("heavy blows

 breakfast 

 "first meal of the day," mid-15c., from the verbal phrase; see break (v.) + fast (n.). For vowel shift, see below. An Old English word for it was undernmete (see undern), also morgenmete "morning meal." Spanish almuerzo "lunch," but formerly and still locally "breakfast," is from

 ecumenical 

 late 16c., "representing the entire (Christian) world," formed in English as an ecclesiastical word, from Late Latin oecumenicus "general, universal," from Greek oikoumenikos "from the whole world," from he oikoumene ge "the inhabited world (as known to the ancient Greeks); the G

 dwarf 

 Old English dweorh, dweorg (West Saxon), duerg (Mercian), "very short human being, person much below ordinary stature, whether of proportionate parts or not," also "supernatural being of subhuman size," from Proto-Germanic *dweraz (source also of Old Frisian dwerch, Old Saxon dwe

 vocation 

 early 15c., "spiritual calling," from Old French vocacion "call, consecration; calling, profession" (13c.) or directly from Latin vocationem (nominative vocatio), literally "a calling, a being called" from vocatus "called," past participle of vocare "to call," which is related to

 heifer 

 "young cow that has not had a calf," Middle English heifer, from Old English heahfore (West Saxon); Northumbrian hehfaro, heffera (plural), "heifer," of unknown origin, not found outside English. The first element seems to be heah "high," which is common in Old English compounds 

 Share hyena 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyena Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyena">Etymology of hyena by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hyena. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyena Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hyena," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyena. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hyena." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyena. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hyena." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyena (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hyena 
 hydrotherapy 
 hydrothermal 
 hydrous 
 hydroxide 
 Hydrus 
 hyena 
 hyetal 
 hyeto- 
 hygiene 
 hygienic 
 hygienist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix