URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacquer
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:41:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lacquer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lacquer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lacquer 

 lacquer (n.) 

 1570s, "dye obtained from lac;" 1670s as "gold-colored solution of shellac," from obsolete French lacre , name for a kind of sealing wax, from Portuguese lacre , unexplained variant of lacca "resinous substance," from Arabic lakk , from Persian lak (see lac ).
 also from 1570s 

 lacquer (v.) 

 "cover or coat with laqueur," 1680s, from lacquer (n.). Related: Lacquered ; lacquering .
 also from 1680s 

 Entries linking to lacquer 

 lac (n.) 

 red resinous substance (an incrustation deposited by females of an insect on twigs of certain trees in southern Asia), 1550s, perhaps immediately from French lacce , displacing or absorbing earlier English lacca (early 15c. in medical texts as a substance in making pills), from Medieval Latin lacca . All these are from Persian lak , from Hindi lakh (Prakrit lakkha ), from Sanskrit laksha "red dye," which is of uncertain origin.

 According to Klein and Century Dictionary, it means literally "one hundred thousand" and is a reference to the insects that gather in great numbers on the trees and create the resin. But other sources say lakh is perhaps an alteration of Sanskrit rakh , from an IE root word for "color, dye" [Watkins]. Still another guess is that Sanskrit laksha is related to English lax, lox "salmon," and the substance perhaps was so called from being somewhat the color of salmon [Barnhart].

 Also see shellac (n.). Related: Lacic ; lacinic .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 decorate 

 1520s, "deck with something becoming or ornamental, adorn, beautify," from Latin decoratus, past participle of decorare "to decorate, adorn, embellish, beautify," from decus (genitive decoris) "an ornament; grace, dignity, honor," from PIE root *dek- "to take, accept." Earlier wa

 adorn 

 late 14c., aournen, later adornen, "to decorate, embellish," also "be an ornament to," from Old French aorner "to order, arrange, dispose, equip; adorn," from Latin adornare "equip, provide, furnish;" also "decorate, embellish," from ad "to" (see ad-) + ornare "prepare, furnish, 

 gum 

 c. 1300, "resin from dried sap of plants," from Old French gome "(medicinal) gum, resin," from Late Latin gumma, from Latin gummi, from Greek kommi "gum," from Egyptian kemai. As the name of a hardened, sweetened gelatine mixture as a candy, 1827. As a shortened form of chewing g

 mug 

 "small, cylindrical drinking vessel, often with a handle," 1560s, "bowl, pot, jug," a word of unknown origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish mugg "earthen cup, jug," Norwegian mugge "pitcher, open can for warm drinks"), or Low German mokke, mukke "mug," also of unknow

 ornament 

 c. 1200, ournement, "an accessory; something that serves primarily for use but also may serve as adornment; ornamental apparel, jewels," from Old French ornement "ornament, decoration," and directly from Latin ornamentum "apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration

 coat 

 early 14c., "principal outer garment, tunic, kirtle," typically made of cloth and usually with sleeves, worn alone or under a mantle, from Old French cote "coat, robe, tunic, overgarment," from Frankish *kotta "coarse cloth" or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon kot "w

 grace 

 late 12c., "God's unmerited favor, love, or help," from Old French grace "pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks; elegance, virtue" (12c., Modern French grâce), from Latin gratia "favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will, gratitude" (source of Italian grazia, Spanis

 soldier 

 c. 1300, souder, soudiour, "fighting man, one engaged ion military service," from Old French soudier, soldier and Anglo-French variants, "one who serves in the army for pay," from Medieval Latin soldarius "a soldier" (source also of Spanish soldado, Italian soldato), literally "o

 emancipate 

 1620s, "set free from control," from Latin emancipatus, past participle of emancipare "put (a son) out of paternal authority, declare (someone) free, give up one's authority over," in Roman law, the freeing of a son or wife from the legal authority (patria potestas) of the pater 

 purpose 

 c. 1300, purpus, "intention, aim, goal; object to be kept in view; proper function for which something exists," from Anglo-French purpos, Old French porpos "an aim, intention" (12c.), from porposer "to put forth," from por- "forth" (from a variant of Latin pro- "forth;" see pur-)

 Share lacquer 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacquer Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacquer">Etymology of lacquer by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lacquer. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacquer Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lacquer," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacquer. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lacquer." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacquer. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lacquer." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lacquer (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lacquer 
 lackluster 
 lacklustre 
 Laconian 
 laconic 
 Lacoste 
 lacquer 
 lacrosse 
 lacrymatory 
 lactate 
 lactation 
 lacteal 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix