URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercy
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:24:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mercy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mercy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mercy 

 mercy (n.) 

 late 12c., "God's forgiveness of his creatures' offenses," from Old French mercit , merci (9c.) "reward, gift; kindness, grace, pity," from Latin mercedem (nominative merces ) "reward, wages, pay, hire" (in Vulgar Latin "favor, pity;" in Medieval Latin "thanks; grace"), from merx (genitive mercis ) "wares, merchandise" (see market (n.)). In Church Latin (6c.) it was given a specific application to the heavenly reward earned by those who show kindness to the helpless and those from whom no requital can be expected.

 The meaning "disposition to forgive or show compassion" is attested from early 13c. Sense of "an act or exercise of forbearance or good will" is from c. 1300. As an interjection, attested from mid-13c. (short for may God have mercy , have mercy on me , etc.).

 Many of the English senses are found earlier in French, but in French the word largely has been superseded by miséricorde except as a word of thanks.

 The sense of "discretionary action" (as in at (one's) mercy ) is from mid-14c. Seat of mercy "golden covering of the Ark of the Covenant" (1530), hence "the throne of God," is Tyndale's loan-translation of Luther's gnadenstuhl , an inexact translation of Latin propitiatorium, ultimately a rendering of Hebrew kapporeth , literally "propitiatory."
 also from late 12c. 

 Entries linking to mercy 

 market (n.) 

 early 12c., "a meeting at a fixed time for buying and selling livestock and provisions, an occasion on which goods are publicly exposed for sale and buyers assemble to purchase," from Old North French market "marketplace, trade, commerce" (Old French marchiet , Modern French marché ), from Latin mercatus "trading, buying and selling; trade; market" (source of Italian mercato , Spanish mercado , Dutch markt , German Markt ), from past participle of mercari "to trade, deal in, buy," from merx (genitive mercis ) "wares, merchandise." This is from an Italic root *merk- , possibly from Etruscan, referring to various aspects of economics.

 The god 
 Mercuriu s was probably the god of exchange. According to [Walde-Hoffmann], the god's name was borrowed from Etruscan; in principle, the same is possible for the stem 
 *merk- altogether. [de Vaan]

 Meaning "public building or space where markets are held" is attested from late 13c. Meaning "a city, country or region considered as a place where things are bought or sold" is from 1610s. Sense of "sale as controlled by supply and demand" is from 1680s. Market-garden "plot of land on which vegetables are grown for market" is by 1789. Market-basket "large basket used to carry marketing" is by 1798. Market price "price a commodity will bring when sold in open market" is from mid-15c.; market value "value established or shown by sales" (1690s) is first attested in the writings of John Locke. Market economy is from 1948; market research is from 1921.

 amerce (v.) 

 "punishment by arbitrary or discretionary fine," 1215, earlier amercy , Anglo-French amercier "to fine," from merci "mercy, grace" (see mercy ). The legal phrase estre a merci "to be at the mercy of" (a tribunal, etc.) was corrupted to estre amercié , a good example of how an adverbial phrase in legalese tends to become a verb (compare abandon ).

 Frans hom ne seit amerciez pour petit forfet. [Magna Charta]

 Related: Amercement ; amerciable / amerceable .

 gramercy 
 Mercedes 
 merciful 
 merciless 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gramercy 

 c. 1300, exclamation of thanks, later of surprise, from Old French grant-merci, gran merci "great thanks, many thanks," from gran (see grand (adj.)) + merci "reward, favor, thanks" (see mercy (n.)). Modern French merci "thank you" is a shortening of this. New York City's Gramercy

 clemency 

 1550s, "mildness or gentleness shown in exercise of authority," from Latin clementia "calmness, gentleness," from clemens "calm, mild," related to clinare "to lean," often said to be from PIE root *klei- "to lean" + participial suffix -menos (also in alumnus). For sense evolution

 Kyrie eleison 

 early 13c., a Greek liturgical formula adopted untranslated into the Latin mass, literally "lord have mercy" (Psalms cxxii...From kyrie, vocative of kyrios "lord, master" (see church (n.)) + eleeson, aorist imperative of eleo "I have pity on, show mercy...to," from eleos "pity, mercy" (see alms)....

 Miserere 

 51st Psalm" (in Vulgate, the 50th), one of the "Penitential Psalms," so called from the phrase Miserere mei Deus "Have mercy..., from Latin miserere "feel pity, have compassion, commiserate," second person singular imperative of misereri "to have mercy...of severe colic ('iliac passion') accompanied by excruciating cramps and vomiting of excrement" (1610s); literally "have mercy...

 alms 

 This was a variant of Church Latin eleemosyna (Tertullian, 3c.), from Greek eleēmosynē "pity, mercy," in Ecclesiastical Greek..."charity, alms," from eleēmōn "compassionate," from eleos "pity, mercy," which is of unknown origin (Beekes gives it no...

 pity 

 mid-13c., pite, "compassion, kindness, generosity of spirit;" c. 1300 "disposition to mercy, quality of being merciful,"...a feeling of sympathy and compassion aroused by the sorrow or suffering of another," from Old French pite, pitet "pity, mercy...

 propitiatory 

 Earlier in English as a noun, propiciatorie, c. 1300, "the mercy seat, lid or cover of the ark of the covenant," from Late...

 blessing 

 Middle English blessinge, from Old English bletsunga, bledsunge, "divine grace; protecting influence (of a deity, saint); state of spiritual well-being or joy;" also of a sanction or benediction of the Pope, a priest, etc.; verbal noun from bless. The meaning "a gift from God, th

 amnesty 

 1570s, "a ruling authority's pardon of past offenses," from French amnistie "intentional overlooking" (16c.), from Latin amnestia, from Greek amnestia "forgetfulness (especially of wrong); an amnesty," from amnestos "forgotten; forgetful," from a- "not" (see a- (3)) + mnestis "re

 pardon 

 c. 1300, pardoun, "papal indulgence, forgiveness of sins or wrongdoing," from Old French pardon, from pardoner "to grant; forgive" (11c., Modern French pardonner), "to grant, forgive," and directly from Medieval Latin perdonum, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare "to give wholeheartedly

 Share mercy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercy">Etymology of mercy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mercy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mercy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mercy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercy. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mercy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mercy (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mercy 
 merciful 
 merciless 
 mercurial 
 mercuric 
 Mercury 
 mercy 
 merde 
 merdivorous 
 mere 
 merely 
 merengue 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix