URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocus
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:02:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Crocus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Crocus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of crocus 

 crocus (n.) 

 "flowering plant best known for producing the spice and dyestuff saffron," late 14c., from Latin crocus , from Greek krokos "crocus," also "saffron," a word probably of Semitic origin (compare Arabic kurkum ), ultimately from Sanskrit kunkumam , unless the Sanskrit word is from the Semitic one. The autumnal crocus ( Crocus sativa ) was a common source of yellow dye in Roman times, and was perhaps grown in England, where the word existed as Old English croh , but this form of the word was forgotten by the time the plant was re-introduced in Western Europe by the Crusaders.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to crocus 

 curcumin (n.) 

 coloring matter of turmeric, 1838 (by 1805 in German), from Curcuma , genus name for plants of the ginger family, from which the chemical was drawn, Medieval Latin, from Arabic kurkum "saffron, turmeric." Compare crocus .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 saffron 

 c. 1200, safroun, "product made from the dried stigmas of flowers of the autumn crocus," from Old French safran (12c.), from...In reference to the crocus plant itself from early 15c. German Safran is from French; Russian shafran' is from Arabic....

 sativa 

 in scientific plant name classifications from late 18c., indicating a cultivated form, is from Latin sativus "cultivated, that is sown or planted," from satus, past participle of serere "to sow, plant seed" (from PIE root *sē-  "to sow"). Sative (adj.) formerly was used in E

 industry 

 late 15c., "cleverness, skill," from Old French industrie "activity; aptitude, experience" (14c.) or directly from Latin industria "diligence, activity, zeal," noun use of fem. of industrius "active, diligent," from early Latin indostruus "diligent," from indu "in, within" (from 

 company 

 mid-12c., "large group of people," from Old French compagnie "society, friendship, intimacy; body of soldiers" (12c.), from Late Latin companio, literally "bread fellow, messmate," from Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + panis "bread," from PIE root *pa- "to feed." Abbreviat

 righteous 

 an early 16c. alteration of the older word, rightwise, which is from Old English rihtwis, of actions, "characterized by justice, morally right," of persons, "just, upright; sinless, conforming to divine law," from riht (see right (adj.1)) + wis "wise, way, manner" (see wise (adj.

 leader 

 Old English lædere "one who leads, one first or most prominent," agent noun from lædan "to guide, conduct" (see lead (v.)). Cognate with Old Frisian ledera, Dutch leider, Old High German leitari, German Leiter. As a title for the head of an authoritarian state, from 1918 (transla

 dismay 

 c. 1300, dismaien, "become or be alarmed, upset, or frightened; to confound, break down the courage of by danger or difficulty or fear of calamity, fill with despairing apprehension;" perhaps formed in Anglo-French or Middle English from dis-, here probably intensive (see dis-), 

 pamphlet 

 "small, unbound treatise," late 14c., pamflet, "brief written text; poem, tract, small book," from Anglo-Latin panfletus, which probably is a popular short form of "Pamphilus, seu de Amore" ("Pamphilus, or about Love"), a short 12c. Latin love poem popular and widely copied in th

 curious 

 mid-14c., "subtle, sophisticated;" late 14c., "eager to know, inquisitive, desirous of seeing" (often in a bad sense), also "wrought with or requiring care and art;" from Old French curios "solicitous, anxious, inquisitive; odd, strange" (Modern French curieux) and directly from 

 comprise 

 early 15c., "to include," from Old French compris, past participle of comprendre "to contain, comprise" (12c.), from Latin comprehendere "to take together, to unite; include; seize; to comprehend, perceive" (to seize or take in the mind), from com "with, together," here probably 

 Share crocus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocus">Etymology of crocus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of crocus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of crocus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of crocus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocus. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of crocus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/crocus (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near crocus 
 crochet 
 crock 
 crockery 
 crocket 
 crocodile 
 crocus 
 Croesus 
 croft 
 Crohn's disease 
 croissant 
 Cro-Magnon 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix