URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/syndrome
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:12:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Syndrome - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Syndrome - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of syndrome 

 syndrome (n.) 

 "a number of symptoms occurring together," 1540s, from medical Latin, from Greek syndrome "concurrence of symptoms, concourse of people," from syndromos "place where several roads meet," literally "a running together," from syn- "with" (see syn- ) + dromos "a running, course" (see dromedary ).

 Phrase _____ syndrome , indicating a characteristic complex of beliefs, behaviors, etc., is by 1955, from psychology.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to syndrome 

 dromedary (n.) 

 "thoroughbred Arabian camel," late 13c., from Old French dromedaire and directly from Late Latin dromedarius "kind of camel," from Latin dromas (genitive dromados ), from Greek dromas kamelos "running camel," from dromos "a race course," from dramein "to run," from PIE *drem- "to run" (source also of Sanskrit dramati "runs, goes," perhaps also Old English trem "footstep").

 A variety of the one-humped Arabian camel bred and trained for use as a saddle-animal, "and comparing with the heavier and slower varieties as a race-horse does with a cart-horse; it is not a different animal zoologically speaking" [Century Dictionary]. An early variant in English was drumbledairy (1560s).

 AIDS (n.) 

 1982, acronym formed from acquired immune deficiency syndrome . AIDS cocktail attested by 1997, the thing itself said to have been in use from 1995.

 syn- 

 word-forming element of Greek origin (corresponding to Latin con- ) meaning "together with, jointly; alike; at the same time," also sometimes completive or intensive, from Greek syn (prep.) "with, together with, along with, in the company of," from PIE *ksun- "with" (source also of Russian so- "with, together," from Old Russian su(n)- ).

 The Greek prefix was assimilated to -l- , reduced to sy- before -s- and -z- , and altered to sym- before -b- , -m- and -p- . Very productive from c. 1860 in forming words for modern sciences. Since 1970s also with a sense of "synthetic."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Munchausen 

 As a syndrome involving feigned dramatic illness, it is attested from 1951....

 Stockholm 

 Stockholm Syndrome is from 1978, a psychologists' term; the name derives from the Aug. 23, 1973, violent armed robbery of...

 survivor 

 Survivor syndrome as a name for the feeling of guilt in some who have lived through a traumatic event in which others died...

 symptom 

 "a departure from normal function or form as an expression or evidence of a disease," late 14c., sinthoma, from Medieval Latin sinthoma "symptom of a disease," altered from Late Latin symptoma, from Greek symptoma "a happening, accident, disease," from stem of sympiptein "to befa

 disease 

 early 14c., "discomfort, inconvenience, distress, trouble," from Old French desaise "lack, want; discomfort, distress; trouble, misfortune; disease, sickness," from des- "without, away" (see dis-) + aise "ease" (see ease (n.)). Restricted pathological sense of "sickness, illness"

 seaside 

 also sea-side, "the land bordering on the sea, the margin or brim of the sea," c. 1200, from sea + side (n.). Especially in England, "the seacoast as a resort for pleasure or health," 1782; as an adjective in this sense from 1781. The meaning "the side facing the sea" seems to be

 attention deficit disorder 

 (abbreviated ADD), introduced as a diagnosis in the third edition of the "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" (1980), from attention in the "power of mental concentration" sense. Expanded to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ("the co-existence of attenti

 radiation 

 mid-15c., radiacion, "act or process of emitting light," from Latin radiationem (nominative radiatio) "a shining, radiation," noun of action from past-participle stem of radiare "to beam, shine, gleam; make beaming," from radius "beam of light; spoke of a wheel" (see radius). Mea

 complex 

 1650s, "composed of interconnected parts, formed by a combination of simple things or elements," from French complexe "complicated, complex, intricate" (17c.), from Latin complexus "surrounding, encompassing," past participle of complecti "to encircle, embrace," in transferred us

 add 

 late 14c., "to join or unite (something to something else)," from Latin addere "add to, join, attach, place upon," literal and figurative, from ad "to" (see ad-) + -dere, combining form meaning "to put, place," from dare "to give" (from PIE root *do- "to give"). The intransitive 

 Share syndrome 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/syndrome Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/syndrome">Etymology of syndrome by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of syndrome. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/syndrome Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of syndrome," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syndrome. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of syndrome." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syndrome. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of syndrome." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/syndrome (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near syndrome 
 syndetic 
 syndic 
 syndicalism 
 syndicate 
 syndication 
 syndrome 
 syndrum 
 syne 
 synecdoche 
 synechia 
 synectic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix