URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/walrus
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:59:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Walrus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Walrus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of walrus 

 walrus (n.) 

 "very large pinniped carnivorous mammal" (the males are noted for their enormous tusk-like canine teeth), 1650s, from Dutch walrus , which was probably a folk-etymology alteration (by influence of Dutch walvis "whale" and ros "horse") of a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse rosmhvalr "walrus," hrosshvalr "a kind of whale," or rostungr "walrus."

 Old English had horschwæl , and later morse , from Lapp morsa or Finnish mursu , which ultimately might be the source, much garbled, of the first element in Old Norse rosmhvalr .

 In reference to a type of large, overgrown mustache, by 1888.
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to walrus 

 sea-horse (n.) 

 late 15c., "walrus" (apparently), from sea + horse (n.); compare walrus . Also in heraldry as a fabulous animal with the foreparts of a horse and the tail of a fish. Main modern sense in zoology is attested from 1580s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sward 

 Dutch swarde "rind of bacon," Dutch zwoord "rind of bacon," German Schwarte "thick, hard skin, rind," Old Norse svörðr "walrus...

 whale 

 "animals of the mammalian order Cetacea," Old English hwæl "whale," also "walrus," from Proto-Germanic *hwalaz (source also...

 seal 

 "fish-eating marine mammal with flippers; any pinniped not a walrus," Middle English sele, from Old English seolh "seal,"...

 pinniped 

 "a fin-footed mammal," one having feet like fins or flippers, especially of the group of fin-footed aquatic carnivorous quadruped mammals that includes seals, sea-lions, and walruses, 1842, from Modern Latin Pinnipedia, suborder of aquatic carnivorous mammals (seals and walruses)

 sea 

 Middle English se, seo, from Old English sæ, "sheet of water, sea, lake, pool," from Proto-Germanic *saiwa- (source also of Old Saxon seo, Old Frisian se, Middle Dutch see, Dutch zee, German See, Swedish sjö), of unknown origin, outside connections "wholly doubtful" [Buck], and a

 horse 

 "solidungulate perissodactyl mammal of the family Equidæ and genus Equus" [Century Dictionary], Old English hors "horse," from Proto-Germanic *harss- (source also of Old Norse hross, Old Frisian, Old Saxon hors, Middle Dutch ors, Dutch ros, Old High German hros, German Roß "horse

 translate 

 early 14c., "to remove from one place to another," also "to turn from one language to another," from Old French translater and directly from Latin translatus "carried over," serving as past participle of transferre "to bring over, carry over" (see transfer), from trans "across, b

 evil 

 Old English yfel (Kentish evel) "bad, vicious, ill, wicked," from Proto-Germanic *ubilaz (source also of Old Saxon ubil, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch evel, Dutch euvel, Old High German ubil, German übel, Gothic ubils), from PIE *upelo-, from root *wap- "bad, evil" (source also of

 communication 

 early 15c., communicacioun, "act of communicating, act of imparting, discussing, debating, or conferring," from Old French comunicacion (14c., Modern French communication) and directly from Latin communicationem (nominative communicatio) "a making common, imparting, communicating

 blackmail 

 1550s, "tribute paid to men allied with criminals as protection against pillage, etc.," from black (adj.) + Middle English male "rent, tribute." This is from Old English mal "lawsuit, terms, bargaining, agreement," from Old Norse mal "speech, agreement;" related to Old English mæ

 Share walrus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/walrus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/walrus">Etymology of walrus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of walrus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/walrus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of walrus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/walrus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of walrus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/walrus. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of walrus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/walrus (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near walrus 
 wall-to-wall 
 wally 
 wallydraggle 
 walnut 
 Walpurgis night 
 walrus 
 Walter 
 waltz 
 wampum 
 wan- 
 wan 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix