URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/seem
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Seem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Seem - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of seem 

 seem (v.) 

 c. 1200, impersonal, hit semeth ( it seems ), "it appears (that something is so);" also with adjectives or phrases, "to appear to be (in some condition), have or present an appearance of being," from Old Norse soema "to honor; to put up with; to conform to (the world, etc.)," a verb derived from the adjective soemr "fitting."

 This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *somiz (source also of Old English som "agreement, reconciliation," seman "to conciliate," source of Middle English semen "to settle a dispute," literally "to make one;" Old Danish söme "to be proper or seemly"), from PIE *somi- , suffixed form of root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with" (also compare same ).

 With other verbs ( seem to be , etc.) from c. 1200. Sense of "appear to oneself, think oneself" is from 1630s. Also in Middle English "to present oneself, appear; be visible, be apparent" (late 14c.), hence, of a fact, etc., "be evident, apparent, or obvious." The sense of "be fitting or appropriate, be expedient" (c. 1300) is the etymological one, but it is obsolete except in derived seemly , unseemly . Related: Seemed ; seeming .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to seem 

 same (adj.) 

 "identical, equal; unchanging; one in substance or general character," from Proto-Germanic *samaz "same" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic sama , Old High German samant , German samt "together, with," Gothic samana "together," Dutch zamelen "to collect," German zusammen "together"), from PIE *samos "same," from suffixed form of root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with."

 Old English seems to have lost the adjective except in the adverbial phrase swa same "the same as" (literally "so same"). But the word that emerged in Middle English as "the ordinary adjectival pronominal designation of identity" [OED] is considered to be more likely (or mostly) from the Old Norse cognate same , samr "same." In its revival it replaced synonymous ilk .

 As a pronoun, "the person or thing just mentioned," from c. 1300. In Middle English also a verb and an adjective, "together, mutually" (as in comen same "gather together, unite," kissen same "embrace one another").

 Colloquial phrase same here "the same thing applies to me" as an exclamation of agreement is from 1895. All the same is from 1803 as "nevertheless, in spite of what has been mentioned." Same difference , a curious way to say "not different; equal," is attested from 1945. Often expanded for emphasis: ilk-same (mid-13c.); the self-same (early 15c.); one and the sam e is in Wycliffe (late 14c.), translating Latin unus atque idem. 

 seeming (adj.) 

 "that appears to be (real, proper, etc.), apparent to the senses or mind, having a semblance or appearance of being real," mid-14c., present-participle adjective from seem Also "suitable, becoming" (mid-14c.); "worthy of respect, honorable" (late 14c.), but these are obsolete. As a noun, "act of appearing," late 14c. Seemingly (adv.) in the sense of "to all appearances" is recorded from 1590s; earlier it meant "fittingly, properly (early 15c.), "in the correct or pleasing manner" (c. 1200).

 seemly 
 unseemly 
 beseem 
 meseems 
 soft 
 *sem- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 seemly 

 c. 1200, semeli, semlich, of persons, "of pleasing or good appearance, handsome, fair," also, of conduct, "proper, tasteful, decorous; good for a purpose," and generally, "pleasant, suitable, fitting," probably from Old Norse soemiligr "becoming, honorable," from soemr "fitting" 

 soft 

 Old English softe, earlier sefte, "gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed; luxurious," from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz "level, even, smooth, gentle, soft" (source also of Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and 

 look 

 Old English locian "use the eyes for seeing, gaze, look, behold, spy," from West Germanic *lokjan (source also of Old Saxon lokon "see, look, spy," Middle Dutch loeken "to look," Old High German luogen, German dialectal lugen "to look out"), a word of unknown origin. Breton lagud

 methinks 

 from Old English me þyncð "it seems to me," from me (pron.), dative of I, + þyncð, third person singular of þyncan "to seem...," reflecting the Old English distinction between þyncan "to seem" and related þencan "to think," which bedevils modern students...

 bot 

 The method of minting new slang by clipping the heads off words does not seem to be old or widespread in English....Examples (za from pizza, zels from pretzels, rents from parents) are American English student or teen slang and seem to date...

 regret 

 Replaced Old English ofþyncan, from of- "off, away," here denoting opposition, + þyncan "seem, seem fit" (as in methinks)...

 think 

 Old English þencan is the causative form of the distinct Old English verb þyncan "to seem, to appear" (past tense þuhte,...The two Old English words converged in Middle English and þyncan "to seem" was absorbed, except for its preservation in archaic...

 glitter 

 c. 1300, glideren (late 14c. as gliteren), from an unrecorded Old English word or from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse glitra "to glitter," from Proto-Germanic *glit- "shining, bright" (source also of Old English glitenian "to glitter, shine; be distinguished," Old High G

 shine 

 Middle English shinen, from Old English scinan "shed, send forth, or give out light; be radiant, be resplendent, illuminate," of persons, "be conspicuous" (class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen). This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *skeinanan (s

 make 

 Old English macian "to give being to, give form or character to, bring into existence; construct, do, be the author of, produce; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform," from West Germanic *makōjanan "to fashion, fit" (source also of Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia "

 Share seem 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/seem Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/seem">Etymology of seem by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of seem. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/seem Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of seem," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/seem. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of seem." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/seem. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of seem." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/seem (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near seem 
 seedling 
 seedy 
 seeing 
 seek 
 seeker 
 seem 
 seeming 
 seemly 
 seen 
 seep 
 seepage 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix