URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/matte
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:52:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Matte - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Matte - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of matte 

 matte (adj.) 

 also matt, mat , 1640s, "lusterless, dull" (of a color or surface), from French mat "dull, dead surface," from Old French mat "beaten down, withered, afflicted, dejected; dull," which is perhaps from Latin mattus "maudlin with drink," from madere "to be wet or sodden, be drunk," from PIE root *mad- "to be wet, drip" (see mast (n.2)). Or the French word might represent a transferred use from chess of mater "to checkmate, defeat," from Arabic (see mate (v.2)).

 The spelling matte is rare before late 19c. and not normalized until mid-20c.; OED only lists the word as mat in the print edition. 
 also from 1640s 

 matte (n.1) 

 "sheet of backing material," 1845, from French mat "dull surface or finish" (15c.), noun use of Old French mat (adj.) "dull, beaten down," for which see matte (adj.). The word has been confused with mat (n.1), especially as the latter was used late 19c. for "piece of thick paper or other material placed for ornament or protection immediately under the glass of a picture-frame, with the central part cut out, for the proper display of the picture." As a verb, "to mount (a print) on a cardboard backing," by 1965. Related: Matted; matting .
 also from 1845 

 matte (n.2) 

 in metallurgy, "impure and unfinished product of the smelting of copper or other ores," 1839, from French matte , from the adjective meaning "dull, dim" (see matte (adj.)).
 also from 1839 

 matte (n.3) 

 also matt , 1917, a motion picture special effect of an image element added to the frame. Originally in reference to objects that covered or blacked out part of an image for purposes such as creating vignettes, spot dissolves and split-screens. In early use sometimes also a mask .

 The original sense indicates that it is derived from matte (n.1) in the meaning "board used to cover or ornament part of a picture." However, OED posits it may be from mat (c. 1870) a technical term in glass-painting for a layer of medium or ground applied upon the glass.

 Applied by 1923 to a special effect where painted background or set elements are added to a filmed image. It differs from painted backdrops or trompe l'oeil sets because the matte painting is added by way of a camera trick where a filmed image is partially masked or matted off. A matte painting is attested by 1934.
 also from 1917 

 Entries linking to matte 

 mast (n.2) 

 "fallen nuts or acorns serving as food for animals." Old English mæst , the collective name for the fruit of the beech, oak, chestnut, and other forest trees, especially serving as food for swine, from Proto-Germanic *masto (source also of Dutch, Old High German, German mast "mast;" Old English verb mæsten "to fatten, feed"), perhaps from PIE *mad-sta- , from root *mad- "moist, wet," also used of various qualities of food (source also of Sanskrit madati "it bubbles, gladdens," medah "fat, marrow;" Latin madere "be sodden, be drunk;" Middle Persian mast "drunk;" Old English mete "food," Old High German muos "meal, mush-like food," Gothic mats "food").

 mat (n.1) 

 "an article plaited or woven of more or less coarse natural materials (rushes, straw, twine, etc.) used as bedding, floor-coverings, etc.," Old English matte , from Late Latin matta "mat made of rushes" (4c.), probably from Punic or Phoenician matta (compare Hebrew mittah "bed, couch").

 Meaning "tangled mass; anything closely set, dense, and thick" is from 1835. Meaning "thin, flat article to be placed under a dish, plate, etc. to protect the table" is by 1800. That of "piece of padded flooring used in gymnastics or wrestling" is attested from 1892; hence figurative phrase go to the mat "do battle" (1910). The Latin word also is the source of German Matte , matze ; Dutch mat , Italian matta . French natte "mat, matting" is from Late Latin secondary form natta (compare napkin ).

 mate 
 matting 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 felt 

 unwoven fabric matted together by rolling or beating while wet, Old English felt "felt," from West Germanic *feltaz "something beaten, compressed wool" (source also of Old Saxon filt, Middle Dutch vilt, Old High German filz, German Filz, Danish filt), from Proto-Germanic *felt- "

 flat 

 c. 1300, "stretched out (on a surface), prostrate, lying the whole length on the ground;" mid-14c., "level, all in one plane; even, smooth;" of a roof, "low-pitched," from Old Norse flatr "flat," from Proto-Germanic *flata- (source also of Old Saxon flat "flat, shallow," Old High

 meadow 

 oblique case of mæd "meadow, pasture," from Proto-Germanic *medwo (source also of Old Frisian mede, Dutch made, German Matte...

 may 

 Dutch mach/moghen/mohte; Dutch mag/mogen/mocht; Old High German mag/magan/mahta; German mag/mögen/mochte; Old Norse ma/mega/matte...

 left 

 c. 1200, "opposite of right," probably from Kentish and northern English forms of Old English *lyft "weak; foolish" (in lyft-adl "lameness, paralysis"). Compare East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof "weak, worthless"). Sense of "opposite of right" is from the left being usually 

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 array 

 mid-14c., "marshal (troops), arrange (an army for battle);" late 14c., "put (things) in order, arrange; get (something) ready, prepare; equip, fit out, put clothing on; adorn, decorate," from Old French areyer, earlier areer "to put in order," from Vulgar Latin *ar-redare "put in

 warlock 

 Old English wærloga "traitor, liar, enemy, devil," from wær "faith, fidelity; a compact, agreement, covenant," from Proto-Germanic *wera- (source also of Old High German wara "truth," Old Norse varar "solemn promise, vow"), from PIE root *were-o- "true, trustworthy." Second eleme

 salad 

 late 14c., salade, "raw herbs cut up and variously dressed," from Old French salade (14c.) and Medieval Latin salata, both from Vulgar Latin *salata, literally "salted," short for herba salata "salted vegetables" (vegetables seasoned with brine, a popular Roman dish), from fem. p

 cat 

 Old English catt (c. 700) "domestic cat," from West Germanic (c. 400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (source also of Old Frisian katte, Old Norse köttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late Latin cattus. The near-universal European word now, it appeared in

 Share matte 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/matte Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/matte">Etymology of matte by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of matte. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/matte Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of matte," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/matte. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of matte." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/matte. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of matte." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/matte (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near matte 
 matroclinous 
 matron 
 matronize 
 matronly 
 matronymic 
 matte 
 matted 
 matter 
 Matterhorn 
 matterless 
 matter-of-fact 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix