URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummery
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T17:44:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mummery - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mummery - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mummery 

 mummery (n.) 

 1520s, "a show or performance of mumming," from Old French mommerie , from momer "to mask oneself" (see mummer ). Transferred sense of "ridiculous ceremony or ritual" is from 1540s.
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to mummery 

 mummer (n.) 

 "one who performs in a mumming, actor in a dumb show," early 15c., probably a fusion of Old French momeur "mummer" (from Old French momer "mask oneself," from momon "mask") and Middle English mommen "to mutter, be silent," which is the source of mum (interjection). "[S]pecifically, in England, one of a company of persons who go from house to house at Christmas performing a kind of play, the subject being generally St. George and the Dragon, with sundry whimsical adjuncts" [Century Dictionary].

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bunk 

 1758, "sleeping-berth in a vessel," later in a railway car, etc., probably a shortened form of bunker (n.) in its sense of "seat." Bunk-bed (n.) attested by 1869...."nonsense," 1900, short for bunkum, phonetic spelling of Buncombe, a county in North Carolina. The usual story (att

 dapper 

 mid-15c., "elegant, neat, trim," from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German dapper "bold, strong, sturdy," later "quick, nimble," from Proto-Germanic *dapraz (source also of Old High German tapfar "heavy," German tapfer "brave"), perhaps with ironical shift of meaning, from PIE root 

 Appalachian 

 in reference to the North American mountain range, c. 1600, Mountaynes Apalatsi; written apalachen by Spanish explorers and originally in reference only to the southern end of the range. Originally the name of the Apalachee, a Muskogean people of northwestern Florida, perhaps fro

 exercise 

 mid-14c., "condition of being in active operation; practice for the sake of training," from Old French exercice (13c.) "exercise, execution of power; physical or spiritual exercise," from Latin exercitium "training, physical exercise" (of soldiers, horsemen, etc.); "play;" in Med

 esoteric 

 "secret; intended to be communicated only to the initiated; profound," 1650s, from Latinized form of Greek esoterikos "belonging to an inner circle" (Lucian), from esotero "more within," comparative adverb of eso "within," from PIE *ens-o-, suffixed form of *ens, extended form of

 moot 

 early 12c., shortened from Old English gemot "meeting, formal assembly" (especially of freemen, to discuss community affairs or mete justice), "society, assembly, council," from Proto-Germanic *ga-motan (compare Old Low Frankish muot "encounter," Middle Dutch moet, Middle High Ge

 fatigue 

 1660s, "that which causes weariness," from French fatigue "weariness," from fatiguer "to tire" (15c.), from Latin fatigare "to weary, to tire out," originally "to cause to break down," from pre-Latin adjective *fati-agos "driving to the point of breakdown," with first half from O

 fluke 

 "flat end of an arm of an anchor," 1560s, perhaps from fluke (n.3) "flatfish," on resemblance of shape, or from Low German flügel "wing." Transferred meaning "whale's tail" (in plural, flukes) is by 1725, so called from resemblance...."lucky stroke, chance hit," 1857, also flook,

 act 

 late 14c., "a thing done," from Latin actus "a doing; a driving, impulse, a setting in motion; a part in a play," and actum "a thing done" (originally a legal term), both from agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," hence "to do, perform," figuratively "incite to action; 

 irony 

 "figure of speech in which the intended meaning is the opposite of the literal meaning" (usually covert sarcasm under a serious or friendly pretense), c. 1500, from Latin ironia, from Greek eironeia "dissimulation, assumed ignorance," from eiron "dissembler," perhaps related to e

 Share mummery 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummery Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummery">Etymology of mummery by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mummery. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummery Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mummery," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummery. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mummery." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummery. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mummery." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mummery (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mummery 
 mumble 
 mumblety-peg 
 mumbo jumbo 
 mummer 
 Mummerset 
 mummery 
 mummification 
 mummify 
 mummy 
 mumps 
 mun 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix