URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/queen
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T14:59:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Queen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Queen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of queen 

 queen (n.) 

 Middle English quene , "pre-eminent female noble; consort of a king," also "female sovereign, woman ruling in her own right," from Old English cwen "queen, female ruler of a state; woman; wife," from Proto-Germanic *kwoeniz (source also of Old Saxon quan "wife," Old Norse kvaen , Gothic quens ), ablaut variant of *kwenon (source of quean ), from PIE root *gwen- "woman."

 The most ancient Germanic sense of the word seems to have been "wife," which had specialized by Old English times to "wife of a king." In Old Norse the cognate word was still mostly "a wife" generally, as in kvan-fang "marriage, taking of a wife," kvanlauss "unmarried, widowed," kvan-riki "the domineering of a wife."

 In reference to anything personified as chief or greatest, and considered as possessing female attributes, from late Old English. Figuratively, of a woman who is chief or pre-eminent among others or in some sphere by 1590s. Queen-mother "widow of a king who is also the mother of a reigning sovereign" is by 1570s (colloquial queen mum is by 1960).

 English is one of the few Indo-European languages to have a word for "queen" that is not a feminine derivative of a word for "king." The others are Scandinavian: Old Norse drottning , Danish dronning , Swedish drottning "queen," in Old Norse also "mistress," but these also are held to be ultimately from male words, such as Old Norse drottinn "master."

 The chess piece (with the freest movement and thus the most power in attack) was so called from c. 1400. As a verb in chess, in reference to a pawn that has reached the opponent's side of the board and become a queen (usually), from 1789. The playing card was so called from 1570s.

 Of bees from c. 1600 (until late 17c., they generally were thought to be kings; as in "Henry V," I.ii, but the Anglo-Saxons knew better: their word was beomodor ); queen bee "fully developed female bee," the mother of the hive, is used in a figurative sense by 1807.

 Meaning "male homosexual" (especially a feminine and ostentatious one) is certainly recorded by 1924; probably as an alteration or misunderstanding of quean , which is earlier in this sense but had become obscure. Cincinnati, Ohio, has been the Queen City (of the West) since 1835. In commercial reference to an extra-large bed size (but generally smaller than king ), by 1954.

 Entries linking to queen 

 quean (n.) 

 Middle English quene "a woman; a low-born woman," from Old English cwene "woman," also "female serf, hussy, prostitute" (as in portcwene "public woman"), from Proto-Germanic *kwenon (source also of Old Saxon quan , Old High German quena , Old Norse kona , Gothic qino "wife, woman," Middle Dutch quene "vain or worthless woman"), from PIE root *gwen- "woman." Compare queen (n.). The -ea- spelling is attested from early 15c.

 Woman considered without regard to qualities or position (perhaps by contrast to the senses in queen ), hence often a slighting or abusive term for a woman; in Middle English it could mean "a harlot; an old woman or crone," and it was in popular use 16c.-17c. in the sense of "hussy." But in Scottish often with a sense of "young, robust woman" (late 15c.).

 The sense of "effeminate homosexual" is recorded by 1935, according to Partridge this was especially in Australian slang.

 bee (n.) 

 stinging insect of the genus Apis , living in societies under a queen and producing wax and honey, Old English beo "bee," from Proto-Germanic *bion (source also of Old Norse by , Old High German bia , Middle Dutch bie ), from PIE root *bhei- "bee."

 Used metaphorically for "busy worker" since 1530s. The sense of "meeting of neighbors to unite their labor for the benefit of one of their number" is attested by 1769, American English, probably from comparison to the combined labor and social activity of the insect: Raising-bee (1814) for building construction; quilting bee (by 1824, see quilt (v.)); logging-bee for a log-rolling; paring-bee for preparing harvested apples; husking bee (by 1830); also hanging bee "a lynching" (1884).

 It was extended to other collective situations, as in spelling bee , "contest between two or more for superiority in spelling," which is attested by 1865; spelling school in this sense is attested by 1828; spelling contest is implied by 1825; spelling match attested by 1809. More bees here . 

 To have a bee in (one's) bonnet (1825), of one who is harebrained or has an intense new notion or fancy, is said in Jamieson to be Scottish, perhaps from earlier expressions such as head full of bees (1510s), denoting mad mental activity.

 queenhood 
 queenly 
 Queensland 
 wife 
 *gwen- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 wife 

 Middle English wif, wyf, from Old English wif (neuter) "woman, female, lady," also, but not especially, "wife," from Proto-Germanic *wīfa- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian wif, Old Norse vif, Danish and Swedish viv, Middle Dutch, Dutch wijf, Old High German wib, German Weib

 king 

 a late Old English contraction of cyning "king, ruler" (also used as a title), from Proto-Germanic *kuningaz (source also of Dutch koning, Old Norse konungr, Danish konge, Old Saxon and Old High German kuning, Middle High German künic, German König). This is of uncertain origin. 

 tabby 

 1630s, "silken stuff; striped silk taffeta" (tabbies was a general name for watered silk), from French tabis "a rich, watered silk" (originally striped), earlier atabis (14c.), via Mediterranean languages from Arabic 'attabi, from 'Attabiyah, a neighborhood of Baghdad where such 

 Regina 

 fem. proper name, from Latin, literally "queen;" related to rex (genitive regis) "king" (from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight...Cognate with Sanskrit rajni "queen," Welsh rhyain "maiden, virgin."...The capital city of Saskatchewan was named 1882 by the then-governor general of Canada, Marquess of Lorne, in honor of Queen...

 consort 

 Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, husband of Queen Victoria; the initial proposal in Parliament in 1840 was to call...him king-consort); queen consort is attested from 1667....The husband of a reigning queen has no powers, he is not king unless an act of parliament makes him so....Queen Victoria's husband was simply Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha until 1857 when the queen conferred on him the title...

 rennet 

 The other possibility is that the Old French name of the apple is literally "little queen," a diminutive of reine "queen,...

 May Day 

 May Queen "girl or young woman crowned with flowers and honored as queen at the games held on May Day," seems to be a Victorian...re-invented tradition; the phrase Queen of Maij is attested from c. 1500....

 competition 

 c. 1600, "action of seeking or endeavoring to gain what another is endeavoring to gain at the same time," from Late Latin competitionem (nominative competitio) "rivalry," in classical Latin "agreement," noun of action from past participle stem of competere (see compete). Meaning 

 nance 

 "effeminate man, male homosexual who takes the passive role," 1924, from female name Nancy (q.v.), which was in use as an adjective meaning "effeminate" (applied to men) by 1904 in prison slang, a shortening of earlier Miss Nancy, a derogatory term for a finicky, effeminate man w

 deck 

 mid-15c., dekke, "covering extending from side to side over part of a ship," from a nautical use of Middle Dutch dec, decke "roof, covering," from Proto-Germanic *thakam (source also of thatch (n.)), from PIE root *(s)teg- "to cover." Sense extended early in English from "coverin

 Share queen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/queen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/queen">Etymology of queen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of queen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/queen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of queen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/queen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of queen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/queen. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of queen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/queen (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near queen 
 quay 
 quean 
 queasy 
 Quebec 
 Quechua 
 queen 
 Queen Anne 
 queenhood 
 queenly 
 Queens 
 Queensberry Rules 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix