URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/enough
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:28:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Enough - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Enough - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of enough 

 enough (adj.) 

 c. 1300, from Old English genog "sufficient in quantity or number," from Proto-Germanic compound *ganog "sufficient" (source also of Old Saxon ginog , Old Frisian enoch , Dutch genoeg , Old High German ginuog , German genug , Old Norse gnogr , Gothic ganohs ).

 First element is Old English ge- "with, together" (also a participial, collective, intensive, or perfective prefix), making this word the most prominent surviving example of the Old English prefix, the equivalent of Latin com- and Modern German ge- (from PIE *kom- "beside, near, by, with;" see com- ). The second element is from PIE *nok- , from root *nek- (2) "to reach, attain" (source also of Sanskrit asnoti "to reach," Hittite ninikzi "lifts, raises," Lithuanian nešti "to bear, carry," Latin nancisci "to obtain").

 As an adverb, "sufficiently for the purpose," in Old English; meaning "moderately, fairly, tolerably" ( good enough ) was in Middle English. Understated sense, as in have had enough "have had too much" was in Old English (which relied heavily on double negatives and understatement). As a noun in Old English, "a quantity or number sufficient for the purpose." As an interjection, "that is enough," from c. 1600. Colloquial 'nough said , implying the end of discussion, is attested from 1839, American English, representing a casual or colloquial pronunciation.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to enough 

 adequate (adj.) 

 1610s, "equal to what is needed or desired, sufficient," from Latin adaequatus "equalized," past participle of adaequare "to make equal to, to level with," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + aequare "make level," from aequus "equal, even" (see equal (adj.)).

 The sense is of being "equal to what is required." It shares duty with enough , depending on the subject. Somewhat disparaging use, "mediocre, just good enough," is by 1900. Related: Adequateness .

 dwarf (n.) 

 Old English dweorh , dweorg (West Saxon), duerg (Mercian), "very short human being, person much below ordinary stature, whether of proportionate parts or not," also "supernatural being of subhuman size," from Proto-Germanic *dweraz (source also of Old Frisian dwerch , Old Saxon dwerg , Old High German twerg , German Zwerg , Old Norse dvergr ), perhaps from PIE *dhwergwhos "something tiny," but with no established cognates outside Germanic.

 Also used by c. 1200 of an animal or plant much below the ordinary size of its species." The use of dwarf in the Germanic mythological sense, "a diminished and generally deformed being, dwelling in rocks and hills and skilled in working metals," seems to have faded after Middle English and been revived after c. 1770 from German.

 Whilst in this and other ways the dwarfs do at times have dealings with mankind, yet on the whole they seem to shrink from man; they give the impression of a downtrodden afflicted race, which is on the point of abandoning its ancient home to new and more powerful invaders. There is stamped on their character something 
 shy and something 
 heathenish , which estranges them from intercourse with christians. They chafe at human faithlessness, which no doubt would primarily mean the apostacy from heathenism. In the poems of the Mid. Ages, 
 Laurin is expressly set before us as a 
 heathen . It goes sorely against the dwarfs to see churches built, 
 bell-ringing ... disturbs their ancient privacy; they also hate the clearing of forests, agriculture, new fangled pounding-machinery for ore. ["Teutonic Mythology," Jakob Grimm, transl. Stallybrass, 1883]

 The shift of the Old English guttural at the end of the word to modern -f is typical (compare enough , draft ) and begins to appear early 14c. In Middle English it also was dwerþ , dwerke . Old English plural dweorgas became Middle English dwarrows , later leveled down to dwarfs . The use of dwarves for the legendary race was popularized by J.R.R. Tolkien. As an adjective, from 1590s.

 The use of giant and dwarf in reference to stars of the highest and lowest luminosity is attested by 1914, said to have been suggested by Danish astronomer Ejnar Hertzsprung, (1873-1967); hence red dwarf (attested by 1922), white dwarf , black dwarf "dead and lightless star" (1966).

 enow 
 nuff 
 sure-enough 
 com- 
 e- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 plenty 

 mid-13c., "abundance; as much as one could desire; an ample supply," from Old French plentee, earlier plentet "abundance, profusion" (12c., Modern French dialectal plenté), from Latin plenitatem (nominative plenitas) "fullness," from plenus "full, filled, greatly crowded; stout, 

 sufficiency 

 late 15c., "sufficient means or wealth," from Late Latin sufficientia, from Latin sufficiens "adequate" (see sufficient) + -cy. By 1530s as "a sufficient number or quantity." The general sense of "state or character of being adequate for the purpose" is by 1560s; that of "a suffi

 autarky 

 "self-sufficiency," from Greek autarkeia "sufficiency in oneself, independence," from autarkēs "self-sufficient, having enough...of others" (also used of countries), from autos "self" (see auto-) + arkein "to ward off, keep off," also "to be strong enough...

 satisfy 

 reparation" (14c., Modern French satisfaire), from Latin satisfacere "discharge fully, comply with, make amends," literally "do enough...This is from satis "enough" (from PIE root *sa- "to satisfy") + facere "to make, do, perform" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set... The meaning "cause to have enough, supply the needs of" is by c. 1500....

 living 

 To make a living or a livelihood is to earn enough to keep alive on with economy, not barely enough to maintain life, nor...

 assets 

 , asetz (singular), from Old French assez "sufficiency, satisfaction; compensation" (11c.), noun use of adverb meaning "enough...sufficiently; very much, a great deal," from Vulgar Latin *ad satis "to sufficiency," from Latin ad "to" (see ad-) + satis "enough...

 precious 

 Precious metals (1776) "gold and silver (and sometimes platinum)" are those that are rare and costly enough to be used as...a standard of value and abundant enough to be used for coinage....

 decent 

 1530s, "proper to one's station or rank," also "tasteful, proper with regard to modesty or social standards," from French décent, or directly from Latin decentem (nominative decens) "becoming, seemly, fitting, proper," present participle of decere "to be fitting or suitable" (fro

 fill 

 Old English fyllan "to fill, make full, fill up, replenish, satisfy; complete, fulfill," from Proto-Germanic *fulljanan "to fill" (source also of Old Saxon fulljan, Old Norse fylla, Old Frisian fella, Dutch vullen, German füllen, Gothic fulljan "to fill, make full"), a derivative

 good 

 Old English gōd (with a long "o") "excellent, fine; valuable; desirable, favorable, beneficial; full, entire, complete;" of abstractions, actions, etc., "beneficial, effective; righteous, pious;" of persons or souls, "righteous, pious, virtuous;" probably originally "having the r

 Share enough 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/enough Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/enough">Etymology of enough by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of enough. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/enough Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of enough," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/enough. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of enough." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/enough. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of enough." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/enough (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near enough 
 enoptomancy 
 enormious 
 enormity 
 enormous 
 Enos 
 enough 
 enow 
 enquire 
 enquiry 
 enrage 
 enrapt 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix