URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/language
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:17:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Language - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Language - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of language 

 language (n.) 

 late 13c., langage "words, what is said, conversation, talk," from Old French langage "speech, words, oratory; a tribe, people, nation" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *linguaticum , from Latin lingua "tongue," also "speech, language," the regular word for it (reconstructed to be from PIE root *dnghu- "tongue"). The -u- is an Anglo-French insertion (see gu- ); it was not originally pronounced.

 The meaning "manner of expression" ( vulgar language , etc.) is from c. 1300. The meaning "a language" (as English, French, Arabic, etc.) is from c. 1300; Century Dictionary (1897) defines this as: "The whole body of uttered signs employed and understood by a given community as expressions of its thoughts; the aggregate of words, and of methods of their combination into sentences, used in a community for communication and record and for carrying on the processes of thought."

 Boutkan (2005) writes: "In general, language unity exists as long as the language is capable of carrying out common innovations, but this does not preclude profound differences among dialects."

 In Middle English the word also was used of dialects:

 Mercii, þat beeþ men of myddel Engelond[,] vnderstondeþ bettre þe side langages, norþerne and souþerne, þan norþerne and souþerne vnderstondeþ eiþer oþer. [John of Trevisa, translation (late 14c.) of Bartholomew Glanville's  "De proprietatibus rerum" ]

 In oþir inglis was it drawin, And turnid ic haue it til ur awin Language of the norþin lede, Þat can na noþir inglis rede. ["Cursor Mundi," early 14c.]

   Language barrier is attested by 1874.

 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to language 

 interlanguage (n.) 

 "artificial or auxilliary language," 1927, from inter- + language .

 paralanguage (n.) 

 "non-phonemic vocal factors in speech" (tone of voice, tempo, etc.), 1958, from para- (1) + language . Related: Paralinguistic .

 proto-language 
 *dnghu- 
 gu- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 speech 

 Middle English speche, from Old English spæc "act of speaking; power of uttering articulate sounds; manner of speaking; statement, discourse, narrative, formal utterance; language." It is a variant of Old English spræc, which is from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, *spek- (source also of

 terminology 

 1770, from German Terminologie, a hybrid coined by Christian Gottfried Schütz (1747-1832), professor of poetry and rhetoric at Jena, from Medieval Latin terminus "word, expression" (see terminus) + Greek -logia "a dealing with, a speaking of" (see -logy). Related: Terminological.

 nomenclature 

 c. 1600, "a name" (a sense now obsolete), from French nomenclature (16c.), from Latin nomenclatura "calling of names," from nomenclator "namer," from nomen "name" (from PIE root *no-men- "name") + calator "caller, crier," from calare "call out" (from PIE root *kele- (2) "to shout

 Urdu 

 official language of Pakistan, 1796, formerly also known as Hindustani, from Urdu urdu "camp," from Turkish ordu (source...of horde); short for zaban-i-urdu "language of the camp."...Compare Dzongkha, a variant of Tibetan and the official language of Bhutan, literally "the language of the fortress."...

 Latin 

 "the language of the (ancient) Romans," Old English latin "Latin, the language of the Romans; any foreign language," from...Latin latinium "the Latin language," noun use of the adjective latinius (see Latin (adj.))....For "the Latin language" Old English also had lædenspræc....laymen; hence latino was used for any dialect, even Arabic and the language of birds ...."...

 prescriptivism 

 by 1963 in moral philosophy, "the view that moral judgments are prescriptions;" by 1977 in reference to language, "the belief...that the grammar of a language should conform to its rules," hence often in a hostile sense, "belief that one variety of...a language is superior to others and should be promoted, attempt to establish or maintain rules defining preferred or correct...

 dialect 

 1570s, "language, speech, mode of speech," especially "form of speech of a region or group, idiom of a locality or class"...as distinguished from the general accepted literary language, also "one of a number of related modes of speech regarded...as descended from a common origin," from French dialecte, from Latin dialectus "local language, way of speaking, conversation...," from Greek dialektos "talk, conversation, speech;" also "the language of a country, dialect," from dialegesthai "converse...

 discussion 

 mid-14c., discussioun, "examination, investigation, judicial trial," from Old French discussion "discussion, examination, investigation, legal trial" and directly from Medieval Latin discussionem (nominative discussio) "examination, discussion," in classical Latin, "a shaking," n

 module 

 1580s, "allotted measure," a sense now obsolete, from French module (1540s) or directly from Latin modulus "small measure," diminutive of modus "measure, manner" (from PIE root *med- "take appropriate measures"). Sense of "a standard measure to regulate proportions" is from 1620s

 expression 

 early 15c., expressioun, "action of pressing out;" later "action of manifesting a feeling;" "a putting into words" (mid-15c.); from Late Latin expressionem (nominative expressio) "expression, vividness," in classical Latin "a pressing out, a projection," noun of action from past-

 Share language 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/language Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/language">Etymology of language by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of language. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/language Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of language," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/language. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of language." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/language. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of language." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/language (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near language 
 land-wash 
 landwehr 
 lane 
 lang syne 
 Langobard 
 language 
 languaged 
 Languedoc 
 languet 
 languid 
 languish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix