URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dark
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:08:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dark - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dark - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dark 

 dark (adj.) 

 Middle English derk , later dark , from Old English deorc "without light, lacking light or brightness (especially at night), obscure, gloomy;" figuratively "sad, cheerless; sinister, wicked," from Proto-Germanic *derkaz (source also of Old High German tarchanjan "to hide, conceal"), which is of uncertain etymology. For vowel change, see marsh .

 Application to colors, "not radiating or reflecting much light," is from late 14c. Of complexion, "not fair," from early 14c. Figurative sense of "obscure, not easily understood" is from early 13c.; that of "sullen, sad" is from 1590s. Meaning "concealed, secret" is from late 14c. Dark Continent "Africa" (1828) combines several figurative senses (earliest references are in missionary publications). Theater slang for "closed" is from 1916.

 Dark Ages "benighted time in history, period of ignorance" is attested by 1739; the specific focus on the centuries of the early Middle Ages in Europe, from the fall of Rome to the revival of secular literature, is from 1830s, from dark in a sense of "characterized by ignorance, backward in learning, void of intellectual light" (late 14c.). 

 Dark horse "competitor for honors or office about whom nothing certain is known, or whose identity is at first concealed," especially, in U.S., politics, "one who is unexpectedly brought forward as a candidate in a convention," 1842, is an image from horse racing, of horses whose performances or capabilities are not generally known, in which dark is used in its figurative sense of "unknown."

 Moonraker is called a "dark horse"; that is neither his sire nor dam is known. ["Pierce Egan's Book of Sports," London, 1832] 

 dark (n.) 

 early 13c., derk , "absence of light, night-time," from dark (adj.). Figurative in the dark "in a state of ignorance" is from 1670s; earlier it meant "in secrecy, in concealment" (late 14c.).

 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to dark 

 marsh (n.) 

 "tract of water-soaked or partially flooded land; wet, swampy ground; piece of low ground, usually more or less wet but often nearly dry at certain seasons," Middle English mersh , from Old English mersc , merisc "marsh, swamp," from Proto-Germanic *marisko (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon marsk "marsh," Middle Dutch mersch , Dutch mars , German Marsch , Danish marsk ), probably from Proto-Germanic *mari- "sea" (from PIE root *mori- "body of water").

 The vowel shift from -e- to -a- began in 15c. and is usual for -er- followed by a consonant: Compare darling (Middle English dereling , Old English deorling ), far (Middle English fer , Old English feorr ), mar (Middle English merren ), hart (Middle English hert , Old English heorot ). Marsh gas "methane generated by decaying matter in marshes" is attested by 1819.

 darken (v.) 

 c. 1300, derken , "to make dark or darker, deprive of light;" early 14c. (intransitive), "to grow or become dark," from dark (adj.) + -en (1). The more usual verb in Middle English in both senses was simply dark , as it is in Chaucer and Shakespeare, and darken did not predominate until 17c. The Anglo-Saxons also had a verb sweorcan meaning "to grow dark."

 Meanings "grow less white or clear, turn a darker color" and "render less white or clear" are from late 14c. Figurative sense of "render gloomy, sadden" is from 1742. To darken (one's) door (usually with a negative) "enter one's house as a visitor," usually with an implication of unwelcomeness, is attested from 1729.

 darkling 
 darkly 
 darkness 
 dark-room 
 darksome 
 darky 
 dern 
 far 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 darkling 

 "in the dark," mid-15c., from dark (n.) + now-obsolete adverbial ending -ling (compare headlong). The verb darkle is a back-formation from 1810 (Moore, who rhymed it with sparkle), assuming the -ing as a present-participle adjective ending. But having nothing to do with the part

 darky 

 also darkey, darkie, colloquial for "a black person, a Negro" (now offensive), 1775, from dark (adj.) + -y (3). Related: Darkies. Jake thought how strange it was to hear the Englishman say “darky” without being offended. Back home he would have been spoiling for a fight. There h

 dern 

 "secret, hidden," from Old English derne (West Saxon dierne) "concealed, secret, dark," from West Germanic *darnjaz (source also of Old Saxon derni, Old Frisian dern "concealed, dark," Old High German tarni "secret, concealed, veiled"), related to dark (adj.). Archaic or poetic o

 temerity 

 "by chance, at random; indiscreetly, rashly, recklessly;" probably, etymologically, "blindly," from PIE root *temsro- "dark..." (adj.), source also of Sanskrit tamisra- "dark night," tamsrah "dark;" Avestan temah "darkness;" Middle Persian tar "darkness...," tarig "dark;" Lithuanian tamsa "darkness," tamsus "dark;" Old Church Slavonic tima "darkness;" Old High German dinstar..."dark," demar "twilight;" Old Irish temel "darkness."...

 dun 

 Old English dunn "dingy brown; dark-colored," perhaps from Celtic (compare Old Irish donn "dark;" Gaelic donn "dull; dark...brown; dark;" Welsh dwnn "brownish"), from PIE *donnos, *dusnos "dark."...

 brunette 

 of a woman, "dark in complexion, having a brownish tone to the skin and hair," 1660s, from French brunette, fem. of brunet..., from Old French brunet "brownish, brown-haired, dark-complexioned," fem. diminutive of brun "brown" (12c.), of West Germanic...As a noun, "woman with dark hair and eyes and of a dark complexion," from 1710....Burnete also was used of a wool-dyed cloth of superior quality, originally dark brown....

 dusk 

 Middle English also had it as a verb, dusken "to become dark."...Perhaps it is from a Northumbrian variant of Old English dox "dark-haired, dark from the absence of light," with transposition...Old English dox is from PIE *dus-ko- "dark-colored" (source also of Swedish duska "be misty," Latin fuscus "dark," Sanskrit...

 obscure 

 c. 1400, "dark," figuratively "morally unenlightened; gloomy," from Old French obscur, oscur "dark, clouded, gloomy; dim, not clear" (12c.) and directly from Latin obscurus "dark, dusky, shady," figuratively "unknown; unintelligible; hard to discern; from insignificant ancestors,

 evening 

 from Old English æfnung "the coming of evening, sunset, time around sunset," verbal noun from æfnian "become evening, grow toward evening," from æfen "evening" (see eve). As a synonym of even (n.) in the sense "time from sunset to bedtime," it dates from mid-15c. and now entirely

 night 

 late Old English niht (West Saxon neaht, Anglian næht, neht) "the dark part of a day; the night as a unit of time; darkness," also "absence of spiritual illumination, moral darkness, ignorance," from Proto-Germanic *nahts (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German naht, Old Fr

 Share dark 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dark Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dark">Etymology of dark by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dark. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dark Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dark," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dark. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dark." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dark. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dark." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dark (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dark 
 daredevil 
 Darfur 
 daring 
 Darius 
 Darjeeling 
 dark 
 darken 
 darkener 
 darkling 
 darkly 
 darkness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix