URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/whore
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:36:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Whore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Whore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of whore 

 whore (n.) 

 "woman who prostitutes her body for hire," also "adulteress" and a general insult, 1530s, a spelling alteration (see wh- ) of Middle English hore , from Old English hore "prostitute, harlot." The wh- form became current in 16c.

 This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *hōran-, fem. *hōrā- (source also of Old Frisian hor "fornication," Old Norse hora "adulteress," Danish hore , Swedish hora , Dutch hoer , Old High German huora "prostitute;" in Gothic only in the masc. hors "adulterer, fornicator," also as a verb, horinon "commit adultery"). It is considered to be, probably, etymologically, "one who desires," from PIE root *ka- "to like, desire," which in other languages has produced words for "lover; friend."

 Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor , which is the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym hore "physical filth, slime," also "moral corruption, sin," from Old English horh .

 A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at least c. 1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Revelation xvii.1, 5, etc. In Middle English with occasional plural forms horen , heoranna .

 The word, with its derivatives, is now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary, 1891]

 According to Buck (Dictionary of Selected Synonyms in the Principal Indo-European Languages), some equivalent words also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka , diminutive of nevesta "bride;" Dutch deern , German dirne originally "girl, lass, wench;" also perhaps Old French pute , perhaps literally "girl," fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus "stinking;" see poontang ). Welsh putain "whore" is from French, probably via Middle English.

 Among other languages, Greek porne "prostitute" is related to pernemi "sell," with an original notion probably of a female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally "one who earns wages" (source of Irish mertrech , Old English miltestre "whore, prostitute").

 The vulgar Roman word was scortum , literally "skin, hide." Another term was lupa , literally "she-wolf" (preserved in Spanish loba , Italian lupa , French louve ; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta , literally "placed in front," thus "publicly exposed," from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)).

 Another Old Norse term was skækja , which yielded Danish skøge , Swedish sköka ; probably from Middle Low German schoke , which is perhaps from schode "foreskin of a horse's penis," perhaps with the sense of "skin" (compare Latin scortum ) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of "vagina."

 Spanish ramera , Portuguese rameira are from fem. form of ramero "young bird of prey," literally "little branch," from ramo "branch." Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast "bitch," of uncertain origin. Compare also strumpet , harlot .

 Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati "fornicate," a compound from ljuby "love" + dejati "put, perform." Russian bljad "whore" derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica , from bladu "fornication." Polish nierządnica is literally "disorderly woman." Sanskrit vecya is a derivation of veca- "house, dwelling," especially "house of ill-repute, brothel." Another term, pumccali , means literally "one who runs after men." Avestan jahika is literally "woman," but only of evil creatures; another term is kunairi , from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi "woman."
 also from 1530s 

 whore (v.) 

 "to have to do with whores," in general, "practice lewdness," 1580s, from whore (n.). An earlier horen (v.) was "be unfaithful to (a husband)," c. 1400. Related: Whored ; whoring .
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to whore 

 harlot (n.) 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), "vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue," from Old French herlot , arlot "vagabond, tramp, vagrant; rascal, scoundrel," with cognates in Old Provençal ( arlot ), Old Spanish ( arlote ), and Italian ( arlotto ), but of unknown origin. Usually male in Middle English and Old French. Used in positive as well as pejorative senses by Chaucer; applied in Middle English to jesters, buffoons, jugglers, later to actors. Secondary sense of "prostitute, unchaste woman" probably had developed by 14c., certainly by early 15c., but this was reinforced by its use euphemistically for "strumpet, whore" in 16c. English translations of the Bible. The word may be Germanic, with an original sense of "camp follower," if the first element is hari "army," as some suspect.

 poontang (n.) 

 "female genitalia," also "sex with a woman; woman regarded as a sex object," c. 1910, a word of uncertain origin. Shortened form poon is recorded by 1969.

 Probably via New Orleans Creole, from French putain "prostitute," from Old French pute "whore" (cognate with Spanish and Provençal puta ), probably from Vulgar Latin *puttus "girl" (source of Old Italian putta "girl"), from Latin putus (originally "pure, bright, splendid"). But also possibly from or influenced by Old French put , from Latin putidus "stinking" on notion of the "foulness" of harlotry [Buck], or for more literal reasons (among the 16c.-17c. slang terms for "whore" in English were polecat , which might also be a pun, and fling-stink ).

 Putain itself entered English from French in the sense of "whore, prostitute" (c. 1300), mostly in the phrase fitz a putain "whoreson, son of a whore." Putage in old legal language meant "prostitution" (late 15c.).

 prostitute 
 strumpet 
 wolf 
 ho 
 whoredom 
 whore-house 
 whoremaster 
 whore-monger 
 whoreson 
 *ka- 
 wh- 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share whore 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/whore Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/whore">Etymology of whore by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of whore. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/whore Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of whore," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/whore. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of whore." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/whore. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of whore." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/whore (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near whore 
 whoops 
 whoosh 
 whoot 
 whop 
 whopper 
 whore 
 whoredom 
 whore-house 
 whoremaster 
 whore-monger 
 whoreson 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix