URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/albacore
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:39:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Albacore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Albacore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of albacore 

 albacore (n.) 

 name given to a large type of tuna caught in the Tropics, 1570s, from Portuguese albacora , from Arabic al bakara "milk cow;" the fish so called for its size.
 also from 1570s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tunny 

 large sea-fish of the mackerel order, 1520s, probably from French thon (14c.), from Old Provençal ton and directly from Latin thunnus "a tuna, tunny," from Greek thynnos "a tuna, tunny," possibly with a literal sense of "darter," from thynein "dart along."  In ancient Greece

 aunt 

 "sister of one's father or mother," c. 1300, from Anglo-French aunte, Old French ante (Modern French tante, from a 13c. variant), from Latin amita "paternal aunt" diminutive of *amma a baby-talk word for "mother" (source also of Greek amma "mother," Old Norse amma "grandmother," 

 providence 

 late 14c., "foresight, prudent anticipation, timely care or preparation," from Old French providence "divine providence, foresight" (12c.) and directly from Latin providentia "foresight, precaution, foreknowledge," abstract noun from present-participle stem of providere "look ahe

 facility 

 early 15c., "gentleness, lightness," from Old French facilité "easiness, ease," from Latin facilitatem (nominative facilitas) "easiness, ease, fluency, willingness," from facilis "easy to do," from facere "to do" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, put"). First in a medical book: If i

 month 

 "one-twelfth part of a year; one of the twelve parts into which the calendar year is arbitrarily divided," Old English monað, from Proto-Germanic *menoth- (source also of Old Saxon manoth, Old Frisian monath, Middle Dutch manet, Dutch maand, Old High German manod, German Monat, O

 militia 

 1580s, "system of military discipline," from Latin militia "military service, warfare," from miles "soldier" (see military (adj.)). The sense of "citizen army" (as distinct from professional soldiers) is first recorded 1690s, perhaps from a sense in French cognate milice. Histori

 decimate 

 c. 1600, "to select by lot and put to death every tenth man," from Latin decimatus, past participle of decimare "the removal or destruction of one-tenth," from decem "ten" (from PIE root *dekm- "ten"). The killing of one in ten, chosen by lots, from a rebellious city or a mutinou

 article 

 c. 1200, "separate parts of anything written" (such as the statements in the Apostles' Creed, the clauses of a statute or contract), from Old French article (13c.), from Latin articulus "a part, a member," also "a knuckle; the article in grammar," diminutive of artus "a joint" (f

 amethyst 

 violet-colored quartz, late 13c., amatist, from Old French ametiste (12c., Modern French améthyste) and directly from Medieval Latin amatistus, from Latin amethystus, from Greek amethystos "amethyst," noun use of an adjective meaning "not intoxicating; not drunken," from a- "not"

 crusade 

 "military expedition under the banner of the cross," 1706, a respelling or replacement of croisade (1570s), from French croisade (16c.), Spanish cruzada, both from Medieval Latin cruciata, past participle of cruciare "to mark with a cross," from Latin crux (genitive crucis) "cros

 Share albacore 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/albacore Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/albacore">Etymology of albacore by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of albacore. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/albacore Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of albacore," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/albacore. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of albacore." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/albacore. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of albacore." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/albacore (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near albacore 
 alas 
 Alaska 
 alastor 
 alate 
 alb 
 albacore 
 Albania 
 albatross 
 albedo 
 albeit 
 Albert 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix