URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lobster
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T23:14:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lobster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lobster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lobster 

 lobster (n.) 

 large, long-tailed, stalk-eyed, 10-legged marine shellfish ( Homarus vulgaris ), early Middle English lopster , lopister , from Old English loppestre "lobster," also "locust," a corruption of Latin locusta , lucusta "marine shellfish, lobster;" also "locust, grasshopper," which is of unknown origin.

 De Vaan writes that "The only word similar in form and meaning is lacerta 'lizard; mackerel', but there is no common preform in sight. ... [T]hey could be cognate words in the language from which Latin borrowed these forms."

 The change of Latin -c- to English -p- (and, from late 14c., to -b- ) is unexplained; perhaps it is by influence of Old English loppe , lobbe "spider." The ending seems to have been altered by the old fem. agent noun suffix (preserved in Baxter , Webster , etc.; see -ster ), which approximated the sound of Latin -sta .

 OED (1989) says the Latin word originally meant "lobster or some similar crustacean, the application to the locust being suggested by the resemblance in shape." Trilobite fossils in Worcestershire limestone quarries were known colloquially as locusts , which seems to have been the generic word for "unidentified arthropod" (as apple was for "foreign fruit").

 Locusta in the sense "lobster" also appears in Old Cornish legast and French langouste (12c.), now "crawfish, crayfish," but in Old French both "lobster" and "locust" (a 13c. psalter has God giving over the crops of Egypt to the langoustes ).

 As slang for "a British soldier" since 1640s, originally in reference to the jointed armor of the Roundhead cuirassiers, later (1660) to the red coat, the color of a boiled lobster.

 Sir William Waller having received from London [in June 1643] a fresh regiment of five hundred horse, under the command of sir Arthur Haslerigge, which were so prodigiously armed that they were called by the other side the regiment of lobsters, because of their bright iron shells with which they were covered, being perfect curasseers. [Lord Clarendon, "History of the Rebellion," 1647]

 Entries linking to lobster 

 lobsterman (n.) 

 1823, American English, from lobster (n.) + man (n.).

 locust (n.1) 

 "grasshopper, large orthopterous insect noted for mass migrations accompanied by destructive ravages of vegetation," early 14c., borrowed earlier in Old French form languste (c. 1200), from Latin locusta "locust; lobster" (see lobster ).

 In the Hebrew Bible there are nine different names for the insect or for particular species or varieties; in the English Bible they are rendered sometimes 'locust,' sometimes 'beetle,' 'grasshopper,' 'caterpillar,' 'palmerworm,' etc. The precise application of several names is unknown. [OED, 1989]

 -ster 

 Old English -istre , from Proto-Germanic *-istrijon , feminine agent suffix used as the equivalent of masculine -ere (see -er (1)). Also used in Middle English to form nouns of action (meaning "a person who ...") without regard for gender.

 The genderless agent noun use apparently was a broader application of the original feminine suffix, beginning in the north of England, but linguists disagree over whether this indicates female domination of weaving and baking trades, as represented in surnames such as Webster , Baxter , Brewster , etc. (though modern spinster probably carries an originally female ending). For Dempster , see deem (v.).

 Also compare whitester "one who bleaches cloth;" kempster (c. 1400; Halliwell has it as kembster ) "woman who cleans wool." Chaucer ("Merchant's Tale") has chidester "an angry woman" (the 17c. had scoldster ). "Piers Plowman" (late 14c.) has waferster "woman who bakes or sells wafers." A c. 1400 psalter has yongling tabourester "girl drummer" (for Latin puellarum tympanistriarum ).

 Also compare Middle English shepster (late 14c.) "dressmaker, female cutter-out," literally "shapester," sleestere (mid-15c.) "murderess, female killer" ("slay-ster"). Sewster "seamstress" (Middle English seuestre , late 13c. as a surname, also used of men) is still in Jonson but was obsolete or provincial after 17c.

 In Modern English, the suffix has been productive in forming derivative nouns such as gamester (compare gamer ), roadster , punster , rodster "angler," throwster "gambler," etc. But still with consciousness of sex; Thackeray (1850) has jocular spokester "female speaker or spokesman." Tonguester "talkative, loquacious person" seems to be a nonce-word (1871). "American Speech" in 1935 reported that "Singers are now tunesters to advertising writers for vaudeville and other entertainments." A 1798 dictionary of thieves' jargon has yapster "a dog."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 crayfish 

 "small, freshwater lobster," early 14c., crevis, from Old French crevice, escrevice "crayfish" (13c., Modern French écrevisse...

 caravel 

 small vessel," from Late Latin carabus "small wicker boat covered with leather," from Greek karabos, literally "beetle, lobster...

 chicken 

 Chicken lobster "small lobster," is by 1947, American English, apparently from chicken in its sense of "young."...

 rock 

 Also used attributively in names of animals that frequent rocky habitats, as in rockfish, rock badger, rock lobster (the...

 carol 

 c. 1300, "joyful song," also a kind of dance in a ring, from Old French carole "kind of dance in a ring, round dance accompanied by singers," a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Medieval Latin choraula "a dance to the flute," from Latin choraules "flute-player," from Greek k

 coral 

 general name for the hard, calcareous skeleton excreted by certain marine polyps, c. 1300, from Old French coral (12c., Modern French corail), from Latin corallium, from Greek korallion, a word perhaps of Semitic origin (compare Hebrew goral "small pebble," Arabic garal "small st

 apple 

 Old English æppel "apple; any kind of fruit; fruit in general," from Proto-Germanic *ap(a)laz (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch appel, Old Norse eple, Old High German apful, German Apfel), from PIE *ab(e)l- "apple" (source also of Gaulish avallo "fruit;" Old Irish ubu

 desultory 

 1580s, "skipping about, jumping, flitting" in a figurative sense, from Latin desultorius "hasty, casual, superficial," adjective form of desultor (n.) "a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop," from desul-, stem of desilire "jump down," 

 satyr 

 late 14c., satire, "one of a type of woodland deities part human or animal; demigod or spirit of the air or woods, companion of Bacchus," from Old French satire and directly from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, a word of unknown origin. "The etymology of [satyros] is unknown. 

 school 

 [place of instruction] Middle English scole, from Old English scol, "institution for instruction," from Latin schola "meeting place for teachers and students, place of instruction;" also "learned conversation, debate; lecture; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect," als

 Share lobster 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lobster Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lobster">Etymology of lobster by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lobster. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lobster Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lobster," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lobster. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lobster." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lobster. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lobster." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lobster (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lobster 
 lobe 
 loblolly 
 lobo 
 lobotomize 
 lobotomy 
 lobster 
 lobsterman 
 loc. cit. 
 locable 
 local 
 locale 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix