URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollen
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:59:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pollen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pollen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pollen 

 pollen (n.) 

 1760 as a botanical term for the fine, yellowish dust that is the fertilizing element of flowers (from Linnæus, 1751), earlier "fine flour" (1520s), from Latin pollen "mill dust; fine flour," which is related to polenta "peeled barley," and probably to Greek poltos "pap, porridge," and Sanskrit pálalam "ground seeds," but the ultimate origin is uncertain.
 also from 1760 

 Entries linking to pollen 

 polenta (n.) 

 Old English polente , "a kind of barley meal," from Latin pollenta , polenta , literally "peeled barley," related to pollen "powder, fine flour" (see pollen ), but the ultimate origin is uncertain. English later reborrowed it 19c. from Italian polenta (from the Latin word) for "porridge made of corn (maize)," a principal food in northern Italy, originally made from chestnut meal.

 pollinate (v.) 

 "put pollen upon for the sake of fertilization," 1873, a back formation from pollination, or else from pollin- , stem of Latin pollen (see pollen ) + -ate (2). Related: Pollinated ; pollinating .

 pollination 
 pulp 
 pulse 
 pulverize 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pulp 

 c. 1400, pulpe, "fleshy part of a fruit or plant," from Latin pulpa "animal or plant pulp; pith of wood," earlier *pelpa, perhaps from the same root as pulvis "dust," pollen "fine flour" (see pollen). Extended to similar moist substances or masses by early 15c. From 1727 as "the 

 pulse 

 "a throb, a beat, a stroke," especially a measured, regular, or rhythmical beat, early 14c., from Old French pous, pulse (late 12c., Modern French pouls) and directly from Latin pulsus (in pulsus venarum "beating from the blood in the veins"), past participle of pellere "to push,

 pulverize 

 early 15c., pulverisen, "reduce to powder or dust," from Late Latin pulverizare "reduce to powder or dust," from Latin pulvis (genitive pulveris) "dust, powder," which perhaps is related to Latin pollen "mill dust; fine flour" (and thus the other words under pollen), but de Vaan 

 stamen 

 "pollen-bearing organ of a flower," 1660s, from Modern Latin (1625, Spigelus), from Latin stamen "stamen" (Pliny), literally...

 inseminate 

 applied to animals in precisely the same way as the word "pollenate" is applied by some botanists to denote the placing of pollen...

 prose 

 c. 1300, "story, narration," from Old French prose (13c.) and directly from Latin prosa, short for prosa oratio "straightforward or direct speech" (without the ornaments of verse), from prosa, fem. of prosus, earlier prorsus "straightforward, direct," from Old Latin provorsus "(m

 fairy 

 c. 1300, fairie, "the country or home of supernatural or legendary creatures; fairyland," also "something incredible or fictitious," from Old French faerie "land of fairies, meeting of fairies; enchantment, magic, witchcraft, sorcery" (12c.), from fae "fay," from Latin fata "the 

 mitigate 

 early 15c., "relieve (pain); make mild or more tolerable; reduce in amount or degree," from Latin mitigatus, past participle of mitigare "soften, make tender, ripen, mellow, tame," figuratively, "make mild or gentle, pacify, soothe," ultimately from mitis "gentle, soft" + root of

 groom 

 c. 1200 (late 12c. in surnames), grome "male child, boy;" c. 1300, "a youth, young man," also "male servant, attendant, minor officer in a royal or noble household ranking higher than a page; a knight's squire." A word of unknown origin with no certain cognates in other Germanic 

 cipher 

 late 14c., "arithmetical symbol for zero," from Old French cifre "nought, zero," Medieval Latin cifra, which, with Spanish and Italian cifra, ultimately is from Arabic sifr "zero," literally "empty, nothing," from safara "to be empty;" a loan-translation of Sanskrit sunya-s "empt

 Share pollen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollen">Etymology of pollen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pollen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pollen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pollen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollen. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pollen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pollen (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pollen 
 polka 
 polka-dot 
 poll 
 pollack 
 pollard 
 pollen 
 pollinate 
 pollination 
 polliwog 
 pollster 
 pollutant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix