URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/passport
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:57:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Passport - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Passport - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of passport 

 passport (n.) 

 c. 1500, passe-porte , "authorization to travel through a country," from Old French passeport "authorization to pass through a port" to enter or leave a country (15c.), from passe , imperative of passer "to pass" (see pass (v.)) + port "port" (see port (n.1)). The original sense is obsolete; the meaning "document issued by competent civil authority granting permission to the person named in it to travel in or out of a country or authenticating his right to protection while abroad" is from 1540s. In early use often indicating principally the right to leave one's country.
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to passport 

 pass (v.) 

 late 13c., passen (transitive), "to go by (something)," also "to cross over," from Old French passer "to pass" (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *passare "to step, walk, pass" (source also of Spanish pasar , Italian passare ), from Latin passus "step, pace" (reconstructed to be from PIE root *pete- "to spread").

 The intransitive sense of "go on, move forward, make one's way" is attested from c. 1300. The figurative sense of "to experience, undergo" (as in pass the time ) is recorded by late 14c. The sense of "go through an examination successfully" is from early 15c. The meaning "decline to do something" is attested from 1869, originally in cards (euchre). In football, hockey, soccer, etc., the meaning "transfer the ball or puck to another player" is from c. 1865. Related: Passed ; passing .

 The meaning "be thought to be something one is not" (especially in a racial sense) is from 1935, from pass oneself off (as) , which is attested by 1809. The general verb sense of "be accepted as equivalent" is from 1590s.

 Pass up "decline, refuse" is attested from 1896. Pass the buck is from 1865, said to be poker slang reference to the buck horn-handled knife that was passed around to signify whose turn it was to deal. Pass the hat "seek contributions" is from 1762. Pass-fail as a grading method is attested from 1955, American English.

 port (n.1) 

 "a bay, cove, inlet, or recess of a large body of water where vessels can load and unload and find shelter from storms; a harbor, whether natural or artificial," Old English port "a port, harbor, a place where there is a constant resort of vessels for the purpose of loading and unloading;" also "a town, market town, city," reinforced by Old French port "harbor, port; mountain pass." The Old English and Old French words both are from Latin portus "a port, harbor," figuratively "haven, place of refuge, asylum" (in Old Latin also "a house;" in Late Latin also "a warehouse"), originally "an entrance, a passage," akin to porta "a city gate, a gate, a door" (from PIE *prtu- "a going, a passage," suffixed form of root *per- (2) "to lead, pass over").

 [I]in 
 law , a place where persons and merchandise are allowed to pass into and out of the realm and at which customs officers are stationed for the purpose of inspecting or appraising imported goods. In this sense a port may exist on the frontier, where the foreign communication is by land. [Century Dictionary]

 The figurative sense "place, position, or condition of refuge" is attested in English from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm , indicating "any refuge is welcomed in adversity," is by 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a vessel in the course of its voyage. The verb meaning "to carry or bring into a port" is by 1610s.

 *per- 
 *pete- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 recommendation 

 early 15c., recommendacion, "action of commending oneself to another" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French recommendation (Modern French recommandation), from Medieval Latin recommendationem (nominative recommendatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of recommendare (

 instrument 

 late 13c., "musical instrument, mechanical apparatus for producing musical sounds," from Old French instrument, enstrument "means, device; musical instrument" (14c., earlier estrument, 13c.) and directly from Latin instrumentum "a tool, an implement; means, furtherance; apparatus

 impression 

 late 14c., "mark produced by pressure," also "image produced in the mind or emotions by something external," from Old French impression "print, stamp; a pressing on the mind" (13c.), from Latin impressionem (nominative impressio) "a pressing into, onset, attack," figuratively "a 

 visa 

 1831, "official signature or endorsement on a passport," from French visa, from Modern Latin charta visa "verified paper," literally "paper that has been seen," from fem. past participle of Latin videre "to see" (from PIE root *weid- "to see"). Earlier visé (1810), from French pa

 Siva 

 also Shiva, one of the three supreme gods of Hinduism, lord of destruction and reproduction, 1788, from Hindi Shiva, from Sanskrit Sivah, literally "propitious, gracious" (a euphemism), from PIE *ki-wo-, suffixed form of root *kei- (1) "to lie," also forming words for "bed, couch

 characteristic 

 adjective ("pertaining to or indicating character") and noun ("a distinctive trait; that which gives or indicates character") both first attested 1660s, from character + -istic on model of Greek kharaktēristikos. Earlier in the adjectival sense was characteristical (1620s). Relat

 diligence 

 mid-14c., "constant and earnest effort to accomplish what is undertaken," from Old French diligence "attention, care; haste, speed" and directly from Latin diligentia "attentiveness, carefulness," from diligentem (nominative diligens) "attentive, assiduous, careful," present-part

 avocado 

 edible, oily fruit of a tree common in the American tropics, 1763, from Spanish avocado, altered (by folk etymology influence of earlier Spanish avocado "lawyer," from same Latin source as advocate (n.)) from earlier aguacate, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) ahuakatl "avocado" (with a sec

 diaspora 

 1825 in reference to Moravian protestants; 1869 in reference to the dispersion of the Jews; from Greek diaspora "dispersion," from diaspeirein "to scatter about, disperse," from dia "about, across" (see dia-) + speirein "to scatter" (see sparse). The Greek word was used in Septua

 conquer 

 c. 1200, cunquearen, "to achieve" (a task), from Old French conquerre "conquer, defeat, vanquish," from Vulgar Latin *conquaerere (for Latin conquirere) "to search for, procure by effort, win," from assimilated form of Latin com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + qu

 Share passport 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/passport Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/passport">Etymology of passport by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of passport. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/passport Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of passport," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/passport. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of passport." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/passport. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of passport." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/passport (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near passport 
 passive 
 passiveness 
 passivist 
 passivity 
 Passover 
 passport 
 password 
 past 
 pasta 
 paste 
 pasteboard 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix