URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/frank
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:35:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Frank - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Frank - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of frank 

 frank (adj.) 

 c. 1300, "free, liberal, generous;" 1540s, "outspoken," from Old French franc "free (not servile); without hindrance, exempt from; sincere, genuine, open, gracious, generous; worthy, noble, illustrious" (12c.), from Medieval Latin francus "free, at liberty, exempt from service," as a noun, "a freeman, a Frank" (see Frank ).

 Frank , literally, 
 free ; the freedom may be in regard to one's own opinions, which is the same as 
 openness , or in regard to things belonging to others, where the freedom may go so far as to be unpleasant, or it may disregard conventional ideas as to reticence. Hence, while 
 openness is consistent with timidity, 
 frankness implies some degree of boldness. [Century Dictionary] 

 A generalization of the tribal name; the connection is that Franks, as the conquering class, alone had the status of freemen in a world that knew only free, captive, or slave. For sense connection of "being one of the nation" and "free," compare Latin liber "free," from the same root as German Leute "nation, people" (see liberal (adj.)) and Slavic "free" words (Old Church Slavonic svobodi , Polish swobodny , Serbo-Croatian slobodan ) which are cognates of the first element in English sibling "brother, sister" (in Old English used more generally: "relative, kinsman"). For the later sense development, compare ingenuity .
 also from c. 1300 

 frank (n.) 

 short for frankfurter , by 1916, American English. Franks and beans attested by 1953.
 also from 1916 

 Frank (n.) 

 one of the Germanic tribal people (Salian Franks) situated on the lower Rhine from 3c. that conquered Romano-Celtic northern Gaul c.500 C.E.; from their territory and partly from their language grew modern France and French. Old English franc , franca "freeman, noble; Frank, Frenchman," from Medieval Latin francus , a Late Latin borrowing of Frankish *Frank , the people's self-designation (cognate with Old High German Franko , the Latin word also is the source of Spanish and Italian names Franco ).

 The origin of the ethnic name is uncertain; it traditionally is said to be from the old Germanic word *frankon "javelin, lance" (compare Old English franca "lance, javelin"), their preferred weapon, but the reverse may be the case. Compare also Saxon , traditionally from root of Old English seax "knife." The adjectival sense of "free, at liberty" (see frank (adj.)) probably developed from the tribal name, not the other way round. It was noted by 1680s that, in the Levant, this was the name given to anyone of Western nationality (compare Feringhee and lingua franca ).

 frank (v.) 

 "to free a letter for carriage or an article for publication, to send by public conveyance free of expense," 1708, from shortened form of French affranchir , from a- "to" + franchir "to free" (see franchise (v.)). A British parliamentary privilege from 1660-1840; in U.S. Congress, technically abolished 1873. Related: Franked ; franking . As a noun, "signature of one entitled to send letters for free," from 1713.
 also from 1708 

 Entries linking to frank 

 Feringhee (n.) 

 name used in India for "European; Englishman; Portuguese," 1630s, from Persian Farangi , from Arabic Faranji (10c.), from Old French Franc "Frank" (see Frank ) + Arabic ethnic suffix -i . The fr- sound is impossible in Arabic.

 franchise (v.) 

 late 14c., "to make free," from Old French franchiss- , past participle stem of franchir "to free" (12c.), from franc "free" (see frank (adj.)). Franchising is from 1570s; the commercial licensing sense is from 1966. Related: Franchisee ; franchiser ; franchisor .

 frankfurter 
 ingenuity 
 liberal 
 lingua franca 
 Saxon 
 sibling 
 farang 
 franc 
 France 
 Francis 
 franc-tireur 
 frankincense 
 Frankish 
 Franklin 
 frankly 
 frankness 
 French 
 Franco- 
 See All Related Words (20) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 frankfurter 

 "hot dog," 1894, American English, from German Frankfurter (wurst) "(sausage) of Frankfurt," so called because the U.S. product resembled a type of smoked-beef-and-pork sausage originally made in Germany, where it was associated with the city of Frankfurt am Main (literally "ford

 ingenuity 

 1590s, "honor, nobility," from French ingénuité "quality of freedom by birth" and directly from Latin ingenuitatem (nominative ingenuitas) "condition of a free-born man," figuratively "frankness, generosity, noble-mindedness," from ingenuus "frank, candid, noble" (see ingenuous).

 liberal 

 mid-14c., "generous," also "nobly born, noble, free;" from late 14c. as "selfless, magnanimous, admirable;" from early 15c. in a bad sense, "extravagant, unrestrained," from Old French liberal "befitting free people; noble, generous; willing, zealous" (12c.), and directly from La

 blurb 

 used by U.S. scholar Brander Matthews in 1906 in "American Character;" popularized 1907 by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess...The blurb was invented by Frank A....

 pert 

 apparent to the eye;" early 14c., "attractive, comely, of good appearance," shortened form of Middle English apert "open, frank...

 landau 

 are complex in construction and liable to get out of order, which prevents their popular use" [Henry William Herbert ("Frank...

 handwriting 

 [Frank Leslie's Magazine, August 1884]...

 blunt 

 c. 1200, blunt, blont, "dull, obtuse" (of persons), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra "to shut one's eyes" (see blunder (v.)). Or from Old English blinnan (past participle blon) "to stop, cease, come to an end." Of tools or weapons, "not sharp, wit

 god 

 also God; Old English god "supreme being, deity; the Christian God; image of a god; godlike person," from Proto-Germanic *guthan (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch god, Old High German got, German Gott, Old Norse guð, Gothic guþ), which is of uncertain origin; perhaps 

 dog 

 "quadruped of the genus Canis," Old English docga, a late, rare word, used in at least one Middle English source in reference specifically to a powerful breed of canine; other early Middle English uses tend to be depreciatory or abusive. Its origin remains one of the great myster

 Share frank 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/frank Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/frank">Etymology of frank by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of frank. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/frank Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of frank," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/frank. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of frank." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/frank. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of frank." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/frank (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near frank 
 Francophone 
 franc-tireur 
 frangible 
 frangipani 
 Franglais 
 frank 
 Frankenstein 
 frankfurter 
 frankincense 
 Frankish 
 Franklin 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix