URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/material
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:45:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Material - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Material - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of material 

 material (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world" (contrasted with spiritual, mental, supernatural ), a term in scholastic philosophy and theology, from Old French material , materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis (adj.) "of or belonging to matter," from Latin materia "matter, stuff, wood, timber" (see matter (n.)).

 From late 14c. as "made of matter, having material existence; material, physical, substantial." From late 15c. as "important, relevant, necessary, pertaining to the matter or subject;" in the law of evidence, "of legal significance to the cause" (1580s).
 also from mid-14c. 

 material (n.) 

 late 14c., "component substance, matter from which a thing is made," from material (adj.).
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to material 

 matter (n.) 

 c. 1200, materie , "the subject of a mental act or a course of thought, speech, or expression," from Anglo-French matere , Old French matere "subject, theme, topic; substance, content; character, education" (12c., Modern French matière ) and directly from Latin materia "substance from which something is made," also "hard inner wood of a tree."

 According to de Vaan and Watkins, this is from mater "origin, source, mother" (see mother (n.1)). The sense developed and expanded in Latin in philosophy by influence of Greek hylē (see hylo- ) "wood, firewood," in a general sense "material," the word used by Aristotle for "matter" in the philosophical sense. 

 The Latin word also is the source of Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian materia , Dutch, German, and Danish materie , vernacular Spanish madera , Portuguese madeira "wood" (compare Madeira ). The Middle English word also sometimes was used specifically as "piece of wood."

 It is attested from c. 1200 as "a subject of a literary work, content of what is written, main theme;" the sense of "narrative, tale, story" is by c. 1300. The meaning "physical substance generally" is from mid-14c.; that of "substance of which some specific object is or may be composed" is attested by late 14c.

 The meaning "piece of business, affair, activity, situation; subject of debate or controversy, question under discussion" is from late 14c. In law, "something which is to be tried or proved," 1530s.

 Matter of course "something expected" attested from 1739 (adjectival phrase matter-of-course "proceeding as a natural consequence" is by 1840). For that matter "as far as that goes, as far as that is concerned" is attested from 1670s.

 What is the matter "what concerns (someone), what is the cause of the difficulty" is attested from mid-15c., from matter in the sense of "circumstance or condition as affecting persons and things." To make no matter to "be no difference to" also is mid-15c., with matter in the meaning "importance, consequence."

 immaterial (adj.) 

 c. 1400, "spiritual, incorporeal, not consisting of matter," from Medieval Latin immaterialis "not consisting of matter, spiritual," from assimilated form of in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + Late Latin materialis "of or belonging to matter" (see material (adj.)).

 The sense of "unimportant, of no consequence" is attested from 1690s, from material (adj.) in its meaning "important" (16c.). Related: Immaterially (late 14c.); immateriality .

 materialism 
 materialist 
 materialize 
 materially 
 materiel 
 unmaterial 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 materiel 

 "the totality of things used in the carrying out of any complex art or technique" (as distinguished from personnel), 1814, from French matériel "material," noun use of adj. matériel (see material (adj.)). A later borrowing of the same word that became material (n.). By 1819 in th

 fabric 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "a building," a sense now obsolete, from Old French fabrique (14c.), verbal noun from fabriquer (13c.), from Latin fabricare "to make, construct, fashion, build," from fabrica "workshop," also "an art, trade; a skillful production, structure, fabric," from fab

 cloth 

 "woven fabric, pliable stuff made of intertexture of threads or fibers," Old English claþ "a cloth, sail, cloth covering, woven or felted material to wrap around one," hence, also, "garment," from Proto-Germanic *kalithaz (source also of Old Frisian klath "cloth," Middle Dutch cl

 stuff 

 early 14c., "quilted material worn under chain mail," from Old French estoffe "quilted material, furniture, provisions" (...Sense extended to material for working with in various trades (c. 1400), then "matter of an unspecified kind" (1570s)....

 substantial 

 ample, sizeable," from Old French substantiel (13c.) and directly from Latin substantialis "having substance or reality, material...," in Late Latin "pertaining to the substance or essence," from substantia "being, essence, material" (see substance)....

 sienna 

 brownish-ochre color, by 1760 (terra-sienna), from Italian terra di Sienna "earth of Siena," region in Italy where the coloring material...Burnt sienna is the raw material roasted in a furnace before powdering....

 interpolate 

 1610s, "to alter or enlarge (a writing) by inserting new material," from Latin interpolatus, past participle of interpolare...Sense evolved in Latin from "refurbish," to "alter appearance of," to "falsify (especially by adding new material)."...

 frieze 

 "sculptured horizontal band in architecture," 1560s, from French frise, originally "a ruff," from Medieval Latin frisium "embroidered border," variant of frigium, which is probably from Latin Phrygium "Phrygian; Phrygian work," from Phrygia, the ancient country in Asia Minor know

 foam 

 Middle English fom, fome (c. 1300), from Old English fam "foam, saliva froth; sea," from West Germanic *faimo- (source also of Old High German veim, German Feim), from PIE root *(s)poi-mo- "foam, froth" (source also of Sanskrit phenah; Latin pumex "pumice," spuma "foam;" Old Chur

 alpaca 

 Andean mammal valued for its wool, 1792, from Spanish alpaca, probably from Aymara allpaca, which is related to Quechua (Inca) p'ake "yellowish-red." The unetymological al- is perhaps from influence of the many words in Spanish that contain the Arabic definite article (compare al

 Share material 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/material Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/material">Etymology of material by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of material. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/material Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of material," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/material. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of material." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/material. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of material." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/material (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near material 
 matchmaker 
 match-wood 
 mate 
 mater- 
 materia medica 
 material 
 materialism 
 materialist 
 materialistic 
 materiality 
 materialization 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix