URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ion
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:28:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ion 

 ion (n.) 

 1834, introduced by English physicist and chemist Michael Faraday (suggested by the Rev. William Whewell, English polymath), coined from Greek ion , neuter present participle of ienai "go," from PIE root *ei- "to go." So called because ions move toward the electrode of opposite charge.
 also from 1834 

 Entries linking to ion 

 cation (n.) 

 "positively charged ion," 1834, from Latinized form of Greek kation "going down," neuter present participle of katienai "to go down," from kata "down" (see cata- ) + ienai "to go" (from PIE root *ei- "to go"). Proposed by the Rev. William Whewell, English polymath, and published by English physicist Michael Faraday. Compare ion .

 electron (n.) 

 coined 1891 by Irish physicist George J. Stoney (1826-1911) from electric + -on , as in ion (q.v.). Electron microscope (1932) translates German Elektronenmikroskop .

 Ionic 
 ionize 
 ionosphere 
 *ei- 
 -on 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 iodine 

 iode "iodine," which was coined 1812 by French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac from Greek ioeides "violet-colored" (from ion...

 poem 

 From 1580s as "written composition, whether in verse or not, characterized by imaginative beauty ion thought or language....

 Ionian 

 The name (which Herodotus credits to an ancestral Ion, son of Apollo and Creusa) probably is pre-Greek, perhaps related to...

 soldier 

 c. 1300, souder, soudiour, "fighting man, one engaged ion military service," from Old French soudier, soldier and Anglo-French...

 anion 

 "a negatively charged ion, which moves toward the anode (q.v.) during electrolysis," 1834, proposed by the Rev. William Whewell, English polymath, and published by English physicist Michael Faraday, from Greek anion "(thing) going up," neuter past participle of anienai "go up," f

 action 

 mid-14c., accioun, "cause or grounds for a lawsuit," from Anglo-French accioun, Old French accion, action (12c.) "action; lawsuit, case," from Latin actionem (nominative actio) "a putting in motion; a performing, a doing; public acts, official conduct; lawsuit, legal action" (sou

 particle 

 late 14c., "a bit or fragment, small part or division of a whole, minute portion of matter," from Latin particula "little bit or part, grain, jot," diminutive of pars (genitive partis) "a part, piece, division" (from PIE root *pere- (2) "to grant, allot"). In grammar, "a part of 

 Vatican 

 1550s, from Latin mons Vaticanus, Roman hill on which Papal palace stands. By Klein's sources said to be an Etruscan loan-word and unrelated to vates "soothsayer, prophet, seer" (see vates), but most others seem to think it is related, on the notion of "hill of prophecy" (compare

 ink 

 "the black liquor with which men write" [Johnson], mid-13c., inke, from Old French enche, encre "dark writing fluid" (12c.), earlier enque (11c.), originally enca, from a shortening of Late Latin encaustum, from Late Greek enkauston. This is the neuter of the past-participle adje

 dream 

 "sequence of sensations or images passing through the mind of a sleeping person," mid-13c., probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish drøm, Swedish dröm, Old Saxon drom "merriment, noise," Old Frisian dram "dream," Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German Traum "dream." Thes

 Share ion 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ion Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ion">Etymology of ion by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ion. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ion Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ion," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ion. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ion." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ion. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ion." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ion (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ion 
 iodic 
 iodide 
 iodine 
 iodize 
 -ion 
 ion 
 Ionian 
 Ionic 
 ionization 
 ionize 
 ionosphere 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix