URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/portrait
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:58:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Portrait - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Portrait - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of portrait 

 portrait (n.) 

 1560s, "a figure, drawn or painted," a back formation from portraiture or directly from French portrait , from Old French portret (13c.), noun use of past participle of portraire "to paint, depict" (see portray ). Especially a picture or representation of the head and face of a person drawn from life. Related: Portraitist .
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to portrait 

 portray (v.) 

 mid-13c., portraien , "to draw, paint" (something), from Anglo-French purtraire , Old French portraire "to draw, to paint, portray" (12c.), literally "trace, draw forth," from por- "forth" (from Latin pro- ; see pro- ) + traire "trace, draw," from Latin trahere "to drag, draw" (see tract (n.1)). Meaning "depict in words, describe" is from late 14c. Related: Portrayed ; portrayer ; portraying .

 Latin protrahere was "to draw forth" but in Medieval Latin also "to draw, paint."

 portraiture (n.) 

 "the art of making portraits; a painting, picture, or drawing," late 14c., from Old French portraiture "portrait, image, portrayal, resemblance" (12c.), from portrait (see portrait ).

 self-portrait (n.) 

 "a portrait of oneself, by oneself," 1821, from self- + portrait , translating German Selbstbildnis .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 locket 

 Meaning "little ornamental case with hinged cover" (containing a lock of hair, miniature portrait, etc.) first recorded 1670s...

 vignette 

 Sense transferred from the border to the picture itself, then (1853) to a type of small photographic portrait with blurred...

 kit-cat 

 Hence "a size of portrait less than half length in which a hand may be shown" (1754), supposedly is because the dining room...

 tester 

 for the head" (late 14c., via Old French testiere) and "coin of Henry VIII" (1546), the first English coin to bear a true portrait...

 simulacrum 

 an image, that which is formed in likeness of an object," from Latin simulacrum "likeness, image, form, representation, portrait...

 example 

 Old French essemple "sample, model, example, precedent, cautionary tale," from Latin exemplum "a sample, specimen; image, portrait...

 sitting 

 The meaning "interval during which one sits" (for some purpose, especially to have one's portrait taken) is from 1706....

 semblance 

 c. 1300, semblaunce, "fact of appearing to view," from Old French semblance "likeness, appearance," from semblant, present participle of sembler "to seem, appear," from Latin simulare "to resemble, imitate," from similis "like, resembling, of the same kind" (see similar). The mea

 picture 

 early 15c., pictur, pictoure, pittour, pectur, "the process or art of drawing or painting," a sense now obsolete; also "a visual or graphic representation of a person, scene, object, etc.," from Latin pictura "painting," from pictus, past participle of pingere "to make pictures, 

 keel 

 "lowest and principal timber of a ship or boat," mid-14c., probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse kjölr "keel," Danish kjøl, Swedish köl), which according to Watkins is from Proto-Germanic *gwele- (3) "to swallow" (see gullet). OED and Middle English Compendium sa

 Share portrait 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/portrait Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/portrait">Etymology of portrait by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of portrait. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/portrait Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of portrait," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/portrait. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of portrait." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/portrait. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of portrait." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/portrait (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near portrait 
 portion 
 Portland 
 portly 
 portmanteau 
 portobello 
 portrait 
 portraiture 
 portray 
 portrayal 
 portreeve 
 portsider 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix