URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ruby
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ruby - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ruby - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ruby 

 ruby (n.) 

 valuable precious gem, in modern understanding a clear, rich-red variety of corundum, c. 1300, rubi , rubie (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French rubi (12c.), from Medieval Latin rubinus lapis "red stone" (source also of Italian rubino ), from Latin rubeus "red," which is related to ruber (from PIE root *reudh- "red, ruddy").

 As a name for a pure or somewhat crimson-red color, from 1570s. As an adjective from late 15c., "made from or with rubies;" c. 1500 as "of a ruby color." Modern French rubis is not explained; Klein suggests a plural mistaken for singular.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to ruby 

 red (adj.1) 

 "of a bright, warm color resembling that of blood or of the highest part of the primery rainbow" [Century Dictionary], Middle English rēd , redde , read , reid , from Old English rēad , used of various shades of purple, crimson, scarlet, pink, etc.; also red clothes, dye, ink, wine, or paint, also "having a ruddy or reddish complexion; red-haired, red-bearded;" from Proto-Germanic *rauthan (source also of Old Norse rauðr , Danish rød , Old Saxon rod , Old Frisian rad , Middle Dutch root , Dutch rood , German rot , Gothic rauþs ).

 This is reconstructed to be from a PIE root *reudh- "red, ruddy," the only color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. It also is the root of native ruddy , rust , and, via Latin, ruby , rubric , russet , etc.

 Along with dead , bread (n.), lead (n.1), its long vowel shortened in or after Middle English. The surname Read , Reid , Reade , etc. represents the old form of the adjective and retains the original Old English long vowel pronunciation. It corresponds to Brown , Black , White ; Red itself being rare as a surname. As the color designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s.

 In fixed comparisons, red as blood (Old English), roses (mid-13c.), cherry (c. 1400). From Old English as the color characteristic of inflammation, blistering, etc. Of the complexion, lips, etc., "ruddy, rosy, red" (c. 1200); also of person with a healthy complexion or skin color; to be red in the face as a result of powerful emotion or agitation is by c. 1200; to see red "get angry" is an American English expression attested by 1898.

 Red as the characteristic color of "British possessions" on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism, from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag, 1852.

 Red rover , the children's game, attested from 1891. Red ball signifying "express" in railroad jargon is by 1904, originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog , type of U.S. football pass rush, is recorded from 1959 (earlier "lowest grade of flour produced in a mill," by 1889). Red meat , that which is ordinarily served or preferred undercooked, is from 1808; the food of wild beasts, hence its figurative use for something that satisfies a basic appetite (by 1792; popular from late 20c.).

 Red shift in spectography is first recorded 1923. Red carpet "sumptuous welcome" is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far back as Aeschylus ("Agamemnon"); it also was the name of a type of English moth. Red ant is from 1660s.

 *reudh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "red, ruddy." The only color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r- .

 It might form all or part of: bilirubin ; corroborate ; Eritrea ; erysipelas ; erythema ; erythro- ; Radnor ; red ; redskin ; roan ; robust ; rooibos ; Rotwelsch ; rouge ; roux ; rowan ; rubella ; rubicund ; rubric ; ruby ; ruddock ; ruddy ; rufous ; Rufus ; russet ; rust .

 It might also be the source of: Latin ruber , also dialectal rufus "light red," mostly of hair; Greek erythros ; Sanskrit rudhira- ; Avestan raoidita- ; Old Church Slavonic rudru , Polish rumiany , Russian rumjanyj "flushed, red," of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas ; Old Irish ruad , Welsh rhudd , Breton ruz "red."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 crimson 

 "highly chromatic deep red color," early 15c., cremesin, "cloth dyed deep purplish-red," also as an adjective, "of a crimson color," from Old Italian carmesi, cremesi (c. 1300), later carmisino, cremesinus, "crimson color; cochineal dye," from Arabic qirmizī (see kermes). For sim

 carmine 

 1712, "pure red dyestuff obtained from cochineal," from French carmin (12c.), from Medieval Latin carminium, from Arabic qirmiz "crimson" (see kermes, also compare crimson (n.)). The form was influenced in Latin by minium "red lead, cinnabar," a word said to be of Iberian origin.

 cherry 

 pulpy drupe of a well-known type of tree, c. 1300, earlier in surname Chyrimuth (1266, literally "Cherry-mouth"); from Anglo-French cherise, from Old North French cherise (Old French, Modern French cerise, 12c.), from Vulgar Latin *ceresia, from late Greek kerasian "cherry," from

 anthracite 

 "non-bituminous coal, hard coal," 1812, earlier (c. 1600) a type of ruby-like gem described by Pliny, from Latin anthracites...

 carbuncle 

 early 13c., "fiery jewel, gem of a deep red color, ruby," also the name of a semi-mythical gem from the East Indies formerly...

 agate 

 notion of smallness is preserved in typographer's agate (1838), the U.S. name of the 5.5-point font called in Great Britain ruby...

 trivia 

 Everyone knows that Amos's wife on the "Amos 'n' Andy Show" is Ruby, but who knows that she is from Marietta, Georgia?...

 scarlet 

 mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), "rich cloth" (often, but not necessarily, bright red), from a shortened form of Old French escarlate "scarlet (color), top-quality fabric" (12c., Modern French écarlate), which, with Medieval Latin scarlatum "scarlet, cloth of scarlet," Italian 

 -red 

 word-forming element meaning "condition or state of," Middle English, from Old English -rede, from ræden "condition, rule, reckoning," a suffixed form of ræd "to advise, rule" (see rede). Common in Old English, less so in Middle English but still active in word-formation. It is a

 gem 

 "a precious stone" (especially when cut or polished), c. 1300, probably from Old French gemme (12c.), from Latin gemma "precious stone, jewel," originally "bud," from Proto-Italic *gebma- "bud, sprout," from PIE *geb-m- "sprout, bud" (source also of Lithuanian žembėti "to germina

 Share ruby 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ruby Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ruby">Etymology of ruby by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ruby. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ruby Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ruby," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ruby. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ruby." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ruby. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ruby." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ruby (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ruby 
 Rubicon 
 rubicund 
 Rubik's Cube 
 ruble 
 rubric 
 ruby 
 ruche 
 rucksack 
 ruckus 
 ruction 
 rudder 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix