URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/night
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:28:14Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Night - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Night - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Origin and history of night 

 night (n.) 

 late Old English niht (West Saxon neaht , Anglian næht , neht ) "the dark part of a day; the night as a unit of time; darkness," also "absence of spiritual illumination, moral darkness, ignorance," from Proto-Germanic *nahts (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German naht , Old Frisian and Dutch nacht , German Nacht , Old Norse natt , Gothic nahts ).

 The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- "night" (source also of Greek nyx "a night," Latin nox , Old Irish nochd , Sanskrit naktam "at night," Lithuanian naktis "night," Old Church Slavonic nosti , Russian noch' , Welsh henoid "tonight"), according to Watkins, probably from a verbal root *neg- "to be dark, be night." For spelling with -gh- see fight . The vowel indicates that the modern English word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte , dative niht ).

 The fact that the Aryans have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by nights. [Weekley]

 Thus in Old English combinations night was "the night before (a certain day or feast day);" compare German Weihnachten "Christmas," literally "holy night." In early times, the day was held to begin at sunset, so Old English monanniht "Monday night" was the night before Monday, or what we would call Sunday night ; so saeterniht "Friday night." Thomas à Becket's Wednes-night (Old English Wodnes-niht ) would be our Tuesday night. The Greeks, by contrast, counted their days by mornings.

 To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night soil "excrement" (1770) is so called because it was removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train is attested from 1838; night-school from 1520s; night-life "habitual nocturnal carousing" is attested from 1852.

 Entries linking to night 

 fight (v.) 

 Old English feohtan "to combat, contend with weapons, strive; attack; gain by fighting, win" (intransitive; class III strong verb; past tense feaht , past participle fohten ), from Proto-Germanic *fe(u)hta (source also of Old High German fehtan , German fechten , Middle Dutch and Dutch vechten , Old Frisian fiuhta "to fight"), probably from PIE *pek- (2) "to comb, to pluck out" wool or hair (source also of Lithuanian p ė šti "to pluck," Greek pekein "to comb, shear," pekos "fleece, wool;" Persian pashm "wool, down," Latin pectere "to comb," Sanskrit paksman- "eyebrows, hair"). Apparently the notion is "pulling roughly," or "to tear out one another's hair." But perhaps it is from the source of Latin pugnus "fist."

 Spelling substitution of -gh- for a "hard H" sound was a Middle English scribal habit, especially before -t- . In some late Old English examples, the middle consonant was represented by a yogh . Among provincial early Modern English spellings, Wright lists faight , fate , fecht , feeght , feight , feit , feyght , feyt , feort , foight .

 From c. 1200 as "offer resistance, struggle;" also "to quarrel, wrangle, create a disturbance." From late 14c. as "be in conflict." Transitive use from 1690s. To fight for "contest on behalf of" is from early 14c. To fight back "resist" is recorded from 1890. Well figt þat wel fligt ("he fights well that flies fast") was a Middle English proverb.

 all-nighter (n.) 

 "incident of staying up all night," 1870, from the adverbial phrase; see all + night . By 1930 as "person who stays up all night."

 benight 
 equinox 
 fortnight 
 good-night 
 Kristallnacht 
 midnight 
 nightcap 
 nightclub 
 night-crawler 
 nightfall 
 nightgown 
 night-hawk 
 nightingale 
 nightjar 
 night-light 
 nightlong 
 nightly 
 nightmare 
 See All Related Words (37) 

 More to explore

 equinox 

 c. 1400, "point at which the sun crosses the earth's equator, making day and night of equal length everywhere," from Old French equinoce (12c.) or directly from Medieval Latin equinoxium "equality of night (and day)," from Latin aequinoctium, usually in plural, dies aequinoctii "

 nightcap 

 also night-cap, late 14c., "covering for the head, worn in bed," from night + cap (n.). In the alcoholic sense, it is attested from 1818. American English sense of "final event in a sporting contest" (especially the second game of a baseball double-header) is by 1924. Sunday's b

 nightingale 

 "small migratory bird of the Old World, noted for the male's melodious song, heard by night as well as day," Middle English nighte-gale, from Old English næctigalæ, in late Old English nihtegale, a compound formed in Proto-Germanic (compare Dutch nachtegaal, German Nachtigall) fr

 bivouac 

 1702, "encampment of soldiers that stays up on night watch in the open air, dressed and armed," from French bivouac (17c....), said to be a word from the Thirty Years' War, ultimately from Swiss/Alsatian biwacht "night guard," from bei- (from Old...As a verb, 1809, "to post troops in the night;" the meaning "camp out-of-doors without tents" is from 1814....

 noctilucent 

 "shining by night," as the eyes of a cat, glow-worms, decaying wood, or certain high clouds seen in northern latitudes, 1812..., from Latin noct-, stem of nox "night" (see noct-) + lucentem (nominative lucens), present participle of lucere "to shine...I have at night, in rowing, seen the whole element as if on fire round me; every oar spangled with them; and the water burnt...Noctilucid is rarely used, but could be valuable if it meant "only making sense at night." Related: Noctilucence....

 watch 

 From c. 1200 as "one of the periods into which the night is divided," in reference to ancient times translating Latin vigilia...Also in Middle English, "the practice of remaining awake at night for purposes of debauchery and dissipation;" hence wacches...of wodnesse "late-night revels and debauchery."...The Hebrews divided the night into three watches, the Greeks usually into four (sometimes five), the Romans (followed by...

 bat 

 alteration of Middle English bakke (early 14c.), which is probably related to Old Swedish natbakka, Old Danish nathbakkæ "night...As a contemptuous term for an old woman, it is perhaps a suggestion of witchcraft (compare fly-by-night), or from bat as..."prostitute who plies her trade by night" [Farmer, who calls it "old slang" and finds French equivalent "night swallow" (...

 gloaming 

 Old English glomung "twilight, the fall of evening," found but once (glossing Latin crepusculum), and formed (probably on model of æfning "evening") from glom "twilight," which is related to glowan "to glow" (hence "glow of sunrise or sunset"), from Proto-Germanic *glo- (see glow

 thing 

 Old English þing "meeting, assembly, council, discussion," later "entity, being, matter" (subject of deliberation in an assembly), also "act, deed, event, material object, body, being, creature," from Proto-Germanic *thinga- "assembly" (source also of Old Frisian thing "assembly,

 evening 

 from Old English æfnung "the coming of evening, sunset, time around sunset," verbal noun from æfnian "become evening, grow toward evening," from æfen "evening" (see eve). As a synonym of even (n.) in the sense "time from sunset to bedtime," it dates from mid-15c. and now entirely

 Share night 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/night Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/night">Etymology of night by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of night. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/night Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of night," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/night. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of night." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/night. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of night." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/night (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near night 
 nigger 
 niggerdom 
 niggerhead 
 niggle 
 nigh 
 night 
 nightcap 
 nightclub 
 night-crawler 
 nightfall 
 nightgown 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix