URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mandrel
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:22:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mandrel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mandrel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mandrel 

 mandrel (n.) 

 "miner's pick," 1510s, of unknown origin; perhaps borrowed from French mandrin , itself of unknown origin. Also applied from 17c. to a bar or spindle, used chiefly to hold articles in place, on a lathe or a circular saw.
 also from 1510s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 spindle 

 "small tapering bar hung from the end of the thread as it is drawn from the fiber on the distaff," early 13c., spindel, with unetymological -d-, from Old English spinel "small wooden bar used in hand-spinning," properly "an instrument for spinning," from stem of spinnan (see spin

 arbor 

 c. 1300, herber, "herb garden, pleasure garden," from Old French erbier "field, meadow; kitchen garden," from Latin herba "grass, herb" (see herb). Later "a grassy plot" (mid-14c., a sense also in Old French), "shaded nook, bower formed by intertwining of trees, shrubs, or vines"

 drive 

 Old English drifan "to compel or urge to move, impel in some direction or manner; to hunt (deer), pursue; to rush against" (class I strong verb; past tense draf, past participle drifen), from Proto-Germanic *dreibanan (source also of Old Frisian driva "I lead, impel, drive (away)

 shaft 

 "long, slender rod," originally "staff or pole forming the body of a spear or lance; spear-shaft," also, perhaps by synecdoche, "spear;" Middle English shafte, from Old English sceaft from Proto-Germanic *skaftaz (source also of Old Norse skapt, Old Saxon skaft, Old High German s

 ghetto 

 1610s, "part of a city in which Jews are compelled to live," especially in Italy, from Italian ghetto "part of a city to which Jews are restricted," of unknown origin. The various theories trace it to: Yiddish get "deed of separation;" a special use of Venetian getto "foundry" (t

 Logos 

 1580s, "the divine Word, second person of the Christian Trinity," from Greek logos "word, speech, statement, discourse," also "a computation, account," also "reason, judgment, understanding," from PIE *log-o-, suffixed form of root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives

 gyp 

 also gip, "to cheat, swindle," 1889, American English, traditionally derived from Gypsy (n.). Gyp/gip/jip is attested from 1794 as university slang for a servant that waited on students in their halls. This is said to have been especially a Cambridge word, and a story told there 

 mug 

 "small, cylindrical drinking vessel, often with a handle," 1560s, "bowl, pot, jug," a word of unknown origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish mugg "earthen cup, jug," Norwegian mugge "pitcher, open can for warm drinks"), or Low German mokke, mukke "mug," also of unknow

 pander 

 "arranger of sexual liaisons, one who caters for the lusts of others," 1520s, "procurer, pimp," from Middle English Pandare (late 14c.), used by Chaucer ("Troylus and Cryseyde"), who borrowed it from Boccaccio (who had it in Italian form Pandaro in "Filostrato") as name of the pr

 politics 

 1520s, "science and art of government," from politic (n.) "the political state of a country or government (early 15c.), from Old French politique and Medieval Latin politica; see politic (adj.). The plural form probably was modeled on Aristotle's ta politika "affairs of state" (p

 Share mandrel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mandrel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mandrel">Etymology of mandrel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mandrel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mandrel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mandrel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mandrel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mandrel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mandrel. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mandrel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mandrel (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mandrel 
 mandibular 
 Mandingo 
 mandolin 
 mandragora 
 mandrake 
 mandrel 
 mandrill 
 Mandy 
 mane 
 -mane 
 man-eater 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix