URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/ocean
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:31:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ocean - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ocean - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of ocean 

 ocean (n.) 

 c. 1300, occean , "the vast body of water on the surface of the globe," from Old French occean "ocean" (12c., Modern French océan ), from Latin oceanus , from Greek ōkeanos , the great river or sea surrounding the disk of the Earth (as opposed to the Mediterranean ), a word of unknown origin; Beekes suggests it is Pre-Greek. Personified as Oceanus , son of Uranus and Gaia and husband of Tethys.

 In early times, when the only known land masses were Eurasia and Africa, the ocean was an endless river that flowed around them. Until c. 1650, commonly ocean sea , translating Latin mare oceanum. Application to individual bodies of water began 14c. ( occean Atlantyke , 1387); five of them are usually reckoned, but this is arbitrary. The English word also occasionally was applied to smaller subdivisions, such as German Ocean "North Sea."
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to ocean 

 oceanic (adj.) 

 "belonging or relating to the ocean," 1650s, probably from French océanique , from océan (see ocean ).

 oceanography (n.) 

 "the science of the oceans," 1859, coined in English from ocean + -graphy ; on analogy of geography . French océanographie is attested from 1580s but is said to have been rare before 1876. Related: Oceanographic .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sea 

 Middle English se, seo, from Old English sæ, "sheet of water, sea, lake, pool," from Proto-Germanic *saiwa- (source also of Old Saxon seo, Old Frisian se, Middle Dutch see, Dutch zee, German See, Swedish sjö), of unknown origin, outside connections "wholly doubtful" [Buck], and a

 monsoon 

 1580s, "alternating trade wind of the Indian Ocean," from Dutch monssoen, from Portuguese monçao, from Arabic mawsim "time...The Arabic word, picked up by Portuguese sailors in the Indian Ocean, was used for anything that comes round every year (...

 North Sea 

 In English, this had been typically called the "German Sea" or "German Ocean," which follows the Roman name for it, Oceanus...North Sea in Middle English also could mean "the northern portion of the ocean believed to surround the earth" (late 14c....

 Hesperides 

 The Gardens of the Hesperides with the golden apples were believed to exist in some island in the ocean, or, as it was sometimes...increased with regard to western lands, it became necessary to move this paradise farther and farther out into the Western Ocean...

 splash 

 Splash-down (n.) in the "landing of a spacecraft in the ocean" sense is attested from 1961....

 Cimmerian 

 Homer described their land as a place of perpetual mist and darkness beyond the ocean, but whether he had in mind the same...

 pelagic 

 In later use especially "living at or near the surface of the open ocean."...

 deep 

 Old English deop "having considerable extension downward," especially as measured from the top or surface, also figuratively, "profound, awful, mysterious; serious, solemn," from Proto-Germanic *deupaz (source also of Old Saxon diop, Old Frisian diap, Dutch diep, Old High German 

 water 

 Old English wæter, from Proto-Germanic *watr- (source also of Old Saxon watar, Old Frisian wetir, Dutch water, Old High German wazzar, German Wasser, Old Norse vatn, Gothic wato "water"), from PIE *wod-or, suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet." To keep (one's) head above w

 mare 

 "female of the horse or any other equine animal," Old English meare, also mere (Mercian), myre (West Saxon), fem. of mearh "horse," from Proto-Germanic *marhijo- "female horse" (source also of Old Saxon meriha, Old Norse merr, Old Frisian merrie, Dutch merrie, Old High German mer

 Share ocean 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/ocean Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/ocean">Etymology of ocean by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of ocean. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/ocean Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of ocean," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ocean. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of ocean." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/ocean. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of ocean." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/ocean (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near ocean 
 occupied 
 occupier 
 occupy 
 occur 
 occurrence 
 ocean 
 Oceania 
 oceanic 
 oceanographer 
 oceanography 
 ocelot 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix