URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/music
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:28:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Music - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Music - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of music 

 music (n.) 

 mid-13c., musike , "a pleasing succession of sounds or combinations of sounds; the science of combining sounds in rhythmic, melodic, and (later) harmonic order," from Old French musique (12c.) and directly from Latin musica "the art of music," also including poetry (also source of Spanish musica , Italian musica , Old High German mosica , German Musik , Dutch muziek , Danish musik ), from Greek mousikē (technē) "(art) of the Muses," from fem. of mousikos "pertaining to the Muses; musical; educated," from Mousa "Muse" (see muse (n.)).

 The modern spelling is from 1630s. In classical Greece, any art in which the Muses presided, but especially music and lyric poetry.

 Music is the sound of the universal laws promulgated. [Thoreau] 

 The use of letters to denote music pitch probably is at least as old as ancient Greece, as their numbering system was ill-suited to the job. Natural scales begin at C (not A) because in ancient times the minor mode was more often used than the major one, and the natural minor scale begins at A.

 Meaning "the written or printed score of a composition" is from 1650s.

 Music box is from 1773, originally "barrel organ," by 1845 in reference to the wind-up mechanical device; music hall is by 1842 as "interior space used for musical performances," especially "public hall licensed for musical entertainment" (1857). To make (beautiful) music with someone "have sexual intercourse" is from 1967.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to music 

 Muse (n.) 

 late 14c., "one of the nine Muses of classical mythology," daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne, protectors of the arts; from Old French Muse and directly from Latin Musa , from Greek Mousa , "the Muse," also "music, song," ultimately from PIE root *men- (1) "to think." Meaning "inspiring goddess of a particular poet" (with a lower-case m- ) is from late 14c.

 The traditional names and specialties of the nine Muses are: Calliope (epic poetry), Clio (history), Erato (love poetry, lyric art), Euterpe (music, especially flute), Melpomene (tragedy), Polymnia (hymns), Terpsichore (dance), Thalia (comedy), Urania (astronomy).

 folk-music (n.) 

 "music of the people," 1852 (Andrew Hamilton, "Sixteen Months in the Danish Isles"), from folk in the "of the people" sense (also see folklore ) + music . Modeled on German Volksmusik . In reference to a branch of modern popular music imitative of the simple and artless style of music originating among the common people (originally associated with Greenwich Village in New York City) it dates from 1958.

 Of airs properly national, it should be remembered, the composers are not known. They are found existing among the people, who are ignorant of their origin. They are, to borrow a German phrase, folk-music. [Richard Grant White, "National Hymns," New York, 1861]

 The term National Music implies that music, which, appertaining to a nation or tribe, whose individual emotions and passions it expresses, exhibits certain peculiarities more or less characteristic, which distinguish it from the music of any other nation or tribe.*

 * The Germans call it Volksmusik, a designation which is very appropriate, and which I should have rendered folk-music, had this word been admissible. [Carl Engel, "An Introduction to the Study of National Music," London, 1866]

 muse 
 musical 
 musicaster 
 musician 
 musicology 
 *men- 
 musico- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 musical 

 early 15c., "pertaining to music;" mid-15c., "tuneful, harmonious;" late 15c., "adept at making music," from Medieval Latin musicalis, from Latin musica (see music).  Related: Musically. Musical box is from 1829. Children's or parlor game musical chairs is attested from 1862

 euphony 

 mid-15c., from French euphonie, from Late Latin euphonia, from Greek euphonia "sweetness of voice," related to euphonos "well-sounding," from eu- "good" (see eu-) + phone "sound, voice," from PIE root *bha- (2) "to speak, tell, say." Related: Euphonic (1782); euphonical (1660s); 

 medicine 

 c. 1200, "medical treatment, cure, healing," also (early 14c.) "substance used in treatment of a disease, medicinal potion or plaster," also used figuratively of spiritual remedies, from Old French medecine (Modern French médicine) "medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, poti

 rock 

 The sense developed in early 1950s to "play or dance to rock and roll music." Also see rock (n.2)....In reference to music, by 1938 as "to have a rocking rhythm;" by 1977 as "exhibit the characteristics of rock music."...To rock out "enjoy oneself to rock music" is by 1968....Rocksteady, Jamaican pop music style (precursor of reggae), is attested from 1969....

 classical 

 Classical music (1836) was defined originally against romantic music....["Music, Its Ideals and Methods," W.S.B....time, as well as music of a style contrasted to "romantic."...Still later it stood in contrast to popular music generally (mid-20c.)....

 philharmonic 

 "loving harmony or music," 1813 (in the name of a society founded in London for the promotion of instrumental music), from...Italian filarmonico, literally "loving harmony," from Greek philos "loving" (see philo-) + ta harmonika "theory of harmony, music...

 chromatic 

 c. 1600, in music, "involving tones foreign to the normal tonality of the scale, not diatonic," from Latin chromaticus, from...Greek khrōmatikos "relating to color, suited for color" (also used in reference to music), from khrōma (genitive khrōmatos...Greek also used khrōma for certain modifications of the usual diatonic music scale....The reason the Greeks used this word in music is not now entirely clear....

 refrain 

 mid-14c., refreinen, transitive, "exercise control over, restrain; hold (someone or something) back from action," senses now obsolete, also "exercise control over" (thoughts, desires, feelings, vices, etc.); from Old French refraigner, refrener, refreiner "restrain, repress, keep

 aplenty 

 also a-plenty, "in abundance," by 1829, colloquial when used after the noun, from a- (1) + plenty (n.). Two square feet, or four at most, in one corner of the frame, will give you mustard and cress a plenty for salads, if you take care to make repeated sowings in proper time. [W

 penalty 

 c. 1500, "punishment," from Old French penalite and directly from Medieval Latin penalitatem (nominative penalitas), from Latin poenalis "pertaining to punishment" (see penal). Specifically as "the punishment laid out by law or judicial decision for a violation of the law" is by 

 Share music 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/music Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/music">Etymology of music by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of music. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/music Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of music," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/music. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of music." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/music. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of music." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/music (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near music 
 museum 
 mush 
 mushiness 
 mushroom 
 mushy 
 music 
 musical 
 musicale 
 musicality 
 musicaster 
 musician 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix