URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mangonel
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T15:54:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mangonel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mangonel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mangonel 

 mangonel (n.) 

 "military engine for hurling stones," mid-13c., from Old French mangonel "catapult, war engine for throwing stones, etc." (Modern French mangonneau ), diminutive of Medieval Latin mangonum , from Vulgar Latin *manganum "machine," from Greek manganon "any means of tricking or bewitching," said to be from a PIE *mang- "to embellish, dress, trim" (source also of Old Prussian manga "whore," Middle Irish meng "craft, deception"), but Beekes thinks it might be Pre-Greek. Attested from c. 1200 in Anglo-Latin.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to mangonel 

 mangle (n.) 

 machine for smoothing and pressing linen and cotton clothes after washing, 1774, from Dutch mangel (18c.), apparently short for mangelstok , from stem of mangelen to mangle, from Middle Dutch mange , which probably is somehow from to Vulgar Latin *manganum "machine" (see mangonel ), "but its history has not been precisely traced" [OED].

 The possession of a mangle, for the use of which a small sum was charged, is, among the poorer classes of English cottagers, a common means of earning money. The question 'Has your mother sold her mangle?' (quot. 1836-7) was at one time the commonest piece of 'chaff' used by London street-boys. [OED]

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 catapult 

 1570s, from French catapulte and directly from Latin catapulta "war machine for throwing," from Greek katapeltēs, from kata "against" in reference to walls, or perhaps "through" in reference to armor (see cata-) + base of pallein "to toss, hurl" (from PIE root *pel- (5) "to thrus

 arbalest 

 type of crossbow, also arbalist, c. 1300, from Old French arbaleste "large crossbow with a crank" (12c., Modern French arbalète), from Vulgar Latin *arbalista, from Late Latin arcuballista "catapult," from Latin arcus "bow" (see arc (n.)) + ballista "machine for throwing projecti

 trebuchet 

 "medieval stone-throwing engine of war," c. 1300 (in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French trebuchet (12c.) "stone-throwing siege engine," from trabuchier "to overturn, fall to the ground, overthrow" (11c.), from tra- (from Latin trans-, here expressing "displacement") + 

 engine 

 c. 1300, "mechanical device," especially one used in war; "manner of construction," also "skill, craft, innate ability; deceitfulness, trickery," from Old French engin "skill, wit, cleverness," also "trick, deceit, stratagem; war machine" (12c.), from Latin ingenium "innate quali

 orange 

 late 14c., in reference to the fruit of the orange tree (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), an alteration of Arabic naranj, from P

 personality 

 late 14c., personalite, "quality or fact of being a person," from Old French personalité and directly from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of "a distinctive essential character of a self-conscious being" is

 virus 

 late 14c., "poisonous substance" (a sense now archaic), from Latin virus "poison, sap of plants, slimy liquid, a potent juice," from Proto-Italic *weis-o-(s-) "poison," which is probably from a PIE root *ueis-, perhaps originally meaning "to melt away, to flow," used of foul or m

 elite 

 "a choice or select body, the best part," 1823, from French élite "selection, choice," from Old French eslite (12c.), fem. past participle of elire, elisre "pick out, choose," from Latin eligere "choose" (see election). Borrowed in Middle English as "chosen person" (late 14c.), e

 pardon 

 c. 1300, pardoun, "papal indulgence, forgiveness of sins or wrongdoing," from Old French pardon, from pardoner "to grant; forgive" (11c., Modern French pardonner), "to grant, forgive," and directly from Medieval Latin perdonum, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare "to give wholeheartedly

 ambiguous 

 "of doubtful or uncertain nature, open to various interpretations," 1520s, from Latin ambiguus "having double meaning, shifting, changeable, doubtful," an adjective derived from ambigere "to dispute about, contend, debate," literally "to wander, go about, go around," figuratively

 Share mangonel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mangonel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mangonel">Etymology of mangonel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mangonel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mangonel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mangonel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mangonel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mangonel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mangonel. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mangonel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mangonel (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mangonel 
 manganese 
 mange 
 manger 
 mangle 
 mango 
 mangonel 
 mangrove 
 mangy 
 manhandle 
 man-hater 
 Manhattan 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix