URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/parameter
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:58:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Parameter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Parameter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of parameter 

 parameter (n.) 

 1650s in geometry, in reference to conic sections, from Modern Latin parameter (1630s), from Greek para- "beside, subsidiary" (see para- (1)) + metron "measure" (from PIE root *me- (2) "to measure").

 A geometry term until late 1920s when it began to be extended to "measurable factor which helps to define a particular system," hence the common meaning (influenced by perimeter ) of "boundary, limit, characteristic factor," common from 1950s. Related: Parametric; parametrical .
 also from 1650s 

 Entries linking to parameter 

 *me- (2) 

 *mē- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to measure." Some words may belong instead to root *med- "to take appropriate measures."

 It might form all or part of: amenorrhea ; centimeter ; commensurate ; diameter ; dimension ; gematria ; geometry ; immense ; isometric ; meal (n.1) "food, time for eating;" measure ; menarche ; meniscus ; menopause ; menses ; menstrual ; menstruate ; mensural ; meter (n.1) "poetic measure;" meter (n.2) unit of length; meter (n.3) "device for measuring;" -meter ; Metis ; metric ; metrical ; metronome ; -metry ; Monday ; month ; moon ; parameter ; pentameter ; perimeter ; piecemeal ; semester ; symmetry ; thermometer ; trigonometry ; trimester .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit mati "measures," matra "measure;" Avestan, Old Persian ma- "to measure;" Greek metron "measure," metra "lot, portion;" Latin metri "to measure."

 para- (1) 

 before vowels, par- , word-forming element of Greek origin, "alongside, beyond; altered; contrary; irregular, abnormal," from Greek para- from para (prep.) "beside, near; issuing from; against, contrary to" (from PIE *prea , from root *per- (1) "forward," hence "toward, near; against").

 It is cognate with Old English for- "off, away." Originally in English in Greek-derived words; it has been active in English mostly in scientific and technical words, but until recently was not usually regarded as a naturalized formative element in English.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 argument 

 early 14c., "statements and reasoning in support of a proposition or causing belief in a doubtful matter," from Old French arguement "reasoning, opinion; accusation, charge" (13c.), from Latin argumentum "a logical argument; evidence, ground, support, proof," from arguere "make c

 address 

 early 14c., "to guide, aim, or direct," from Old French adrecier "go straight toward; straighten, set right; point, direct" (13c.), from Vulgar Latin *addirectiare "make straight" (source also of Spanish aderezar, Italian addirizzare), from ad "to" (see ad-) + *directiare "make s

 factor 

 early 15c., "commercial agent, deputy, one who buys or sells for another," from French facteur "agent, representative" (Old French factor, faitor "doer, author, creator"), from Latin factor "doer, maker, performer," in Medieval Latin, "agent," agent noun from past participle stem

 reference 

 1580s, "act of referring" (some matter, to someone for consideration), from refer + -ance, or else from French référence, from Medieval Latin *referentia, from Latin referentem (nominative referens), present participle of referre. Meaning "direction to a book or passage" where ce

 quantity 

 early 14c., quantite, "amount, magnitude, the being so much in measure or extent," from Old French quantite, cantite (12c., Modern French quantité) and directly from Latin quantitatem (nominative quantitas) "relative greatness or extent," coined as a loan-translation of Greek pos

 constant 

 late 14c., "steadfast, resolute; patient, unshakable; fixed or firm in mind," from Old French constant (14c.) or directly from Latin constantem (nominative constans) "standing firm, stable, steadfast, faithful," present participle of constare "to stand together," from assimilated

 value 

 c. 1300, "price equal to the intrinsic worth of a thing;" late 14c., "degree to which something is useful or estimable," from Old French value "worth, price, moral worth; standing, reputation" (13c.), noun use of fem. past participle of valoir "be worth," from Latin valere "be st

 perimeter 

 early 15c., perimetre, "circumference, outer boundary, or border of a figure or surface," from Latin perimetros, from Greek perimetron "circumference," from peri "around, about" (see peri-) + metron "measure" (from PIE root *me- (2) "to measure"). Military sense of "boundary of a

 crucial 

 1706, "cross-shaped, having the form of an X," from French crucial, a medical term for ligaments of the interior of the knee-joint (which cross each other), from Latin crux (genitive crucis) "cross" (see crux). The meaning "decisive, critical, finally disproving one of two altern

 pharmacy 

 late 14c., farmacie, "a medicine that rids the body of an excess of humors (except blood);" also "treatment with medicine; theory of treatment with medicine," from Old French farmacie "a purgative" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin pharmacia, from Greek pharmakeia "a healin

 Share parameter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/parameter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/parameter">Etymology of parameter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of parameter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/parameter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of parameter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parameter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of parameter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parameter. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of parameter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/parameter (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near parameter 
 paralyze 
 paramagnetic 
 paramecium 
 paramedic 
 paramedical 
 parameter 
 paramilitary 
 paramount 
 paramour 
 paranoia 
 paranoiac 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix