URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/syrup
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:32:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Syrup - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Syrup - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of syrup 

 syrup (n.) 

 late 14c., sirup , "thick, sweet liquid," from Old French sirop "sugared drink" (13c.), and perhaps from Italian siroppo , both from Arabic sharab "beverage, wine," literally "something drunk," from verb shariba "he drank" (compare sherbet ). Spanish jarabe , jarope , Old Provençal eissarop are from Arabic; Italian sciroppo is via Medieval Latin sirupus . In English, formerly also sirup , sirop .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to syrup 

 sherbet (n.) 

 1580s as sorbet ; other early spellings include zerbet, cherbet ; the form sherbert is attested by 1670s. Originally a cooling drink of the East, made from diluted fruit juice and sugar and chilled with fresh snow when possible. The word is from Turkish serbet , from Persian sharbat , from Arabic sharba(t) "a drink," from shariba "he drank." A doublet of syrup , and compare sorbet .

 In 16c-18c. in reference to a drink, sometimes served with ice. By 1723 it could also be a prepared syrup that was added to punch or other drinks. The frozen dessert appears to be an Italian invention, attested in English 1760 as sorbetto , offering sherbet in the definition.

 Milk sherbet , with dairy added, is by 1827. French spelling sorbet readopted in English by 1828, originally always with full French name ( sorbet au cafe, sorbet a la pistache, etc.) in recipes that could be indistinguishable from ice cream.

 In later 19c. the French sorbet (in this era, in English cookbooks) necessarily contained alcohol, and was thus differentiated from sherbet. In early 20c. sherbet was distinguished from ices by including egg whites or other stabilizers; around the 1940s the addition of dairy became the designator (an article in Confectionary and Ice Cream World dated July 18, 1947, discusses new state laws requiring milk solids be included in sherbet.) Sorbet lost the alcohol connection after American prohibition, and came to designate a dessert of sweetened fruit juice or pulp without added dairy.

 In chiefly British use, sherbet also refers to a kind of powder that is stirred into water to make a fizzy drink, by 1850.

 sirop (n.) 

 an old or French spelling of syrup (q.v.), used later in a specific sense of "sweetened fruit-juice concentrate" (1871).

 syrupy (adj.) 

 "like syrup," especially "having the consistency of syrup," 1707, from syrup + -y . Related: Syrupiness .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 compote 

 1690s, "fruit preserved in syrup," from French compote "stewed fruit, fruit preserved in syrup," from Old French composte...

 taffy 

 On this theory, the candy would have been made from the syrup skimmed off the liquor during distillation....

 confection 

 In late 14c. also "something prepared or made with sugar or syrup;" sense of "candies, bonbons, light pastry" predominated...

 ripple 

 The meaning "ice cream streaked with colored syrup" is attested by 1939, so called from its appearance....

 maple 

 Maple syrup attested from 1824, American English (earlier maple molasses, 1804)....

 Martini 

 Martini cocktail (1886), originally a mixture of Old Tom gin, vermouth, bitters, and sometimes sherry, curaçao or simple syrup...documented by 1884, this being an iced drink made from gin, vermouth, bitters and maraschino liqueur, sometimes sweetened with syrup...

 sorghum 

 a cane-like grass also known as Indian millet, 1590s, from Modern Latin Sorghum, the genus name, from Italian sorgo "a tall cereal grass," probably from Medieval Latin surgum, suricum (12c.), perhaps a variant of Latin syricum "Syrian," as in Syricum (gramen) "(grass) of Syria," 

 Electra 

 also called Laodice, a daughter of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, the accomplice of her brother Orestes in the murder of their mother, from Greek Ēlektra, literally "shining, bright," related to ēlektōr "the beaming sun" and perhaps to ēlektron "amber." Especially in psychological 

 treacle 

 mid-14c., "medicinal compound, antidote for poison," from Old French triacle "antidote, cure for snake-bite" (c. 1200), from Vulgar Latin *triacula, from Latin theriaca, from Greek thēriakē (antidotos) "antidote for poisonous wild animals," from fem. of thēriakos "of a wild anima

 bingo 

 lotto-like game of chance, 1924; there are many theories about its origin, none satisfying; the most likely is bingo! as an exclamation of sudden realization or surprise (attested from 1923). Uncertain connection to the slang word for "brandy" (1690s), attested as "liquor" in Ame

 Share syrup 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/syrup Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/syrup">Etymology of syrup by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of syrup. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/syrup Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of syrup," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syrup. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of syrup." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/syrup. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of syrup." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/syrup (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near syrup 
 Syracuse 
 Syria 
 Syriac 
 syringe 
 syrinx 
 syrup 
 syrupy 
 systaltic 
 system 
 systematic 
 systematise 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix