URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hygiene
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hygiene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hygiene - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hygiene 

 hygiene (n.) 

 1670s, from French hygiène , ultimately from Greek hygieine techne "the healthful art," from hygies "healthy, sound, hearty," literally "living well" (personified as the goddess Hygieia ), from PIE *eyu-gwie-es- "having a vigorous life," from root *aiw- , *ayu- "vital force, life, long life, eternity; in the prime of life, young" (source of Latin aevus , English ever ). The Greek adjective was used by Aristotle as a noun meaning "health." The difficult spelling in English is a relic of the struggle to render the Greek vowels into French.
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to hygiene 

 hygienic (adj.) 

 1815, from French hygiénique (1812), from hygiène (see hygiene ). The earlier adjective was hygienal (1660s). Related: Hygienics (1836).

 hygienist (n.) 

 1836, "an expert on cleanliness," from hygiene + -ist . Earlier was hygeist (1716). Dental sense is recorded by 1913.

 *aiw- 

 also *ayu- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "vital force, life; long life, eternity."

 It might form all or part of: age ; aught (n.1) "something; anything;" aye (adv.) "always, ever;" Ayurvedic ; coetaneous ; coeval ; each ; eon ; eternal ; eternity ; ever ; every ; ewigkeit ; hygiene ; longevity ; medieval ; nay ; never ; no ; primeval ; sempiternal ; tarnation ; utopia . 

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit ayu- "life;" Avestan aiiu "age, life(time);" Greek aiōn "age, vital force; a period of existence, a lifetime, a generation; a long space of time," in plural, "eternity;" Latin aevum "space of time, eternity;" Gothic aiws "age, eternity," Old Norse ævi "lifetime," German ewig "everlasting," Old English a "ever, always."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 a.s.a.p. 

 Fancher, D.D.S., "The Practical Application of the Dental Hygienist in General Practice," in Oral Hygiene, March 1920) also...

 sanitary 

 1823, "pertaining to health or hygiene," from French sanitaire (1812), from Latin sanitas "health," from sanus "healthy;...

 medicine 

 c. 1200, "medical treatment, cure, healing," also (early 14c.) "substance used in treatment of a disease, medicinal potion or plaster," also used figuratively of spiritual remedies, from Old French medecine (Modern French médicine) "medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, poti

 ever 

 Old English æfre "ever, at any time, always;" of uncertain origin, no cognates in any other Germanic language; perhaps a contraction of a in feore, literally "ever in life" (the expression a to fore is common in Old English writings). First element is almost certainly related to 

 snow 

 Middle English snou, from Old English snaw "snow, that which falls as snow; a fall of snow; a snowstorm," from Proto-Germanic *snaiwaz (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German sneo, Old Frisian and Middle Low German sne, Middle Dutch snee, Dutch sneeuw, German Schnee, Old No

 watershed 

 "line separating waters flowing into different rivers," 1803, from water (n.1) + shed in a topographical sense of "ridge of high ground between two valleys or lower ground, a divide," for which see shed (n.2). Perhaps a loan-translation of German Wasser-scheide. Figurative sense 

 pharmacy 

 late 14c., farmacie, "a medicine that rids the body of an excess of humors (except blood);" also "treatment with medicine; theory of treatment with medicine," from Old French farmacie "a purgative" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin pharmacia, from Greek pharmakeia "a healin

 brunch 

 1896, British student slang merger of breakfast and lunch. ACCORDING to the Lady, to be fashionable nowadays we must "brunch." Truly an excellent portmanteau word, introduced, by the way, last year, by Mr GUY BERINGER, in the now defunct Hunter's Weekly, and indicating a combine

 typhoon 

 Tiphon "violent storm, whirlwind, tornado," 1550s, from Greek typhon "whirlwind," personified as a giant, father of the winds, probably [Beekes] from or related to typhein "to smoke" (see typhus), but according to Watkins from PIE *dheub- "deep, hollow," via notion of "monster fr

 quench 

 Middle English quenchen, "to extinguish, put out" (heat, light, fire, also of desire, hunger, thirst), also figurative, "to bring to naught, eliminate, render ineffectual" (c. 1200), Old English acwencan "to quench" (of fire, light), from Proto-Germanic *kwenkjanan, probably a ca

 Share hygiene 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hygiene Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hygiene">Etymology of hygiene by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hygiene. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hygiene Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hygiene," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hygiene. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hygiene." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hygiene. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hygiene." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hygiene (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hygiene 
 hydroxide 
 Hydrus 
 hyena 
 hyetal 
 hyeto- 
 hygiene 
 hygienic 
 hygienist 
 hygro- 
 hygrology 
 hygrometer 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix