URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/farm
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:07:18Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Farm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Farm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of farm 

 farm (n.) 

 c. 1300, "fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent," from Old French ferme "a rent, lease" (13c.), from Medieval Latin firma "fixed payment," from Latin firmare "to fix, settle, confirm, strengthen," from firmus "strong; stable," figuratively "constant, trusty" (from suffixed form of PIE root *dher- "to hold firmly, support").

 Sense of "tract of leased land" is first recorded early 14c.; that of "cultivated land" (leased or not) is 1520s. A word of confused history, but there is agreement that "the purely agricultural sense is comparatively modern" [Century Dictionary]. There is a set of Old English words that appear to be related in sound and sense; if these, too, are from Latin it would be a very early borrowing. Some books strenuously defend a theory that the Anglo-Saxon words are original (perhaps related to feorh "life").

 Phrase buy the farm "die in battle," is from at least World War II, perhaps a cynical reference to the draftee's dream of getting out of the war and going home, in many cases to a peaceful farmstead. The simple term buy it as slang for "suffer a mishap," especially "to die" is attested by 1825, and seems to have been picked up in airmen's jargon. Meanwhile fetch the farm is prisoner slang from at least 1879 for "get sent to the infirmary," with reference to the better diet and lighter duties there.
 also from c. 1300 

 farm (v.) 

 mid-15c., "to rent (land)," from Anglo-French fermer , from ferme "a rent, lease" (see farm (n.)). The agricultural sense is from 1719. Original sense is retained in to farm out .
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to farm 

 arbor (n.1) 

 c. 1300, herber , "herb garden, pleasure garden," from Old French erbier "field, meadow; kitchen garden," from Latin herba "grass, herb" (see herb ). Later "a grassy plot" (mid-14c., a sense also in Old French), "shaded nook, bower formed by intertwining of trees, shrubs, or vines" (mid-14c.). It is probably not from Latin arbor "tree" (see arbor (n.2)), though perhaps that word has influenced its spelling:

 [O]riginally signifying a place for the cultivation of herbs, a pleasure-ground, garden, subsequently applied to the bower or rustic shelter which commonly occupied the most conspicuous situation in the garden ; and thus the etymological reference to herbs being no longer apparent, the spelling was probably accommodated to the notion of being sheltered by trees or shrubs (
 arbor ). [Hensleigh Wedgwood, "A Dictionary of English Etymology," 1859]

 But the change from er- to ar- before consonants in Middle English also reflects a pronunciation shift: compare farm from ferme , harbor from Old English herebeorg .

 farmer (n.) 

 late 14c., "one who collects taxes, etc.," from Anglo-French fermer , Old French fermier "lease-holder," from Medieval Latin firmarius , from firma "fixed payment" (see farm (n.)). In the agricultural sense, 1590s, replacing native churl and husbandman .

 farm-hand 
 farm-house 
 farming 
 farmland 
 farmstead 
 *dher- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 grow 

 Old English growan (of plants) "to flourish, increase, develop, get bigger" (class VII strong verb; past tense greow, past participle growen), from Proto-Germanic *gro- (source also of Old Norse groa "to grow" (of vegetation), Old Frisian groia, Dutch groeien, Old High German gru

 raise 

 c. 1200, reisen, "cause a rising of; lift upright, set upright; build, construct, bring into being," from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse reisa "to raise," from Proto-Germanic *raizjan (source also of Gothic ur-raisjan, Old English ræran "to rear;" see rear (v.)), causat

 produce 

 early 15c., producen, "develop, proceed, extend, lengthen out," from Latin producere "lead or bring forth, draw out," figuratively "to promote, empower; stretch out, extend," from pro "before, forth" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, before, forth") + ducere

 wick 

 "dairy farm," now surviving, if at all, as a localism in East Anglia or Essex, it was once the common Old English wic "dwelling...place, lodging, house, mansion, abode," then coming to mean "village, hamlet, town," and later "dairy farm" (as in Gatwick..."Goat-farm")....

 grange 

 small village," also "a granary, barn" (early 14c.), "outlying buildings of a monastic or other estate" (late 14c.), "small farm..." (mid-15c.), and compare granger; from Anglo-French graunge, Old French grange "barn, granary; farmstead, farm house" (12c...Sense evolved to "outlying farm" (late 14c.), then "country house," especially of a gentleman farmer (1550s)....

 ranch 

 1808, "country house," from American Spanish rancho "small farm, group of farm huts," from Spanish rancho "small farm, hamlet...The sense of "large stock-farm and herding establishment" is by 1847....In Spanish America, the rancho was a herding operation, distinguished from the hacienda, a cultivated farm or plantation....

 plantation 

 The meaning "large farm on which tobacco or cotton is grown" is recorded by 1706; "Century Dictionary" [1895] defines it...in this sense as "A farm, estate, or tract of land, especially in a tropical or semi-tropical country, such as the southern...

 dairy 

 c. 1300, daerie, "building for making butter and cheese; dairy farm," formed with Anglo-French -erie (from Latin -arius; see -ery) affixed to Middle English daie (in daie maid "dairymaid"), which is from Old English dæge "kneader of bread, housekeeper, female servant" (see dey (n

 diary 

 1580s, "an account of daily events, a journal kept by one person of his or her experiences and observations," from Latin diarium "daily allowance," later "a journal," neuter of diarius "daily," from dies "day" (from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine," in derivatives "sky, heaven, god"); 

 work 

 Old English weorc, worc "something done, discrete act performed by someone, action (whether voluntary or required), proceeding, business; that which is made or manufactured, products of labor," also "physical labor, toil; skilled trade, craft, or occupation; opportunity of expend

 Share farm 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/farm Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/farm">Etymology of farm by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of farm. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/farm Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of farm," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/farm. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of farm." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/farm. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of farm." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/farm (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near farm 
 far-fetched 
 far-flung 
 farina 
 farinaceous 
 -farious 
 farm 
 farmer 
 farm-hand 
 farm-house 
 farming 
 farmland 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix