URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/helicopter
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:02:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Helicopter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Helicopter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of helicopter 

 helicopter (n.) 

 1861, from French hélicoptère "device for enabling airplanes to rise perpendicularly," thus "flying machine propelled by screws." From a Latinized combining form of Greek helix (genitive helikos ) "spiral" (see helix ) + pteron "wing" (from PIE root *pet- "to rush, to fly").

 The idea was to gain lift from spiral aerofoils, and it didn't work. Used by Jules Verne and the Wright Brothers, the word was transferred to helicopters in the modern sense by 1918 when those began to be developed. Nativized in Flemish as wentelwiek "with rotary vanes."

 also from 1861 

 Entries linking to helicopter 

 helix (n.) 

 "a spiral thing," 1560s, originally of the volutes of Corinthian capitals, from Latin helix "spiral, a volute in architecture," from Greek helix (genitive helikos ), a word used of anything in a spiral shape (an armlet, a curl of hair, the tendril of a vine, a serpent's coil), which is related to eilein "to turn, twist, roll" (reconstructed in Watkins to be from PIE *wel-ik- , from root *wel- (3) "to turn, revolve"). The classical plural is helices .

 gyrocopter (n.) 

 1915, from gyro- + ending as in helicopter .

 heliport 
 *pet- 
 heli- 
 *wel- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pad 

 Sense of "takeoff or landing place for a helicopter or missile" is from 1949; the notion is of something to prevent friction...

 blade 

 Old English blæd "a leaf," also "a leaf-like part" (of a spade, oar, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *bladaz (source also of Old Frisian bled "leaf," German Blatt, Old Saxon, Danish, Dutch blad, Old Norse blað), from PIE *bhle-to-, suffixed form (past participle) of root *bhel- (3) "t

 nave 

 "main part of a church," the middle part, lengthwise, extending typically from the main entrance to the choir or chancel, 1670s, from Medieval Latin navem (nominative navis) "nave of a church," a special use of Latin navis "ship" (from PIE root *nau- "boat"), on some fancied rese

 civil 

 late 14c., "relating to civil law or life; pertaining to the internal affairs of a state," from Old French civil "civil, relating to civil law" (13c.) and directly from Latin civilis "relating to a society, pertaining to public life, relating to the civic order, befitting a citiz

 oasis 

 "fertile spot in a desert, where there is a spring or well and more or less vegetation," originally in reference to the Libyan desert, 1610s, from French oasis (18c.) and directly from Late Latin oasis, from Greek oasis, probably from Hamitic (compare Coptic wahe, ouahe "oasis," 

 juggernaut 

 "an idea, custom, fashion, etc., that demands either blind devotion or merciless sacrifice," 1854, a figurative use of Juggernaut, 1630s (Iaggernat), "huge wagon bearing an image of the god Krishna," especially that at the town of Puri, drawn annually in procession during which (

 exploit 

 late 14c., "outcome of an action," from Old French esploit "a carrying out; achievement, result; gain, advantage" (12c., Modern French exploit), a very common word, used in senses of "action, deed, profit, achievement," from Latin explicitum "a thing settled, ended, or displayed,

 Mary 

 fem. proper name, Old English Maria, Marie, name of the mother of Jesus, from Latin Maria, from Greek Mariam, Maria, from Aramaic Maryam, from Hebrew Miryam, name of the sister of Moses (Exodus xv), a word of unknown origin, said to mean literally "rebellion." The nursery rhyme "

 potential 

 late 14c., "possible" (as opposed to actual), "capable of being or becoming," from Old French potenciel and directly from Medieval Latin potentialis "potential," from Latin potentia "power, might, force;" figuratively "political power, authority, influence," from potens "powerful

 dearth 

 c. 1300, derthe "scarcity of food," of other situations of scarcity by mid-14c., abstract noun from root of Old English deore "precious, costly" (see dear) + abstract noun suffix -th (2). A common Germanic formation, though not always with the same sense (Old Saxon diurtha "splen

 Share helicopter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/helicopter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/helicopter">Etymology of helicopter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of helicopter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/helicopter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of helicopter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/helicopter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of helicopter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/helicopter. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of helicopter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/helicopter (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near helicopter 
 Helga 
 heli- 
 heliacal 
 helical 
 Helicon 
 helicopter 
 Heligoland 
 helio- 
 heliocentric 
 heliograph 
 heliolatry 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix