URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/goat
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:04:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Goat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Goat - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of goat 

 goat (n.) 

 Old English gat "she-goat," from Proto-Germanic *gaito (source also of Old Saxon get , Old Norse geit , Danish gjed , Middle Dutch gheet , Dutch geit , Old High German geiz , German Geiß , Gothic gaits "goat"), from PIE *ghaid-o- "young goat," also forming words for "to play" (source also of Latin hædus "kid").

 They are sprightly, capricious, and wanton, and their strong odor (technically called hircine ) is proverbial. [Century Dictionary]

 The word for "male goat" in Old English was bucca or gatbucca (see buck (n.)) until late 1300s shift to he-goat , she-goat ( Nanny goat is 18c., billy goat 19c.).

 The meaning "licentious man" is attested from 1670s (hence goat-milker , name of a bird formerly believed to suck the milk from goats at night, but also old slang for "a prostitute," also "the female pudendum").

 To get (someone's) goat is by 1908, American English, the source of many fanciful explanation stories; perhaps from French prendre sa chèvre "take one's source of milk," or more likely it is "to steal a goat mascot" from a racehorse, warship, fire company, military unit, etc.

 ... to become separated from your goat is a thing no soldierman is willing to contemplate. ["Letitia, Nursery Corps, U.S.A.," in American Magazine, vol. lxiv, June 1907]

 Entries linking to goat 

 buck (n.1) 

 "male deer," c. 1300, earlier "male goat;" from Old English bucca "male goat," from Proto-Germanic *bukkon (source also of Old Saxon buck , Middle Dutch boc , Dutch bok , Old High German boc , German Bock , Old Norse bokkr ), perhaps from a PIE root *bhugo (source also of Avestan buza "buck, goat," Armenian buc "lamb"), but some speculate that it is from a lost pre-Germanic language. Barnhart says Old English buc "male deer," listed in some sources, is a "ghost word or scribal error." The Germanic word (in the sense "he-goat") was borrowed in French as bouc .

 The meaning "a man" is from c. 1300 (Old Norse bokki also was used in this sense). Especially "fashionable man" (1725); also used of a male Native American (c. 1800) or Negro (1835). This also is perhaps the sense in army slang buck private "private of the lowest class" (1870s).

 The phrase pass the buck is recorded in the literal sense 1865, American English poker slang; the buck in question being originally perhaps a buckhorn-handled knife:

 The 'buck' is any inanimate object, usually [a] knife or pencil, which is thrown into a jack pot and temporarily taken by the winner of the pot. Whenever the deal reaches the holder of the 'buck', a new jack pot must be made. [J.W. Keller, "Draw Poker," 1887]

 The figurative sense of "shift responsibility" is first recorded 1912; the phrase the buck stops here (1952) is associated with U.S. President Harry Truman.

 billy-goat (n.) 

 familiar name for a male goat, by 1826, from the familiar form of William ; also see goat (n.), and compare billy . 

 goatherd 
 goatish 
 goatskin 
 goaty 
 pet 
 scapegoat 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pet 

 "domesticated or tamed animal kept as a favorite," 1530s, originally in Scottish and northern England dialect (and exclusively so until mid-18c.), a word of unknown origin. Sense of "indulged or favorite child" (c. 1500) is recorded slightly earlier than that of "animal kept as a

 scapegoat 

 1530, "goat sent into the wilderness on the Day of Atonement as a symbolic bearer of the sins of the people," coined by Tyndale from scape, a shortening of escape (see scape (v.)) + goat; the whole word translating Latin caper emissarius, itself a translation in Vulgate of Hebrew

 tragedy 

 from Greek tragodia "a dramatic poem or play in formal language and having an unhappy resolution," apparently literally "goat...song," from tragos "goat, buck" + ōidē "song" (see ode), probably on model of rhapsodos (see rhapsody)....But many other theories have been made (including "singer who competes for a goat as a prize"), and even the "goat" connection...

 cab 

 , a caper," earlier capriole (16c.), from Italian capriola "a caper, frisk, leap," literally "a leap like that of a kid goat...," from capriola "a kid, a fawn," from Latin capreolus "wild goat, roebuck," from caper, capri "he-goat, buck," from PIE...*kap-ro- "he-goat, buck" (source also of Old Irish gabor, Welsh gafr, Old English hæfr, Old Norse hafr "he-goat")....

 aegis 

 aegis, from Greek Aigis, the name of the shield of Zeus, a word said by Herodotus to be related to aix (genitive aigos) "goat...," from PIE *aig- "goat" (source also of Sanskrit ajah, Lithuanian ožys "he-goat"), as the shield was of goatskin....Athene's aigis was a short goat-skin cloak, set with a gorgon's head and fringed with snakes....

 nanny 

 The word also is a nickname form of the fem. proper name Ann, which probably is the sense in nanny-goat "female goat" (1706..., compare billy-goat)....

 tragic 

 from Greek tragikos "of or pertaining to tragedy; stately, majestic; plaintive," literally "goatish, of or pertaining to a goat...," and perhaps referring to a satyr impersonated by a goat singer or satyric actor, from tragodia (see tragedy)....

 horn 

 Old English horn "horn of an animal; projection, pinnacle," also "wind instrument" (originally one made from animal horns), from Proto-Germanic *hurni- (source also of German Horn, Dutch horen, Old Frisian horn, Gothic haurn), from PIE root *ker- (1) "horn; head." Late 14c. as "o

 laughing-stock 

 also laughingstock; 1510s, formed by analogy with whipping-stock "whipping post," later also "object of frequent whipping" (but that word is not attested in writing in this sense until 1670s). See laughing + stock (n.1). Also in the same sense was jesting-stock (1530s), and compa

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 Share goat 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/goat Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/goat">Etymology of goat by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of goat. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/goat Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of goat," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/goat. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of goat." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/goat. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of goat." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/goat (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near goat 
 go-ahead 
 goal 
 goalie 
 goalless 
 goal-post 
 goat 
 goatee 
 goatherd 
 goatish 
 goatskin 
 goaty 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix