URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/magazine
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:20:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Magazine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Magazine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of magazine 

 magazine (n.) 

 1580s, "warehouse, place for storing goods, especially military ammunition," from French magasin "warehouse, depot, store" (15c.), from Italian magazzino , from Arabic makhazin , plural of makhzan "storehouse" (source of Spanish almacén "warehouse, magazine"), from khazana "to store up." The original sense is almost obsolete. Meaning "cartridge chamber in a repeating rifle" is by 1868; that of "a case in which a supply of cartridges is carried" is by 1892. 

 The meaning "periodical journal containing miscellaneous writings" dates from the publication of the first one, Gentleman's Magazine , in 1731, which was so called from earlier use of the word for printed lists of military stores and information, or in a figurative sense, from the publication being a "storehouse" of information (originally of books, 1630s).
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to magazine 

 fanzine (n.) 

 Also fan zine "magazine produced by and for fans of a genre or property" by 1941, from fan (n.2) + suffix abstracted from magazine . Earlier fan magazine is by 1939, originally of science fiction.

 mag (adj.) 

 1969 in reference to car wheels, "made of magnesium alloy." As an abbreviation of magazine , it dates from 1801.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 clip 

 "to cut or sever with a sharp instrument," c. 1200, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse klippa, Swedish klippa, Danish klippe "clip, shear, cut"), which is probably echoic. Related: Clipped; clipping. Meaning "to pronounce words in a shortened form" is from 1520s. The v

 cartridge 

 1570s, cartage, "case of cardboard, tin, etc., holding a charge of gunpowder" (also with the bullet or shot in firearms), corruption of French cartouche "a full charge for a pistol," originally wrapped in paper (16c.), from Italian cartoccio "roll of paper," an augmentative form 

 burglarize 

 "The Yankeeisms donated, collided, and burglarized have been badly used up by an English magazine writer." ( Southern Magazine...

 blurb 

 Munsey when he wrote on the front of his magazine in red ink 'I consider this number of Munsey's the hottest pie that ever...Fame, and it is seldom honored.["] [Publishers' Weekly, May 18, 1907] Burgess occasionally wrote for Munsey's popular magazine...

 ABC 

 As a shortening of American Broadcasting Company from 1944 (in a Billboard magazine headline), earlier of Australian Broadcasting...

 zillion 

 1916, arbitrary humorous coinage with no definite numerical value; a 1922 representation of youthful exaggeration in a magazine...

 flophouse 

 [McClure's magazine, November 1904]...

 depot 

 1795, "warehouse or storehouse for receiving goods for storage, sale, or transfer," from French dépôt "a deposit, place of deposit," from Old French depost "a deposit or pledge," from Latin depositum "a deposit," noun use of neuter past participle of deponere "lay aside, put down

 production 

 c. 1400, produccioun, "a coming into being," from Old French production "production, exhibition" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin productionem (nominative productio) "a prolonging, lengthening," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin producere "bring forth" (see

 press 

 c. 1300, presse, "a crowd, throng, company; crowding and jostling of a throng; a massing together," from Old French presse (n.) "a throng, a crush, a crowd; wine or cheese press" (11c.), from Latin pressare (see press (v.1)). Late Old English had press in the sense of "clothes pr

 Share magazine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/magazine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/magazine">Etymology of magazine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of magazine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/magazine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of magazine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/magazine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of magazine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/magazine. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of magazine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/magazine (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near magazine 
 maffick 
 mafia 
 mag 
 *mag- 
 MAGA 
 magazine 
 magdalen 
 Magdalene 
 mage 
 Magellanic 
 magenta 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix