URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pewter
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:38:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pewter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pewter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pewter 

 pewter (n.) 

 early 14c., peutre , "any of various alloys having tin as their main constituent" (the usual ratio is one part lead to four parts tin), used to make tableware, beer pots, and church vessels, from Old French peautre (12c.) and Medieval Latin peutrum , from Vulgar Latin *peltrum "pewter" (source of Spanish peltre , Italian peltro ), a word of uncertain origin. From mid-15c. as "tableware of pewter;" by late 14c. as an adjective. Related: Pewterer .
 also from early 14c. 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sad 

 course would be through the common Middle English sense of "steadfast, firmly established, fixed" (as in sad-ware "tough pewter...

 metal 

 an undecomposable elementary substance having certain recognizable qualities (opacity, conductivity, plasticity, high specific gravity, etc.), mid-13c., from Old French metal "metal; material, substance, stuff" (12c.), from Latin metallum "metal, mineral; mine, quarry," from Gree

 alloy 

 early 14c. "relative freedom of a noble metal from alloy or other impurities," from Anglo-French alai, Old French aloi "alloy," from aloiier (see alloy (v.)). The meaning " base metal alloyed with a noble metal" is from c. 1400. The modern spelling from late 17c. The meaning "any

 loyal 

 "true or faithful in allegiance," 1530s, in reference to subjects of sovereigns or governments, from French loyal, from Old French loial, leal "of good quality; faithful; honorable; law-abiding; legitimate, born in wedlock," from Latin legalem, from lex "law" (see legal). Identic

 atavism 

 1833, in biology, "reversion by influence of heredity to ancestral characteristics, resemblance of a given organism to some remote ancestor, return to an early or original type," from French atavisme, attested by 1820s, said to have been coined by French botanist Antoine-Nicolas 

 lede 

 by 1965, alternative spelling of lead (n.2) in the newspaper journalism sense, to distinguish this specialized sense from other possible meanings of the written word, perhaps especially the molten lead (n.1) used in 20c. typesetting machines...."a people, nation, race; the subjec

 blood 

 Old English blod "blood, fluid which circulates in the arteries and veins," from Proto-Germanic *blodam "blood" (source also of Old Frisian blod, Old Saxon blôd, Old Norse bloð, Middle Dutch bloet, Dutch bloed, Old High German bluot, German Blut, Gothic bloþ), according to some s

 instinct 

 early 15c., "a prompting" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French instinct (14c.) or directly from Latin instinctus "instigation, impulse, inspiration," noun use of past participle of instinguere "to incite, impel," from in- "into, in, on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + stingue

 sphere 

 a re-Latinized spelling, attested beginning mid-15c., of Middle English spere (c. 1300) "cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow globe about the world," from Anglo-French espiere, Old French espere (13c., Modern French sphère), from Latin sphaera "globe, ball, celestial sphere" (Med

 sacrifice 

 late 13c., "the offering of something (especially a life) to a deity as an act of propitiation, homage, etc.;" mid-14c., "that which is offered (to a deity) in sacrifice," from Old French sacrifise "sacrifice, offering" (12c.), from Latin sacrificium, from sacrificus "performing 

 Share pewter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pewter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pewter">Etymology of pewter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pewter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pewter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pewter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pewter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pewter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pewter. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pewter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pewter (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pewter 
 petulant 
 petunia 
 *peuk- 
 pew 
 pewee 
 pewter 
 peyote 
 Pez 
 pH 
 Ph.D 
 phaeton 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix