URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/indigo
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Indigo - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Indigo - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of indigo 

 indigo (n.) 

 17c. spelling change of indico (1550s), "blue powder obtained from certain plants and used as a dye," from Spanish indico , Portuguese endego , and Dutch (via Portuguese) indigo , all from Latin indicum "indigo," from Greek indikon "blue dye from India," literally "Indian (substance)," neuter of indikos "Indian," from India (see India ).

 Replaced Middle English ynde (late 13c., from Old French inde "indigo; blue, violet" (13c.), from Latin indicum ). Earlier name in Mediterranean languages was annil , anil (see aniline ). As "the color of indigo" from 1620s. As the name of the violet-blue color of the spectrum, 1704 (Newton).
 also from 17c. 

 Entries linking to indigo 

 aniline (n.) 

 chemical base used in making colorful dyes, 1843, coined 1841 by German chemist Carl Julius Fritzsche and adopted by Hofmann, ultimately from Portuguese anil "the indigo shrub," from Arabic an-nil "the indigo," assimilated from al-nil (with Arabic definite article al- ), from Persian nila , ultimately from Sanskrit nili "indigo," from nilah "dark blue."

 With suffix -ine indicating "derived substance" (see -ine (1); also see -ine (2) for the later, more precise, use of the suffix in chemistry). Discovered in 1826 in indigo and at first called crystallin ; it became commercially important in 1856 when mauve dye was made from it. As an adjective from 1860.

 India 

 "the Indian subcontinent, central Asia south of the Himalayas," formerly sometimes used generally for "Asia;" Old English India , Indea , from Latin India , from Greek India "region of the Indus River," later used of the region beyond it, from Indos "Indus River," also "an Indian," from Old Persian Hindu , the name for the province of Sind, from Sanskrit sindhu "river."

 The more common Middle English form was Ynde or Inde , from Old French (hence Indies ). The form India began to prevail again in English from 16c., perhaps under Spanish or Portuguese influence. From 1947 in reference to the Republic of India.

 indium 
 perse 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 indium 

 metallic element, 1864, Modern Latin, from indicum "indigo" (see indigo) + chemical name element -ium. So called for its spectral lines. Ferdinand Reich (1799-1882), professor of physics at Freiberg, isolated it while analyzing local zinc ores in 1863 and identified it as a new e

 woad 

 Formerly much cultivated; since superseded by indigo. French guède, Italian guado are Germanic loan-words....

 dey 

 Old English dæge "female servant, woman who handles food in a household, housekeeper," from Proto-Germanic *daigjon (source also of Old Norse deigja "maid, female servant," Swedish deja "dairymaid"), from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build." Now obsolete (though OED says, "Still i

 dye 

 "coloring matter in solution," Middle English deie, from Old English deah, deag "a color, hue, tinge," from Proto-Germanic *daugo (source also of Old Saxon dogol "secret," Old High German tougal "dark, hidden, secret," Old English deagol "secret, hidden; dark, obscure," dohs, dox

 bush 

 "many-stemmed woody plant," from Old English bysc (found in place names), from West Germanic *busk "bush, thicket" (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with Old French (busche "firewood") and Medieval Latin

 nail 

 Old English negel "tapering metal pin," nægl "fingernail (handnægl), toenail," from Proto-Germanic *naglaz (source also of Old Norse nagl "fingernail," nagli "metal nail;" Old Saxon and Old High German nagel, Old Frisian neil, Middle Dutch naghel, Dutch nagel, German Nagel "finge

 brush 

 "instrument consisting of flexible material (bristles, hair, etc.) attached to a handle or stock," late 14c., "dust-sweeper, a brush for sweeping," from Old French broisse, broce "a brush" (13c., Modern French brosse), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *bruscia "a bunch of new shoots" (u

 shrub 

 "low-growing bush, a woody plant with stems branched from or near the ground," Middle English shrubbe, from Old English scrybb "brushwood, shrubbery," a rare and late word (but preserved also, perhaps, in Shrewsbury), possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Danish 

 plant 

 Old English plante "young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, a shoot or strip recently sprouted from seed," from Latin planta "sprout, shoot, cutting" (source of Spanish planta, French plante), which is perhaps from an unattested verb *plantare "to drive in with the feet, push in

 clean 

 Old English clæne "free from dirt or filth, unmixed with foreign or extraneous matter; morally pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open," of beasts, "not forbidden by ceremonial law to eat," from West Germanic *klainja- "clear, pure" (source also of Old Saxon kleni "dainty, deli

 Share indigo 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/indigo Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/indigo">Etymology of indigo by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of indigo. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/indigo Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of indigo," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/indigo. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of indigo." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/indigo. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of indigo." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/indigo (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near indigo 
 indigestion 
 indignance 
 indignant 
 indignation 
 indignity 
 indigo 
 indirect 
 indirection 
 indirectly 
 indiscernible 
 indiscipline 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix