URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pray
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:57:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pray - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pray - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pray 

 pray (v.) 

 early 13c., preien , "ask earnestly, beg (someone)," also (c. 1300) in a religious sense, "pray to a god or saint," from Old French preier "to pray" (c. 900, Modern French prier ), from Vulgar Latin *precare (also source of Italian pregare ), from Latin precari "ask earnestly, beg, entreat," from *prex (plural preces , genitive precis ) "prayer, request, entreaty," from PIE root *prek- "to ask, request, entreat."

 From early 14c. as "to invite." The deferential parenthetical expression I pray you , "please, if you will," attested from late 14c. (from c. 1300 as I pray thee ), was contracted to pray in 16c. Related: Prayed ; praying .

 Praying mantis attested from 1809 ( praying locust is from 1752; praying insect by 1816; see mantis ). The Gardener's Monthly of July 1861 lists other names for it as camel cricket , soothsayer , and rear horse .
 also from early 13c. 

 Entries linking to pray 

 mantis (n.) 

 1650s, "type of insect that holds its forelegs in a praying position" (especially the praying mantis, Mantis religiosa ), Modern Latin, from Greek mantis , used of some sort of elongated insect with long forelimbs (Theocritus), literally "one who divines, a seer, prophet," from mainesthai "be inspired," related to menos "passion, spirit," from PIE *mnyo- , suffixed form of root *men- (1) "to think," with derivatives referring to qualities and states of mind or thought (compare mania and -mancy ).

 The insects, which live in temperate and tropical regions worldwide, are so called for its way of holding the enlarged forelimbs as if in prayer. The mantis shrimp (by 1853; earlier sea-mantis , 1690s) is so called for its resemblance to the insect.

 ask (v.) 

 Middle English asken , from Old English ascian "ask, call for an answer; make a request," earlier ahsian , from Proto-Germanic *aiskojanan , which is reconstructed (Watkins) to be from PIE *ais- "to wish, desire" (source also of Sanskrit icchati "seeks, desires," Armenian aic "investigation," Old Church Slavonic iskati "to seek," Lithuanian ieškau, ieškoti "to seek").

 The form in English was influenced by a Scandinavian cognate (such as Danish æske ); the Old English would have evolved by normal sound changes into ash , esh , which was a Midlands and southwestern England dialect form. Modern dialectal ax is as old as Old English acsian and was an accepted literary variant until c. 1600 ("[Jesus] answered and sayed unto them : I also will axe you a question." Luke xx, Tyndale, 1526). Related: Asked ; asking .

 Other Germanic cognates include Old Saxon escon , Old Frisian askia "request, demand, ask," Middle Dutch eiscen , Dutch eisen "to ask, demand," Old High German eiscon "to ask (a question)," German heischen "to ask, demand."

 Old English also had fregnan / frignan which carried more directly the sense of "question, inquire," and is from PIE root *prek- , the common source of words for "ask" in most Indo-European languages (see pray ). If you ask me "in my opinion" is attested from 1910.

 prayer 
 prithee 
 *prek- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 prayer 

 c. 1300, preiere, "earnest request, entreaty, petition," also "the practice of praying or of communing with God," from Old French prier "prayer, petition, request" (12c., Modern French prière), from Medieval Latin precaria "petition, prayer," noun use of Latin adjective precaria,

 beg 

 "to ask alms," especially to do so habitually as one's way of life, c. 1200, a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from the rare Old English bedecian "to beg," from Proto-Germanic *beth-. Or from Anglo-French begger, a back-formation from Old French noun begart (see beggar (n.)) an

 implore 

 c. 1500, from French implorer and directly from Latin implorare "call on for help, beseech, beg earnestly," with a literal sense probably of "plead tearfully, invoke with weeping," from assimilated form of in- "on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + plorare "to weep, cry out," a wo

 imprecation 

 imprecationem (nominative imprecatio) "an invoking of evil," noun of action from past participle stem of imprecari "invoke, pray..., call down upon," from assimilated form of in- "into, in, within" (from PIE root *en "in") + precari "to pray, ask, beg,...

 deprecation 

 averting by prayer," noun of action from past-participle stem of deprecari "plead in excuse; avert by prayer," literally "to pray...(something) away," from de "away" (see de-) + precari "to pray" (from PIE root *prek- "to ask, entreat")....

 bid 

 influence or confusion of two older words: The sense in bid farewell is from Old English biddan "to ask, entreat, beg, pray..., beseech; order" (class V strong verb, past tense bæd, past participle beden), from Proto-Germanic *bedjanan "to pray, entreat...This, according to Kluge and Watkins, is from a PIE root *gwhedh- "to ask, pray" (see bead (n.))....

 bead 

 German beta, German bitte, Gothic bida "prayer, request," which according to Watkins is from a PIE root *gwhedh- "to ask, pray...The word is also related to bid (Old English biddan) and Gothic bidjan "to ask, pray."...

 importune 

 "harass with solicitation, demand persistently," 1520s, back-formation from importunity, or else from French importuner, from Medieval Latin importunari "to make oneself troublesome," from Latin importunus "unfit, unfavorable, troublesome," literally "having no harbor" (thus "dif

 insist 

 1580s, from French insister (14c.) or directly from Latin insistere "take a stand, stand on, stand still; follow, pursue; insist, press vigorously, urge, dwell upon," from in- "upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + sistere "take a stand," from PIE *si-st-, reduplicated form of root *s

 crave 

 Old English crafian "ask, implore, demand by right," from North Germanic *krabojan (source also of Old Norse krefja "to demand," Danish kræve, Swedish kräva); perhaps related to craft (n.) in its base sense of "power." Current sense "to long for, eagerly desire" is c. 1400, proba

 Share pray 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pray Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pray">Etymology of pray by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pray. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pray Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pray," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pray. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pray." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pray. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pray." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pray (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pray 
 Pratt 
 prattle 
 pravity 
 prawn 
 praxis 
 pray 
 prayer 
 prayerful 
 pre- 
 preach 
 preacher 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix