URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/algebra
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Algebra - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Algebra - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of algebra 

 algebra (n.) 

 "formal mathematics; the analysis of equations; the art of reasoning about quantitative relations by the aid of a compact and highly systematized notation," 1550s, from Medieval Latin algebra , from Arabic "al-mukhtasar fi hisab al-jabr wa al-muqabala" ("the compendium on calculation by restoring and balancing"), the title of the famous 9c. treatise on equations by Baghdad mathematician Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi.

 Arabic al jabr ("in vulgar pronunciation, al-jebr " [Klein]) "reunion of broken parts" (reducing fractions to integers in computation) was one of the two preparatory steps to solving algebraic equations; it is from Arabic jabara "reintegrate, reunite, consolidate." Al-Khwarizmi's book (translated into Latin in 12c.) also introduced Arabic numerals to the West.

 John Dee (16c.) calls the work algiebar and almachabel . The accent shifted 17c. from second syllable to first. The same word was used in English 15c.-16c. to mean "bone-setting," as was Medieval Latin algebra , a usage picked up probably from Arab medical men in Spain.
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to algebra 

 algebraic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to algebra," 1660s, from algebra + -ic . Earlier was algebraical (1570s). Related: algebraically .

 algorithm (n.) 

 1690s, "Arabic system of computation," from French algorithme , refashioned (under mistaken connection with Greek arithmos "number") from Old French algorisme "the Arabic numeral system" (13c.), from Medieval Latin algorismus , a mangled transliteration of Arabic al-Khwarizmi "native of Khwarazm" (modern Khiva in Uzbekistan), surname of the mathematician whose works introduced sophisticated mathematics to the West (see algebra ). The earlier form in Middle English was algorism (early 13c.), from Old French. The meaning broadened to any method of computation; from mid-20c. especially with reference to computing.

 al- 

 in words from Arabic (or assumed to be), it is the definite article "the." Sometimes rendered in English as el- . Often assimilated to following consonants ( as- , az- , ar- , am- , an- , etc.). Examples include almanac , alchemy , alcohol , algebra .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 exponent 

 Earliest use is the mathematical one (said to have been introduced in algebra by Descartes) for the symbol placed above and...

 and 

 Old English and, ond, originally meaning "thereupon, next," from Proto-Germanic *unda (source also of Old Saxon endi, Old Frisian anda, Middle Dutch ende, Old High German enti, German und, Old Norse enn), from PIE root *en "in." Introductory use (implying connection to something 

 perfunctory 

 "done mechanically or without interest or zeal and merely for the sake of being rid of the duty of doing it; done so as to conform to the letter but not the spirit," 1580s, from Late Latin perfunctorius "careless, negligent," literally "like one who wishes to get through a thing,

 obelisk 

 "tapering rectangular stone column with a pyramidal apex," 1560s, from French obélisque (16c.) and directly from Latin obeliscus "obelisk, small spit," from Greek obeliskos "small spit, obelisk, leg of a compass," diminutive of obelos "a spit, pointed pillar, needle, broach; obel

 blunt 

 c. 1200, blunt, blont, "dull, obtuse" (of persons), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra "to shut one's eyes" (see blunder (v.)). Or from Old English blinnan (past participle blon) "to stop, cease, come to an end." Of tools or weapons, "not sharp, wit

 peanut 

 1807; see pea + nut. Earlier, and still commonly in England, ground nut, ground pea (1769). The plant is native to South America; Portuguese traders took peanuts from Brazil and Peru to Africa by 1502 and it is known to have been cultivated in Chekiang Province in China by 1573, 

 artillery 

 late 14c., "warlike munitions," especially ballistic engines, from Anglo-French artillerie, Old French artillerie (14c.), from artillier "to provide with engines of war" (13c.), which probably is from Medieval Latin articulum "art, skill," a diminutive of Latin ars (genitive arti

 compound 

 late 14c., compounen, "to put together, to mix, to combine; to join, couple together," from Old French compondre, componre "arrange, direct," and directly from Latin componere "to put together," from com "with, together" (see com-) + ponere "to place" (see position (n.)). The une

 emanation 

 "act of flowing or issuing from an origin; emission; radiation; what issues, flows, or is given out from any substance or body;" 1560s, from Late Latin emanationem (nominative emanatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin emanare "flow out, spring out of," figurati

 arrogance 

 "a manifest feeling of superiority of one's worth or importance, combined with contempt of others," c. 1300, from Old French arrogance (12c.), from Latin arrogantia "presumption, pride, haughtiness," abstract noun from arrogantem (nominative arrogans) "assuming, overbearing, inso

 Share algebra 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/algebra Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/algebra">Etymology of algebra by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of algebra. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/algebra Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of algebra," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/algebra. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of algebra." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/algebra. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of algebra." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/algebra (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near algebra 
 Alfredo 
 alfresco 
 alga 
 algae 
 algal 
 algebra 
 algebraic 
 Algeria 
 Algernon 
 -algia 
 Algol 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix