URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/butcher
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:45:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Butcher - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Butcher - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of butcher 

 butcher (n.) 

 c. 1300, "one who slaughters animals for market," from Anglo-French boucher , from Old French bochier "butcher, executioner" (12c., Modern French boucher ), probably literally "slaughterer of goats," from bouc "male goat," from Frankish *bukk or some other Germanic source (see buck (n.1)) or Celtic *bukkos "he-goat." Figurative sense of "brutal murderer, one who kills indiscriminately or cruelly" is attested from 1520s. Related: Butcherly . Old English had flæscmangere "butcher" ('flesh-monger').
 also from c. 1300 

 butcher (v.) 

 1560s, "kill or slaughter for food or market," from butcher (n.). Figuratively, "bungle, botch, spoil by bad work," 1640s. Related: Butchered ; butchering . Re-nouned 1640s as butcherer .
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to butcher 

 buck (n.1) 

 "male deer," c. 1300, earlier "male goat;" from Old English bucca "male goat," from Proto-Germanic *bukkon (source also of Old Saxon buck , Middle Dutch boc , Dutch bok , Old High German boc , German Bock , Old Norse bokkr ), perhaps from a PIE root *bhugo (source also of Avestan buza "buck, goat," Armenian buc "lamb"), but some speculate that it is from a lost pre-Germanic language. Barnhart says Old English buc "male deer," listed in some sources, is a "ghost word or scribal error." The Germanic word (in the sense "he-goat") was borrowed in French as bouc .

 The meaning "a man" is from c. 1300 (Old Norse bokki also was used in this sense). Especially "fashionable man" (1725); also used of a male Native American (c. 1800) or Negro (1835). This also is perhaps the sense in army slang buck private "private of the lowest class" (1870s).

 The phrase pass the buck is recorded in the literal sense 1865, American English poker slang; the buck in question being originally perhaps a buckhorn-handled knife:

 The 'buck' is any inanimate object, usually [a] knife or pencil, which is thrown into a jack pot and temporarily taken by the winner of the pot. Whenever the deal reaches the holder of the 'buck', a new jack pot must be made. [J.W. Keller, "Draw Poker," 1887]

 The figurative sense of "shift responsibility" is first recorded 1912; the phrase the buck stops here (1952) is associated with U.S. President Harry Truman.

 butch (n.) 

 "tough youth," 1902, first attested in nickname of U.S. outlaw George Cassidy (1866-?), probably an abbreviation of butcher (n.). Sense of "aggressive lesbian" is by 1940s. As an adjective by 1941.

 butcher-knife 
 butchery 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 charcuterie 

 cold cuts of pork, sausage, etc.," 1858, from French charcuterie, literally "pork-butcher's shop," from charcutier "pork-butcher...Compare French charcutier "pork butcher; meat roaster, seller of cooked (not raw) meat."...

 filet 

 entrecôte,' and the 'filet mignon' (of mutton), with other forms, are all due to the more enlarged sympathies of the French butcher...

 cleaver 

 This last ["Marrowbones and Cleaver"] is a sign in Fetter Lane, originating from a custom, now rapidly dying away, of the butcher...

 merchant 

 "one engaged in the business of buying commercial commodities and selling them again for profit," early 13c., marchaunt (late 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French marchaunt "merchant, shopkeeper" (Old French marcheant, Modern French marchand), from Vulgar Latin *mercatantem (nom

 niche 

 1610s, "shallow recess in a wall," from French niche "recess (for a dog), kennel" (14c.), perhaps from Italian nicchia "niche, nook," which is said to be from nicchio "seashell," itself said by Klein, Barnhart, etc. to be probably from Latin mitulus "mussel," but the change of -m

 demurrer 

 1530s, "a pause, a delay" (a sense now obsolete); 1540 as legal pleading to the effect that, even conceding the facts to be as alleged by the opponent, he is not entitled to legal relief, from Anglo-French demurrer, Old French demorer "to delay, retard," from Latin demorari "to l

 knacker 

 "to kill, castrate" (1855), apparently from knacker (n.) "one who slaughters old or sick horses" (1812). This is probably the same word as the earlier knacker/nacker "harness-maker" (1570s), which survived in 18c. in dialects. The sense extension is perhaps because knackers suppl

 cut 

 c. 1300, "to make, with an edged tool or instrument, an incision in; make incisions for the purpose of dividing into two or more parts; remove by means of a cutting instrument;" of an implement, "have a cutting edge," according to Middle English Compendium from a presumed Old Eng

 sad 

 Old English sæd "sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of," from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (source also of Old Norse saðr, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High German sat, German satt, Gothic saþs "satiated, sated, full"), from PIE *seto-, from 

 iniquity 

 c. 1300, "hostility, malevolence; a hostile action," from Old French iniquité, iniquiteit "wickedness; unfavorable situation" (12c.), from Latin iniquitatem (nominative iniquitas) "unequalness, unevenness," figuratively "unfavorableness, unfairness, injustice," noun of quality fr

 Share butcher 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/butcher Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/butcher">Etymology of butcher by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of butcher. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/butcher Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of butcher," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/butcher. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of butcher." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/butcher. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of butcher." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/butcher (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near butcher 
 busyness 
 busy-work 
 but 
 butane 
 butch 
 butcher 
 butcher-knife 
 butchery 
 butler 
 butt 
 butte 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix