URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhoon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:10:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Typhoon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Typhoon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of typhoon 

 typhoon (n.) 

 Tiphon "violent storm, whirlwind, tornado," 1550s, from Greek typh ō n "whirlwind," personified as a giant, father of the winds, a name probably [Beekes] from or related to typhein "to smoke" (see typhus ). According to Watkins from PIE *dheub- "deep, hollow," via notion of "monster from the depths." The god-name is in Middle English in Wycliffe's wynd Tiffonyk (c. 1384, via Latin typhonicus ).

 The meaning "cyclone, violent hurricane of India or the China Seas" is attested by 1588 in Thomas Hickock's translation of an account in Italian of a voyage to the East Indies by Caesar Frederick, a merchant of Venice:

 concerning which Touffon ye are to vnderstand, that in the East Indies often times, there are not stormes as in other countreys; but euery 10. or 12. yeeres there are such tempests and stormes, that it is a thing incredible, but to those that haue seene it, neither do they know certainly what yeere they wil come. ["The voyage and trauell of M. Caesar Fredericke, Marchant of Venice, into the East India, and beyond the Indies"] 

 This sense of the word, in reference to titanic storms in the East Indies, is found in Europe first in Portuguese in the mid-16th century. It apparently is from tufan , a word in Arabic, Persian, and Hindi meaning "big cyclonic storm." Yule ["Hobson-Jobson," London, 1903] writes that "the probability is that Vasco [da Gama] and his followers got the tufao ... direct from the Arab pilots."

 The Arabic word sometimes is said to be from Greek typhon , but other sources consider it purely Semitic, though the Greek word might have influenced the form of the word in English. Al-tufan occurs several times in the Koran for "a flood or storm" and also for Noah's Flood. Chinese (Cantonese) tai fung "a great wind" also might have influenced the form or sense of the word in English, and that term and the Indian one may have had some mutual influence; toofan still means "big storm" in India.

 From the thighs downward he was nothing but coiled serpents, and his arms which, when he spread them out, reached a hundred leagues in either direction, had countless serpents' heads instead of hands. His brutish ass-head touched the stars, his vast wings darkened the sun, fire flashed from his eyes, and flaming rocks hurtled from his mouth. [Robert Graves, "Typhon," in "The Greek Myths"] 
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to typhoon 

 typhus (n.) 

 acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by severe prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785, from medical Latin, from Greek typhos "stupor caused by fever," literally "smoke," from typhein "to smoke," related to typhos "blind," typhon "whirlwind." Beekes rejects the derivation suggested in Watkins that these are from a PIE root *dheu- (1) "dust, vapor, smoke."

 The Greek term [typhos] 
 (smoke, mist, fog) was employed by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor 
 (stupor attonitus) ; and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever "typhus," and the name was adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as "Pestilential" or "Putrid Fever," or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the locality in which it appeared, as "Camp," "Jail," "Hospital," or "Ship Fever" (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford, ed., "A System of Medicine," New York, 1897] 

 Related: typhous (adj.). For distinction, see typhoid .

 Typhon 

 giant in Greek mythology, Latin Typhon , from Greek Typhōs (see typhoon ), Father of the Winds. The word was sometimes used in 16c. English for "a whirlwind."

 *dheu- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "dust, vapor, smoke." 

 It might form all or part of: enthymeme ; fewmet ; fume ; fumigation ; funk ; perfume ; sfumato ; typhoid ; typhoon ; typhus .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dhuma- "smoke, fume;" Greek thymos "spirit, courage, anger," thymiao "fumigate," thymin "incense;" Latin fumus "smoke, steam, fume;" Lithuanian dūmai "smoke" (plural); Old Prussian dumis "smoke;" Old Church Slavonic dymu "smoke;" Middle Irish dumacha "fog;" perhaps Old High German toum "steam, vapor."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kamikaze 

 Said to have been originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion by wrecking Kublai...

 cyclone 

 1848, "extensive storm characterized by the revolution of air around a calm center in which the wind blows spirally around the center," coined by British East India Company official Henry Piddington to describe the devastating storm of December 1789 in Coringa, India; irregularly

 answer 

 Middle English answere, from Old English andswaru "a response, a reply to a question," from and- "against" (from PIE root *ant- "front, forehead," with derivatives meaning "in front of, before") + -swaru "affirmation," from swerian "to swear" (see swear). The proposed etymology s

 oven 

 Old English ofen "furnace, oven, chamber or receptacle in which food is baked or cooked by continuous heat radiated from the structure," from Proto-Germanic *ukhnaz (source also of Old Frisian, Dutch oven, Old High German ovan, German Ofen, Old Norse ofn, Old Swedish oghn, Gothic

 access 

 early 14c., "an attack of fever," from Old French acces "onslaught, attack; onset (of an illness)," from Latin accessus "a coming to, an approach; way of approach, entrance," noun use of past participle of accedere "to approach," from assimilated form of ad "to" (see ad-) + ceder

 smart 

 Middle English smerten, "to cause pain, to suffer pain," from Old English smeortan "be painful," in reference to wounds, from Proto-Germanic *smarta- (source also of Middle Dutch smerten, Dutch smarten, Old High German smerzan, German schmerzen "to pain," originally "to bite"). T

 iron 

 Middle English iron, iren, yron, from Old English iren, variant (with rhotacism of -s-) of isen, later form of isern, isærn "the metal iron; an iron weapon or instrument," from Proto-Germanic *isarn (source also of Old Saxon isarn, Old Frisian isern, Old Norse isarn, Middle Dutch

 pharmacy 

 late 14c., farmacie, "a medicine that rids the body of an excess of humors (except blood);" also "treatment with medicine; theory of treatment with medicine," from Old French farmacie "a purgative" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin pharmacia, from Greek pharmakeia "a healin

 Christ 

 "the Anointed," synonymous with and translating to Greek  Hebrew mashiah (see messiah), a title given to Jesus of Nazareth; Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus, from Greek khristos "the anointed," noun use of verbal adjective of khriein "to rub, anoi

 respect 

 late 14c., "relationship, relation; regard, consideration" (as in in respect to), from Old French respect and directly from Latin respectus "regard, a looking at," literally "act of looking back (or often) at one," noun use of past participle of respicere "look back at, regard, c

 Share typhoon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhoon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhoon">Etymology of typhoon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of typhoon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhoon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of typhoon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhoon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of typhoon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhoon. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of typhoon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/typhoon (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near typhoon 
 type-setting 
 typewrite 
 typewriter 
 typhoid 
 Typhon 
 typhoon 
 typhus 
 typical 
 typify 
 typing 
 typist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix