URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Israel
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:56:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Israel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Israel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Israel 

 Israel 

 Old English Israel , "the Jewish people, the Hebrew nation," from Latin Israel , from Greek, from Hebrew yisra'el "he that striveth with God" (Genesis xxxii.28), symbolic proper name conferred on Jacob and extended to his descendants, from sara "he fought, contended" + El "God." As the name of an independent Jewish state in the Middle East, it is attested from 1948. Compare Israeli , Israelite .

 Entries linking to Israel 

 Israeli (n.) 

 "citizen of the state of Israel," 1948, from Israel + Hebrew national designation suffix -i . Also used in English as the adjective (1948). It distinguishes the citizens of the modern state from the ancient people who had been known in English since 14c. as Israelites (see Israelite ).

 Israelite (n.) 

 mid-14c., "a Jew; one of the people of ancient Israel, a descendant of Israel or Jacob," from Latin israelita , from Greek Israelites , from Israel (see Israel ). The Middle English adjective was Israelish (Old English Israelisc ), sometimes Israelitish (Coverdale, 1530s); Israelitic (c. 1600, from Late Latin Israeliticus ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 manna 

 tree," but used in Greek and Latin specifically with reference to the substance miraculously supplied to the Children of Israel...

 theocracy 

 which God is recognized as supreme ruler and his laws form the statute book," originally of the sacerdotal government of Israel...

 shamus 

 The word is said to be probably from Yiddish shames, literally "sexton of a synagogue" (according to Israel Zangwill "a potent...

 Solomon 

 masc. proper name, Biblical name of David's son and successor as king of Judah and Israel and wisest of all men, from Greek...

 Seven Seas 

 or sometimes in reference to seven seas forming part of the Hindu cosmology or to the Talmudists' supposed seven seas of Israel...

 philistine 

 German Philister "enemy of God's word," literally "Philistine," inhabitants of a Biblical land, neighbors (and enemies) of Israel...

 Arcturus 

 In Israel and Arabia, the seven stars of the Great Bear seem to have been a bier (the "bowl") followed by three mourners....

 race 

 [act of running] late Old English, also rase, "a narrative, an account;" c. 1300, "an act of swift running, a hurried attack," also "a course of life or conduct, a swift current;" from Old Norse rās "a running, a rush (of water)," cognate with Old English ræs "a running, a rush, 

 acre 

 Old English æcer "tilled field, open land," from Proto-Germanic *akraz "field, pasture" (source also of Old Norse akr, Old Saxon akkar, Old Frisian ekker, Middle Dutch acker, Dutch akker, Old High German achar, German acker, Gothic akrs "field"), from PIE root *agro- "field." "[O

 care 

 Old English caru, cearu "sorrow, anxiety, grief," also "burdens of mind; serious mental attention," in late Old English also "concern, anxiety caused by apprehension of evil or the weight of many burdens," from Proto-Germanic *karō "lament; grief, care" (source also of Old Saxon 

 Share Israel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Israel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Israel">Etymology of Israel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Israel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Israel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Israel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Israel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Israel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Israel. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Israel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Israel (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Israel 
 isotherm 
 isothermal 
 isotonic 
 isotope 
 isotropic 
 Israel 
 Israeli 
 Israelite 
 Issachar 
 Issei 
 issuable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix