URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dys-
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:20:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dys- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Dys- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dys- 

 dys- 

 word-forming element meaning "bad, ill; hard, difficult; abnormal, imperfect," from Greek dys- , inseparable prefix "destroying the good sense of a word or increasing its bad sense" [Liddell & Scott], hence "bad, hard, unlucky," from PIE root (and prefix) *dus- "bad, ill, evil" (source also of Sanskrit dus- , Old Persian duš- "ill," Old English to- , Old High German zur- , Gothic tuz- "un-"), a derivative of the root *deu- (1) "to lack, be wanting" (source of Greek dein "to lack, want").

 Very productive in ancient Greek, where it could attach even to proper names (such as dysparis "unhappy Paris"); its entries take up nine columns in Liddell & Scott. Among the words formed from it were some English might covet: dysouristos "fatally favorable, driven by a too-favorable wind;" dysadelphos "unhappy in one's brothers;" dysagres "unlucky in fishing;" dysantiblepos "hard to look in the face."

 Entries linking to dys- 

 dysentery (n.) 

 diseased characterized by inflammation of the mucous membrane of the large intestine, late 14c., dissenterie , from Old French disentere (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin dysenteria , from Greek dysenteria , coined by Hippocrates, from dys- "bad, abnormal, difficult" (see dys- ) + entera "intestines, bowels," from PIE *enter "between, among," comparative of root *en "in." Related: Dysenteric .

 dysfunction (n.) 

 "failure to function, abnormality or impairment of function," 1914, from dys- "bad, abnormal, difficult" + function (n.). Originally in anatomy and medicine; in sociology by 1949.

 dysgenics 
 dyslexia 
 dyslogy 
 dyspeptic 
 dysphemism 
 dysphoria 
 dysplasia 
 dysprosium 
 dystopia 
 dystrophy 
 mal- 
 See All Related Words (13) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dyslexia 

 "a difficulty in reading due to a condition of the brain," 1885, from German dyslexie (1883), from Greek dys- "bad, abnormal, difficult" (see dys-) + lexis "word" (taken as "reading"), from legein "speak" (from PIE root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives meaning "to

 dyspeptic 

 1690s, "causing dyspepsia" (a sense now obsolete); by 1789 as "pertaining to dyspepsia;" by 1822 as "suffering from dyspepsia;" from Greek dyspeptos "hard to digest," from dys- "bad, difficult" (see dys-) + peptos "digested," from peptein "to digest" (from PIE root *pekw- "to coo

 dysphemism 

 "substitution of a vulgar or derogatory word or expression for a dignified or normal one," 1873, from Greek dys- "bad, abnormal, difficult" (see dys-) + phēmē "speech, voice, utterance, a speaking," from phanai "speak" (from PIE root *bha- (2) "to speak, tell, say"); Greek dysphe

 eminent 

 early 15c., "standing or rising above other places; exceeding other things in quality or degree;" from Old French éminent "prominent" (13c.) or directly from Latin eminentem (nominative eminens) "standing out, projecting, prominent, high," figuratively "distinguished, distinctive

 sacred 

 late 14c., "hallowed, consecrated, or made holy by association with divinity or divine things or by religious ceremony or sanction," past-participle adjective from a now-obsolete verb sacren "to make holy" (c. 1200), from Old French sacrer "consecrate, anoint, dedicate" (12c.) or

 radical 

 late 14c., "originating in the root or ground;" of body parts or fluids, "vital to life," from Latin radicalis "of or having roots," from Latin radix (genitive radicis) "root" (from PIE root *wrād- "branch, root"). The basic sense of the word in all meanings is "pertaining or rel

 surreptitious 

 "fraudulent, done by stealth or without legitimate authority," mid-15c., surrepticious, from Latin surrepticius "stolen, furtive, clandestine," from surreptus, past participle of surripere, "seize secretly, take away, steal, plagiarize," from assimilated form of sub "from under" 

 honeymoon 

 "indefinite period of tenderness and pleasure experienced by a newly wed couple," 1540s (hony moone), but probably older, from honey (n.) in reference to the new marriage's sweetness, and moon (n.) "month" in reference to how long it probably will last, or from the changing aspec

 merry 

 Middle English mirie, from Old English myrge "pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet, exciting feelings of enjoyment and gladness" (said of grass, trees, the world, music, song); also as an adverb, "pleasantly, melodiously," from Proto-Germanic *murgijaz, which probably originally 

 secular 

 c. 1300, seculer, in reference to clergy, "living in the world, not belonging to a religious order," also generally, "belonging to the state" (as opposed to the Church), from Old French seculer, seculare (Modern French séculier) and directly from Late Latin saecularis "worldly, s

 Share dys- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dys- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dys-">Etymology of dys- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dys-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dys- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dys-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dys-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dys-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dys-. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dys-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dys- (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dys- 
 dynamo 
 dynast 
 dynastic 
 dynasty 
 dyne 
 dys- 
 dysentery 
 dysfunction 
 dysfunctional 
 dysgenics 
 dyslexia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix