URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/identity
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:26:48Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Identity - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Identity - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of identity 

 identity (n.) 

 c. 1600, "sameness, oneness, state of being the same," from French identité (14c.), from Medieval Latin identitatem (nominative identitas ) "sameness," ultimately from Latin idem (neuter) "the same" (see idem ).

 An earlier form of the word in English was idemptitie (1560s), from Medieval Latin idemptitas . The term identity crisis is recorded by 1954. Identity theft is attested from 1995. Identity politics is attested by 1985, the phrase said to have been brought to attention by the Black feminist Combahee River Collective Statement (1977).

 "[I]dentity politics" [is] a phrase with notably wide currency in gay and lesbian communities. In common usage, the term identity politics refers to the tendency to base one's politics on a sense of personal identity—as gay, as Jewish, as Black, as female ..... [Diana Fuss, "Essentially Speaking," 1989] 

 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to identity 

 idem (adv.) 

 "the same (as above)," used to avoid repetition in writing, Latin, literally "the same," from id "it, that one," from PIE pronominal stem *i- (see yon ) + demonstrative suffix -dem .

 identify (v.) 

 1640s, "regard as the same," from French identifier , from identité (see identity ). The sense of "determine the identity of, recognize as or prove to be the same" is recorded by 1769. The meaning "make one (with), associate (oneself), regard oneself as being the essence of" is from 1780. The sense of "serve as means of identification" is attested by 1886. Related: Identified ; identifying .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 identification 

 Meaning "act or process of determining the identity of something" is from 1859....Meaning "object or document which marks identity" is from 1947 (short for identification tag, card, etc.)....

 masquerade 

 Extended sense of "disguise in general, concealment or apparent change of identity by any means" is from 1660s; figurative...

 self-conscious 

 (Locke was using it by 1690, along with self-consciousness "state of being aware of oneself, consciousness of one's own identity...

 simon-pure 

 In the play, the real Simon Pure is treated as an impostor and is believed only after he has proven his identity....

 incognito 

 1640s as both adjective ("disguised under an assumed name and character") and adverb ("unknown, with concealed identity")...

 Hastings 

 Northumbrian chronicle as the gens Hestingorum which seems to have kept a separate identity as late as the early 11th cent...

 sexuality 

 Meaning "(one's) sexual identity" is by 1980....

 recognition 

 mid-15c., recognicion, "knowledge (of an event or incident); understanding," from Old French recognition (15c.) and directly from Latin recognitionem (nominative recognitio) "a reviewing, investigation, examination," noun of action from past-participle stem of recognoscere "to ac

 personality 

 late 14c., personalite, "quality or fact of being a person," from Old French personalité and directly from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of "a distinctive essential character of a self-conscious being" is

 personal 

 late 14c., "private, pertaining to the self or to a self-conscious individual; performed by the individual himself," from Old French personal (12c., Modern French personnel), from Late Latin personalis "pertaining to a person," from Latin persona (see person). The meaning "applic

 Share identity 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/identity Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/identity">Etymology of identity by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of identity. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/identity Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of identity," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/identity. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of identity." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/identity. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of identity." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/identity (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near identity 
 identical 
 identifiable 
 identification 
 identifier 
 identify 
 identity 
 ideo- 
 ideogram 
 ideograph 
 ideological 
 ideologue 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix