URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/madam
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:58:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Madam - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Madam - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of madam 

 madam 

 c. 1300, formal term of address to a lady (a woman of rank or authority, or the mistress of a household), from Old French ma dame, literally "my lady," from Latin mea domina (see Donna , and compare madonna ). It became a conventional term of address to women of any degree (but chiefly to the married and matronly); also "a woman of fashion or pretension" (often with a suggestion of disparagement) by 1590s. From 1719 as "a courtesan, a prostitute;" the meaning "female owner or manager of a brothel" is attested by 1871.

 The title of Madam is sometimes given here, and generally in Charleston (S. Carolina), and in the South, to a mother whose son has married, and the daughter-in-law is then called Mrs. By this means they avoid the inelegant phraseology of old Mrs. A., or the Scotch, Mrs. A senior. [Sir Charles Lyell, "A Second Visit to the United States of North America," 1849]
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to madam 

 Donna 

 fem. proper name, from Italian, literally "lady," from Latin domina "lady, mistress of the house," from Latin domus "house" (from PIE root *dem- "house, household"). A top 20 name for girls born in the U.S. from 1941 to 1967 (top 10 from 1955 to 1965).

 madonna (n.) 

 1580s, Italian title of address or courtesy, equivalent to madam ; from c. 1600 as a noun, "an Italian lady," from Italian madonna , from Old Italian ma donna (Italian mia donna ) "my lady," from ma "my" + donna "lady," from Latin domina "lady, mistress of the house," from Latin domus "house" (from PIE root *dem- "house, household").

 Often specifically "the Virgin Mary," hence the sense of "picture or statue of the Virgin Mary," attested in English by 1640s. The U.S. singer/dancer (full name Madonna Louise Ciccone, b. 1958) attained to pop stardom in the fall of 1984.

 ma'am 
 madame 
 mesdames 
 mum 
 *dem- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dame 

 c. 1200, "a mother," also "a woman of rank or high social position; superior of a convent," and an address for a woman of rank or position, used respectfully to other ladies, from Old French dame "lady, mistress, wife," from Late Latin domna, from Latin domina "lady, mistress of 

 lady 

 c. 1200, lafdi, lavede, from Old English hlæfdige (Northumbrian hlafdia, Mercian hlafdie), "mistress of a household, wife of a lord," apparently literally "one who kneads bread," from hlaf "bread" (see loaf (n.)) + -dige "maid," which is related to dæge "maker of dough" (which is

 mister 

 and obsolescent use of sir, as an unaccompanied term of address, and the like facts with regard to mistress, Mrs., and madam...Sir and madam or ma'am as direct terms of address are old-fashioned and obsolescent in ordinary speech, and mister and lady...

 pretender 

 "Your countrymen (the Irish), Madam," said James, as he was ascending the stairs, "can run well."...

 egg-nog 

 It is, of all physic, the best I have seen  To keep out the cold, and to cut up the spleen — Here madam — miss Cynthia...

 made 

 late 14c., "created, wrought, fabricated, constructed" (of words, stories, etc.), from Middle English maked, from Old English macod "made," past participle of macian "to make" (see make (v.)). From 1570s as "artificially produced, formed independently of natural development." To 

 mead 

 "a strong liquor made from fermented honey and water," a favorite beverage of England in the Middle Ages, Middle English mede, from Old English medu, from Proto-Germanic *meduz (source also of Old Norse mjöðr, Danish mjød, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch mede, Old High German metu, 

 mama 

 1707, spelling variant of mamma. Meaning "sexually attractive woman" is attested by 1925 in African-American vernacular. Mamasan "woman in a position of authority," especially "woman in charge of a geisha-house" is by 1949, with Japanese san, an honorific title. Mama mia! as an e

 woman 

 "adult female human," late Old English wimman, wiman (plural wimmen), literally "woman-man," alteration of wifman (plural wifmen) "woman, female servant" (8c.), a compound of wif "woman" (see wife) + man "human being" (in Old English used in reference to both sexes; see man (n.))

 brothel 

 "bawdy house," 1590s, shortened from brothel-house, from brothel "prostitute" (late 15c.), earlier "vile, worthless person" of either sex (14c.), from Old English broðen past participle of breoðan "deteriorate, go to ruin," from Proto-Germanic *breuthan "to be broken up," related

 Share madam 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/madam Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/madam">Etymology of madam by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of madam. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/madam Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of madam," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/madam. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of madam." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/madam. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of madam." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/madam (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near madam 
 maculate 
 maculation 
 macule 
 mad 
 Madagascar 
 madam 
 madame 
 madarosis 
 madcap 
 madden 
 maddening 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close