URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/illustrate
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:50:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Illustrate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Illustrate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of illustrate 

 illustrate (v.) 

 1520s, "light up, shed light on;" 1610s, "educate by means of examples," back-formation from illustration , and in some cases from Latin illustratus , past participle of illustrare "light up, make light, illuminate." The sense of "provide pictures to explain or decorate" is by 1630s. Related: Illustrated ; illustrating; illustrable .
 also from 1520s 

 Entries linking to illustrate 

 illustrated (adj.) 

 "provided with drawings, etc., as illustration," 1831, past-participle adjective from illustrate (v.).

 illustration (n.) 

 c. 1400, illustracioun , "a shining;" early 15c., "a manifestation;" mid-15c., "a spiritual illumination," from Old French illustration "apparition, appearance" (13c.) and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio ) "vivid representation" (in writing), literally "an enlightening," from past-participle stem of illustrare "light up, make light, illuminate;" figuratively "make clear, disclose, explain; adorn, render distinguished." This is from assimilated form of in- "in" (see in- (2)) + lustrare "make bright, illuminate" (from suffixed form of PIE root *leuk- "light, brightness").

 The mental sense of "act of making clear in the mind" is from 1580s. The meaning "an illustrative picture" is attested by 1816.

 illustrator (n.) 

 1590s, "one who enlightens," agent noun in Latin form from illustrate , or from Late Latin illustrator "an enlightener." Meaning "one who draws pictures" is attested by 1680s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 exemplify 

 early 15c., exemplifien, "to illustrate or demonstrate by examples, to instruct by (good) example, be or serve as a model (of conduct)," good or bad, from Medieval Latin exemplificare "to illustrate," from Latin exemplum "example, pattern, model" (see example). Meaning "to serve 

 instance 

 late 14c., "urgency, insistence" (a sense now archaic), from Old French instance "effort, application; urgency, eagerness, anxiety" (13c.), from Latin instantia "presence, effort, intention; earnestness, urgency," literally "a standing near," from instans (see instant). In logic,

 simile 

 Further, to Johnson, "A simile, to be perfect, must both illustrate and ennoble the subject."...

 were 

 The forms illustrate Verner's Law (named for Danish linguist Karl Verner, 1875), which predicts the "s" to "z" sound shift...

 illumination 

 participle stem of Latin illuminare "to throw into light, make bright, light up;" figuratively, in rhetoric, "to set off, illustrate...

 squeamish 

 The historical forms of the word illustrate qu-/squ- alterations (compare squash (v.)); the variant squeasy (1580s) seems...

 tenderfoot 

 And miners illustrate their conversation by the various terms used in mining....

 render 

 late 14c., rendren, rendre, "repeat, say again, recite; translate," from Old French rendre "give back, present, yield" (10c.) and Medieval Latin rendere, from Vulgar Latin *rendere, a variant of Latin reddere "give back, return, restore," from red- "back" (see re-) + combining fo

 show 

 Middle English sheuen, from Old English sceawian "to look at, see, gaze, behold, observe; inspect, examine; look for, choose," from Proto-Germanic *skauwojanan (source also of Old Saxon skauwon "to look at," Old Frisian skawia, Dutch schouwen, Old High German scouwon "to look at"

 ornament 

 c. 1200, ournement, "an accessory; something that serves primarily for use but also may serve as adornment; ornamental apparel, jewels," from Old French ornement "ornament, decoration," and directly from Latin ornamentum "apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration

 Share illustrate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/illustrate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/illustrate">Etymology of illustrate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of illustrate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/illustrate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of illustrate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/illustrate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of illustrate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/illustrate. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of illustrate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/illustrate (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near illustrate 
 illusion 
 illusionary 
 illusionist 
 illusive 
 illusory 
 illustrate 
 illustrated 
 illustration 
 illustrative 
 illustrator 
 illustrious 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix