URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sip
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:37:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sip 

 sip (v.) 

 late 14c., sippen , "drink little by little, drink in small mouthfuls" (sometimes glossing Latin potisso , subbibo ), a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Continental Germanic word such as Low German sippen "to sip," or from Old English sypian "absorb, drink in," which is related to supan "to take into the mouth a little at a time" (see sup (v.2)). OED writes that it is, "possibly a modification of sup intended to express a slighter action."

 Compare Middle English soupen "drink in small mouthfuls, from Old English supan . Also compare Dutch sipperlippen "taste with the tip of the tongue." The transitive sense of "drink (a liquid) in very small mouthfuls" is from c. 1600. Related: Sipped ; sipper ; sipping .
 also from late 14c. 

 sip (n.) 

 "a small drink; act of drinking by small quantities," by 1630s, perhaps c. 1500, from sip (v.). The figurative sense of "a mere taste" is by 1728.
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to sip 

 sup (v.2) 

 "to sip, to take into the mouth with the lips, drink or swallow with small mouthfuls," Middle English soupen , from Old English supan (West Saxon), suppan , supian (Northumbrian) "sip, taste, drink, swallow" (strong verb, past tense seap , past participle sopen ).

 This is from Proto-Germanic *supanan (source also of Old Norse supa "to sip, drink," Middle Low German supen , Dutch zuipen "to drink, tipple," Old High German sufan , German saufen "to drink, booze"). The Germanic word is from PIE *sub- , possibly [Watkins] an extended form of the root *seue- (2) "to take liquid" (source also of Sanskrit sunoti "presses out juice," soma ; Avestan haoma , Persian hom "juice;" Greek huetos "rain," huein "to rain;" Latin sugere "to suck," succus "juice, sap;" Lithuanian sula "flowing sap;" Old Church Slavonic soku "sap," susati "suck;" Middle Irish suth "sap;" Old English seaw "sap").

 If this is correct, the two verbs sup are cognates out of Germanic, the other one via French. The noun meaning "a small quantity of liquid" is by 1560s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lap 

 " Old Saxon lepil, Dutch lepel, German Löffel "spoon"), from PIE imitative base *lab- (source also of Greek laptein "to sip...

 swallow 

 "ingest through the throat" (transitive), Middle English swolwen, from Old English swelgan "swallow, imbibe, absorb" (class III strong verb; past tense swealg, past participle swolgen), from Proto-Germanic *swelgan/*swelhan (source also of Old Saxon farswelgan, Old Norse svelgja 

 drink 

 Old English drincan "to swallow water or other fluid," also "to swallow up, engulf" (class III strong verb; past tense dranc, past participle druncen), from Proto-Germanic *drenkanan (source also of Old Saxon drinkan, Old Frisian drinka, Dutch drinken, Old High German trinkan, Ge

 case 

 early 13c., "what befalls one; state of affairs," from Old French cas "an event, happening, situation, quarrel, trial," from Latin casus "a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap," literally "a falling," from cas-, past-participle stem of cadere "to fall, sink, settle do

 Indian 

 "inhabit of India or South Asia; pertaining to India," c. 1300 (noun and adjective), from Late Latin indianus, from India (see India). Applied to the aboriginal native inhabitants of the Americas from at least 1553 as a noun (1610s as an adjective), reflecting Spanish and Portugu

 dispatch 

 1510s, "to send off, send to a destination," usually implying urgent importance or haste, from Spanish despachar "expedite, hasten" or cognate Italian dispacciare "to dispatch." For first element, see dis-. The second element apparently has been confused or corrupted, and its exa

 buck 

 "male deer," c. 1300, earlier "male goat;" from Old English bucca "male goat," from Proto-Germanic *bukkon (source also of Old Saxon buck, Middle Dutch boc, Dutch bok, Old High German boc, German Bock, Old Norse bokkr), perhaps from a PIE root *bhugo (source also of Avestan buza 

 giant 

 c. 1300, "fabulous man-like creature of enormous size," from Old French geant, earlier jaiant "giant, ogre" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *gagantem (nominative gagas), from Latin gigas "a giant," from Greek Gigas (usually in plural, Gigantes), one of a race of divine but savage and m

 Christian 

 1520s as a noun, "a believer in and follower of Christ;" 1550s as an adjective, "professing the Christian religion, received into the Christian church," 16c. forms replacing Middle English Cristen (adjective and noun), from Old English cristen, from a West Germanic borrowing of C

 nice 

 late 13c., "foolish, ignorant, frivolous, senseless," from Old French nice (12c.) "careless, clumsy; weak; poor, needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish," from Latin nescius "ignorant, unaware," literally "not-knowing," from ne- "not" (from PIE root *ne- "not") + stem of scire "to 

 Share sip 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sip Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sip">Etymology of sip by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sip. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sip Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sip," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sip. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sip." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sip. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sip." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sip (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sip 
 sinus 
 sinusitis 
 sinusoid 
 Siouan 
 Sioux 
 sip 
 siphon 
 sir 
 sire 
 siren 
 Sirius 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix