URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Saracen
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:57:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Saracen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Saracen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Saracen 

 Saracen (n.) 

 Middle English Saracene , Sarcene , Sarazyn , Sarasine , "a Turk; an Arab; a Muslim," from Old English (in translations from Latin), from Old French Saracin, Sarrasine or Medieval Latin Saracenus , from Greek sarakenos. This usually is said to be from Arabic sharquiyin , accusative plural of sharqiy "eastern," from sharq "east, sunrise," but this is not certain. In medieval times the name was associated with that of Biblical Sarah (q.v.).

 Peple þat cleped hem self Saracenys, as þogh þey were i-come of Sarra [Ranulph Higden’s "Polychronicon," mid-14c., John Trevisa's translation, 1380s ]

 It was the name Greeks and Romans gave to the nomads of the Syrian and Arabian deserts and the inhabitants of Arabia Felix, in the West it took on a sense of "Middle Eastern Muslim" from the Crusades. It also could be applied to any non-Christian people against whom a crusade was preached (the pagan Lithuanians), and in Middle English it was used generally for "one who is not a Christian or Jew; heathen, pagan" (mid-13c.). From c. 1300 as an adjective. Related: Saracenic ; Sarcenism ("Islam"), and compare sarsen . Sarsinrie , "the Saracen people or country," is attested in mid-15c.

 Entries linking to Saracen 

 Sarah 

 fem. proper name, Biblical wife of Abraham and mother of Isaac, from Hebrew, literally "princess," from sarah, fem. of sar "prince," from sarar "he ruled," which is related to Akkadian sharratu "queen." A popular as a name for girls born in U.S. in 1870s and 1978-2000.

 sarsen (n.) 

 a name given in the southwest of England to a large sandstone boulder, by 1743, properly sarsen stone , that is, "Saracen stone," from Saracen in the old, broad sense of "pagan, heathen" and thus used generally in the popular mind for the former (pre-Christian) inhabitants of the region.

 The same word was applied to the ancient leavings outside Cornish tin mines, also known as Jews' pits , those being the other people formerly credited in Western Europe with any ancient structure of forgotten origin, based vaguely on Biblical chronologies.

 sarsenet (n.) 

 also sarcenet , type of fine silk fabric valued for its softness, late 14c., sarsinet , from Anglo-French sarzinett (Old French sarrasinet ), probably a diminutive (with -et ) of Sarasin , Sarazin "Saracen," meaning Turkish or Arab (see Saracen ). Compare Old French drap sarrasinois , Medieval Latin pannus saracenius .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 paynim 

 early 13c., painime, paynyme, "heathen lands collectively," from Old French paienime, paienisme "heathen, pagan; Saracen...

 admiral 

 c. 1200, amiral, admirail, "Saracen commander or chieftain," from Old French amirail (12c.)..."Saracen military commander; any military commander," ultimately from medieval Arabic amir "military commander," probably...

 Barbary 

 The meaning "Saracen nations on coastal North Africa" is attested from 1590s, via French (Old French barbarie), from Arabic...

 libertine 

 This sense partakes more of liberty and liberal than of the classical meaning (in Old French, libertin meant "Saracen slave...

 corsair 

 In English often treated as identical with pirate, though the Saracen and Turkish corsairs were authorized and recognized...

 infidel 

 Originally "a non-Christian" (especially a Saracen); later "one who does not believe in religion, disbeliever in religion...

 barbarian 

 speaking a language different from one's own," from Medieval Latin barbarinus (source of Old French barbarin "Berber, pagan, Saracen...

 Arab 

 "one of the native people of Arabia and surrounding regions," late 14c. (Arabes, a plural form), from Old French Arabi, from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem), from Greek Araps (genitive Arabos), from Arabic 'arab, indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally "inhabitant of the

 nomad 

 "a wanderer, one of a tribe of people who have no fixed abode," 1550s (in plural, nomades), from French nomade (16c.), from Latin Nomas (genitive Nomadis) "wandering groups in Arabia," from Greek nomas (genitive nomados, plural nomades) "roaming, roving, wandering" (from place to

 monad 

 1610s, "unity, arithmetical unit," 1610s, from Late Latin monas (genitive monadis), from Greek monas "unit," from monos "alone" (from PIE root *men- (4) "small, isolated"). In Leibnitz's philosophy, "an ultimate unit of being, a unit of the universal substance" (1748); he apparen

 Share Saracen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Saracen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Saracen">Etymology of Saracen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Saracen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Saracen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Saracen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Saracen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Saracen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Saracen. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Saracen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Saracen (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Saracen 
 saprophyte 
 saprophytic 
 saprostomous 
 saque 
 Sara 
 Saracen 
 Sarah 
 Sarajevo 
 Saran 
 Saratoga 
 sarcasm 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix