URL: https://ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=paradise
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T15:11:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: American Heritage Dictionary Entry: paradise

American Heritage Dictionary Entry: paradise 

 HOW TO USE THE DICTIONARY
 To look up an entry in The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, use the search window above. For best results, after typing in the word, click on the “Search” button instead of using the “enter” key.
 Some compound words (like bus rapid transit, dog whistle, or identity theft ) don’t appear on the drop-down list when you type them in the search bar. For best results with compound words, place a quotation mark before the compound word in the search window.
 guide to the dictionary 

 THE USAGE PANEL
 The Usage Panel is a group of nearly 200 prominent scholars, creative writers, journalists, diplomats, and others in occupations requiring mastery of language. Annual surveys have gauged the acceptability of particular usages and grammatical constructions.
 The Panelists 

 NEED HELP SOLVING A CROSSWORD PUZZLE?

 Go to our Crossword Puzzle Solver and type in the letters that you know, and the Solver will produce a list of possible solutions.

-->
 AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY APP
 The new American Heritage Dictionary app is now available for 
 iOS and Android. 

 THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY BLOG
 The articles in our blog examine new words, revised definitions, interesting images from the fifth edition, discussions of usage, and more.

 OPEN DICTIONARY PROJECT

 Share your ideas for new words and new meanings of old words!

 Start Sharing Now! 

 --> See word lists from the best-selling 100 Words Series!
 Find out more! 

 INTERESTED IN DICTIONARIES?
 Check out the Dictionary Society of North America at http://www.dictionarysociety.com 

 par·a·dise (p ă r  ə -d ī s ′ , -d ī z ′ ) 
 Share: 

 Tweet 

 n. 1. often Paradise The Garden of Eden.
 2. a. In various religious traditions, the Edenic or heavenly abode of righteous souls after death.
 b. According to some forms of Christian belief, an intermediate resting place for righteous souls awaiting the Resurrection.

 3. a. A place of great beauty or happiness: saw the park as a paradise within a noisy city. 
 b. A state of delight or happiness: The newlyweds have been in paradise for months. 

 [Middle English paradis , from Old French, from Late Latin parad ī sus , from Greek paradeisos , garden, enclosed park, paradise, from Avestan pairida ē za- , enclosure, park : pairi- , around; see per 1 in the Appendix of Indo-European roots + da ē za- , wall; see dheigh- in the Appendix of Indo-European roots .]
 par ′ a·di·si  a·cal (-d ĭ -s ī  ə -k ə l, -z ī  -), par ′ a·di·si  ac (- ă k), par ′ a·di·sa  i·cal (-d ĭ -s ā  ĭ -k ə l, -z ā  -), par ′ a·di·sa  ic (- ĭ k), par ′ a·dis  al (-d ī  s ə l, -z ə l) adj. 
 par ′ a·di·si  a·cal·ly , par ′ a·di·sa  i·cal·ly , par ′ a·dis  al·ly adv. 
 Word History: From an etymological perspective at least, paradise is located in ancient Iran — for it is there that the word paradise ultimately originates. The old Iranian language Avestan had a noun pairida ē za-, "a wall enclosing a garden or orchard," which is composed of pairi-, "around," and da ē za- "wall." The adverb and preposition pairi is related to the equivalent Greek form peri, as in perimeter. Da ē za- comes from the Indo-European root *dheigh-, "to mold, form, shape." Zoroastrian religion encouraged maintaining arbors, orchards, and gardens, and even the kings of austere Sparta were edified by seeing the Great King of Persia planting and maintaining his own trees in his own garden. Xenophon, a Greek mercenary soldier who spent some time in the Persian army and later wrote histories, recorded the pairida ē za- surrounding the orchard as paradeisos, using it not to refer to the wall itself but to the huge parks that Persian nobles loved to build and hunt in. This Greek word was used in the Septuagint translation of Genesis to refer to the Garden of Eden, and then Latin translations of the Bible used the Greek word in its Latinized form, paradisus. The Latin word was then borrowed into Old English and used to designate the Garden of Eden. In Middle English, the form of the word was influenced by its Old French equivalent, paradis, and it is from such Middle English forms as paradis that our Modern English word descends.

 The American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fifth Edition copyright ©2022 by HarperCollins Publishers. All rights reserved.

 Indo-European & Semitic Roots Appendices
 Thousands of entries in the dictionary include etymologies that trace their origins back to reconstructed proto-languages. You can obtain more information about these forms in our online appendices:
 Indo-European Roots 
 Semitic Roots 
 The Indo-European appendix covers nearly half of the Indo-European roots that have left their mark on English words. A more complete treatment of Indo-European roots and the English words derived from them is available in our Dictionary of Indo-European Roots .

 American Heritage Dictionary Products
 The American Heritage Dictionary, 5th Edition

 The American Heritage Dictionary of Idioms

 The American Heritage Roget's Thesaurus

 Curious George's Dictionary

 The American Heritage Children's Dictionary

 CONTACT US 
 Customer Service 
 Make Me An Author 
 Ebooks Help with Glose Reader 
 ABOUT US 
 Company Profile 
 Leadership Team 
 Corporate Social Responsibility 
 HarperCollins Careers 
 HarperCollins Imprints 
 HarperGreen 
 Social Media Directory 
 Accessibility 
 FOR READERS 
 Browse Reading Guides 
 FOR AUTHORS 
 Submit a Manuscript 
 Report Piracy 
 Agent Portal 
 MEDIA 
 Publicity Contacts 
 Press Room 
 SERVICES 
 HarperCollins Speakers Bureau 
 Library Services 
 Academic Services 
 Desk & Exam Copies 
 Review Copies 
 OpenBook API 
 Marketing Partnerships 
 COVID-19 RESOURCES & PERMISSIONS 
 Permissions for Adult Online Readings 
 Permissions for Kids Online Readings 
 SALES & RIGHTS 
 Booksellers & Retailer Ordering 
 HarperCollins Catalogs 
 Permissions 
 Subsidiary Rights 
 Media Rights and Content Development 
 GLOSE APP 
 iPhone 
 Android 

 GLOBAL DIVISIONS 
 HarperCollins US 
 HarperCollins Canada 
 HarperCollins Christian 
 HarperCollins Australia 
 HarperCollins India 
 HarperCollins UK 

 Terms of Use  • 

 Terms of Sale  • 

 Your Ad Choices  • 

 Privacy Policy  • 

 California Privacy Policy 
 Do Not Sell My Personal Information 
 Copyright 2022 HarperCollins Publishers All rights reserved.
 *This website is best viewed in Chrome, Firefox, Microsoft Edge, or Safari. Some characters in pronunciations and etymologies cannot be displayed properly in Internet Explorer.