URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/metropolis
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:45:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Metropolis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Metropolis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of metropolis 

 metropolis (n.) 

 1530s, "seat of a metropolitan bishop," from Late Latin metropolis , which is from Greek (see metropolitan (n.)). Meaning "chief town or capital city of a province" is attested from 1580s; the earlier word for this in English was metropol (late 14c.) or metropolitan (mid-15c.). Related: Metropolitical "pertaining to or belonging to a metropolis."
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to metropolis 

 metropolitan (n.) 

 mid-14c., "bishop having general superintendency over other bishops of his province," from Late Latin metropolitanus , from Greek metropolis "mother city" (from which others have been colonized), parent state of a colony," also "capital city," and, in Ecclesiastical Greek, "see of a metropolitan bishop," from meter "mother" (see mother (n.1)) + polis "city" (see polis ).

 In the early church, the bishop of a municipal capital of a province or eparchy, who had general superintendence over the bishops in his province. In modern Catholic use, an archbishop who has bishops under his authority; in the Greek church still the bishop of a municipal capital of a province, ranking above an archbishop.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 city 

 c. 1200, from Old French cite "town, city" (10c., Modern French cité), from earlier citet, from Latin civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally "citizenship, condition or rights of a citizen, membership in the community," later "community of citiz

 coffee-house 

 In such circumstances, the coffee-were the chief organs through which the public opinion of the metropolis vented itself....

 suburb 

 [T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life is carried on without...

 accost 

 Infamous houses, he states, are in all parts of the metropolis, but most numerous in small streets, leading from public thoroughfares...

 morgue 

 specific building in Paris where bodies were exposed for identification: There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis...

 urban 

 "characteristic of city life, pertaining to cities or towns," 1610s (but rare before 1830s), from Latin urbanus "of or pertaining to a city or city life; in Rome," also "in city fashion, polished, refined, cultivated, courteous," but also sometimes "witty, facetious, bold, impude

 center 

 late 14c., "middle point of a circle; point round which something revolves," from Old French centre (14c.), from Latin centrum "center," originally the fixed point of the two points of a drafting compass (hence "the center of a circle"), from Greek kentron "sharp point, goad, sti

 testimony 

 c. 1400, "proof or demonstration of some fact, evidence, piece of evidence;" early 15c., "legal testimony, sworn statement of a witness," from Old North French testimonie (Old French testimoine 11c.), from Latin testimonium "evidence, proof, witness, attestation," from testis "a 

 period 

 early 15c., periode, "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle of the Greek games," from Greek perio

 Share metropolis 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/metropolis Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/metropolis">Etymology of metropolis by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of metropolis. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/metropolis Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of metropolis," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/metropolis. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of metropolis." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/metropolis. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of metropolis." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/metropolis (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near metropolis 
 Metro 
 Metroliner 
 metrology 
 metronome 
 metronymic 
 metropolis 
 metropolitan 
 metropolitanism 
 metrosexual 
 -metry 
 mettle 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix