URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/esophagus
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:20:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Esophagus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Esophagus - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of esophagus 

 esophagus (n.) 

 also oesophagus , late 14c., from Greek oisophagos "gullet, passage for food," literally "what carries and eats," from oisein , future infinitive of pherein "to carry" (from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry") + -phagos , from phagein "to eat" (from PIE root *bhag- "to share out, apportion; to get a share"). Related: Esophageal .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to esophagus 

 oesophagus (n.) 

 alternative spelling of esophagus . See oe . Related: Oesophageal .

 *bhag- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to share out, apportion; to get a share."

 It might form all or part of: aphagia ; Bhagavad-Gita ; baksheesh ; esophagus ; nebbish ; pagoda ; -phage ; phago- ; -phagous ; porgy ; sarcophagus .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit bhajati "assigns, allots, apportions, enjoys, loves," bhagah "allotter, distributor, master, lord," bhaksati "eats, drinks, enjoys;" Persian bakhshidan "to give;" Greek phagein "to eat," literally "to have a share of food;" Old Church Slavonic bogatu "rich."

 *bher- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to carry," also "to bear children."

 It might form all or part of: Aberdeen ; amphora ; anaphora ; aquifer ; auriferous ; bairn ; barrow (n.1) "frame for carrying a load;" bear (v.); bearing ; Berenice ; bier ; birth ; bring ; burden (n.1) "a load;" carboniferous ; Christopher ; chromatophore ; circumference ; confer ; conference ; conifer ; cumber ; cumbersome ; defer (v.2) "yield;" differ ; difference ; differentiate ; efferent ; esophagus ; euphoria ; ferret ; fertile ; Foraminifera ; forbear (v.); fossiliferous ; furtive ; indifferent ; infer ; Inverness ; Lucifer ; metaphor ; odoriferous ; offer ; opprobrium ; overbear ; paraphernalia ; periphery ; pestiferous ; pheromone ; phoresy ; phosphorus ; Porifera ; prefer ; proffer ; proliferation ; pyrophoric ; refer ; reference ; semaphore ; somniferous ; splendiferous ; suffer ; transfer ; vociferate ; vociferous .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit bharati "he carries, brings," bhrtih "a bringing, maintenance;" Avestan baraiti "carries;" Old Persian barantiy "they carry;" Armenian berem "I carry;" Greek pherein "to carry," pherne "dowry;" Latin ferre "to bear, carry," fors (genitive fortis ) "chance, luck," perhaps fur "a thief;" Old Irish beru / berim "I catch, I bring forth," beirid "to carry;" Old Welsh beryt "to flow;" Gothic bairan "to carry;" Old English and Old High German beran , Old Norse bera "barrow;" Old Church Slavonic birati "to take;" Russian brat' "to take," bremya "a burden," beremennaya "pregnant."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gorge 

 mid-14c., "throat," from Old French gorge "throat; a narrow passage" (12c.), from Late Latin gurges "gullet, throat, jaws," also "gulf, whirlpool," which probably is related to Latin gurgulio "gullet, windpipe," from a reduplicated form of PIE root *gwora- "food, devouring." Tran

 gullet 

 "passage from the mouth of an animal to the stomach," c. 1300 (as a surname), from Old French golet "neck (of a bottle); gutter; bay, creek," diminutive of gole "throat, neck" (Modern French gueule), from Latin gula "throat," also "appetite," which is related to gluttire "to gulp

 stomach 

 have their origin in that organ (source also of Spanish estómago, Italian stomaco), from Greek stomakhos "throat, gullet, esophagus...Some 16c. anatomists tried to correct the sense of the word back to "esophagus" and introduce ventricle for what we call...

 passage 

 early 13c., "a road, a pathway;" c. 1300, "action of crossing from one place to another; a going over or through something; means of crossing," from Old French passage "mountain pass, passage" (11c.), from passer "to go by," from Vulgar Latin *passare "to step, walk, pass," from 

 blue-blood 

 1809 in reference to the blood that flows in the veins of the old and aristocratic families of Spain, translating Spanish sangre azul, claimed by certain families of Castile that held themselves uncontaminated by Moorish or Jewish admixture; the term probably is from the notion o

 apt 

 mid-14c., "inclined, disposed;" late 14c., "suited, fitted, adapted, possessing the necessary qualities for the purpose," from Old French ate "fitting, suitable, appropriate" (13c., Modern French apte), or directly from Latin aptus "fit, suited, proper, appropriate," adjectival u

 pastor 

 late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), "shepherd, one who has care of a flock or herd" (a sense now obsolete), also figurative, "spiritual guide, shepherd of souls, a Christian minister or clergyman," from Old French pastor, pastur "herdsman, shepherd" (12c.) and directly from Latin 

 emblem 

 1580s, "relief, raised ornament on vessels, etc.," from Latin emblema "inlaid ornamental work," from Greek emblema (genitive emblematos) "an insertion," from emballein "to insert," literally "to throw in," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + ballein "to throw" (from 

 save 

 c. 1200, saven, "to deliver from some danger; rescue from peril, bring to safety," also "prevent the death of;" also "to deliver from sin or its consequences; admit to eternal life; gain salvation," from Old French sauver "keep (safe), protect, redeem," from Late Latin salvare "m

 dissertation 

 1610s, "discussion, debate" (a sense now obsolete), from Late Latin dissertationem (nominative dissertatio) "discourse," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin dissertare "debate, argue, examine, harangue," frequentative of disserere "discuss, examine," from dis- "apar

 Share esophagus 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/esophagus Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/esophagus">Etymology of esophagus by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of esophagus. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/esophagus Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of esophagus," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/esophagus. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of esophagus." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/esophagus. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of esophagus." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/esophagus (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near esophagus 
 esker 
 Eskimo 
 Esmerelda 
 esne 
 eso- 
 esophagus 
 esoteric 
 esoterica 
 ESP 
 espadrille 
 espalier 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix