URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuisance
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:32:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nuisance - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nuisance - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nuisance 

 nuisance (n.) 

 c. 1400, "injury, hurt, harm," from Anglo-French nusaunce , Old French nuisance "harm, wrong, damage," from past-participle stem of nuire "to harm," from Latin nocere "to hurt" (from PIE root *nek- (1) "death"). Sense has softened over time, to "anything obnoxious to a community" (bad smells, pests, eyesores), 1660s, then "source of annoyance, something personally disagreeable" (1831). Applied to persons from 1690s. As an adjective by 1889; the older adjective nuisant was always rare and now is obsolete.
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to nuisance 

 *nek- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "death." It might form all or part of: innocent ; innocuous ; internecine ; necro- ; necropolis ; necrosis ; necromancy ; nectar ; nectarine ; nociceptive ; nocuous ; noxious ; nuisance ; obnoxious ; pernicious .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit nasyati "disappears, perishes," Avestan nasyeiti "disappears," nasu- "corpse," Old Persian vi-nathayatiy "he injures;" Greek nekros "corpse;" Latin nex , genitive necis "violent death, murder" (as opposed to mors ), nocere "to harm, hurt," noxius "harmful;" Greek nekus "dead" (adj.), nekros "dead body, corpse;" Old Irish ec , Breton ankou , Welsh angeu "death."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pain 

 late 13c., peine, "the agony suffered by Christ;" c. 1300, "punishment," especially for a crime, "legal punishment of any sort" (including fines and monetary penalties); also "condition one feels when hurt, opposite of pleasure," including mental or emotional suffering, grief, di

 meddle 

 in," and in the disparaging sense of "interfere or take part in inappropriately or impertinently, be officious, make a nuisance...

 banana 

 The nuisance was a frequent complaint in cities, and there seems to have been a regular insurance scam targeting streetcar...

 chain 

 Chain letter is recorded from 1892; at first usually to raise money; decried from the start as a nuisance....

 minstrel 

 Their social importance and reputation in England deteriorated and by Elizabethan times they were ranked as a public nuisance...

 public 

 Public enemy, one considered a nuisance to the general community, is attested from 1756....

 annoyance 

 late 14c., "vexation, trouble," from Old French enoiance "ill-humor, irritation," from anuiant, present participle of anuier "to be troublesome, annoy, harass" (see annoy). The meaning "state of being annoyed" is from c. 1500, as is the sense of "that which annoys." Earlier, anno

 the 

 definite article, late Old English þe, nominative masculine form of the demonstrative pronoun and adjective. After c.950, it replaced earlier se (masc.), seo (fem.), þæt (neuter), and probably represents se altered by the th- form which was used in all the masculine oblique cases

 neck 

 "that part of an animal body between the head and the trunk and which connects those parts," Middle English nekke, from Old English hnecca "neck, nape, back of the neck" (a fairly rare word) from Proto-Germanic *hnekk- "the nape of the neck" (source also of Old Frisian hnekka, Mi

 romanticism 

 1803, "a romantic idea," from romantic + -ism. In literature, 1823, in a French context, in reference to a movement toward medieval forms (especially in reaction to classical ones), an association now more often confined to Romanesque. The movement began in German and spread to E

 Share nuisance 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuisance Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuisance">Etymology of nuisance by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nuisance. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuisance Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nuisance," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuisance. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nuisance." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuisance. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nuisance." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuisance (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nuisance 
 nudity 
 nudnik 
 nuff 
 nugatory 
 nugget 
 nuisance 
 nuke 
 null 
 nullification 
 nullifidian 
 nullify 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix