URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/diploma
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:19:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Diploma - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Diploma - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of diploma 

 diploma (n.) 

 1640s, "state paper, official document," from Latin diploma (plural diplomata ) "a state letter of recommendation," given to persons travelling to the provinces, "a document drawn up by a magistrate," from Greek diploma "licence, chart," originally "paper folded double," from diploun "to double, fold over," from diploos "double" (see diplo- ) + -oma , suffix forming neuter nouns and nouns that indicate result of verbal action (see -oma ).

 The main modern use is a specialized one, "a writing under seal from competent authority conferring some honor or privilege," especially that given by a college conferring a degree or authorizing the practice of a profession (1680s in English).

 The plural is always 
 -mas in the ordinary sense (certificate of degree &c.), though 
 -mata lingers in unusual senses (state paper &c.) as an alternative. [Fowler]

 Compare diplomacy , diplomatic .
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to diploma 

 diplomacy (n.) 

 "the science of formal intercourse between nations through authorized agents; the art of negotiating and drafting treaties;" more loosely, "transactions and management of international business in general," 1793, from French diplomatie , formed from diplomate "diplomat" (on model of aristocratie from aristocrate ), from Modern Latin diplomaticus (1680s), from Latin diploma (genitive diplomatis ) "official document conferring a privilege" (see diploma ; for sense evolution, see diplomatic ).

 It is obvious to any one who has been in charge of the interests of his country abroad that the day secrecy is abolished negotiations of any kind will become impossible. [Jules Cambon, "The Diplomatist" (transl. Christopher Rede Turner), 1931]

 Meaning "dexterity or skill in managing negotiations of any kind" is by 1848.

 diplomatic (adj.) 

 1711, "pertaining to official or original documents, texts, or charters," from Modernl Latin diplomaticus (1680s), from diplomat- , stem of Latin diploma "a state letter of recommendation," given to persons travelling to the provinces, "a document drawn up by a magistrate," from Greek diploma "a licence, a chart," originally "paper folded double," from diploun "to double, fold over," from diploos "double" (see diplo- ) + -oma , suffix forming neuter nouns and nouns that indicate result of verbal action (see -oma ).

 Meaning "pertaining to or of the nature of diplomacy; concerned with the management of international relations" is recorded by 1787, apparently a sense evolved in 18c. from the use of diplomaticus in Modern Latin titles of collections of international treaties, etc., in which the word referred to the "texts" but came to be felt as meaning "pertaining to international relations."

 In the general sense of "tactful and adroit, skilled in negotiation or intercourse of any kind" it dates from 1826. Diplomatic immunity is attested by 1849. Related: Diplomatically .

 anadiplosis 
 diplo- 
 -oma 
 *dwo- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 anadiplosis 

 in rhetoric, "repetition at the start of a line or phrase of the last word or words of the preceding one," 1580s, from Latin, from Greek anadiplosis, from anadiploesthai "to be doubled back, to be made double," from ana "back" (see ana-) + diploun "to double, fold over" (see dipl

 paper 

 game of hare-and-hounds, from the bits of paper scattered as "scent" by the "hares;" the slang meaning "effort to earn a diploma...

 degree 

 .; educational sense of "an academic rank conferred by diploma" is from late 14c....

 certificate 

 early 15c., "action of certifying," from French certificat, from Medieval Latin certificatum "thing certified," noun use of neuter past participle of certificare "to make certain" (see certify). Of documents of certification, testifying to the truth of the facts stated, from mid-

 credential 

 "that which entitles to credit," 1756, probably a back-formation from credentials, from Medieval Latin credentialis, from credentia "belief," from Latin credere "to believe, trust" (see credo). Rare in the singular form. Earlier in English as an adjective, "confirming, corroborat

 rectification 

 c. 1400, rectificacioun, "a remedying, healing, improvement;" late 15c., "action of setting someone right in conduct or action, the correction of that which is wrong or erroneous;" from Old French rectificacion (14c.) or directly from Late Latin rectificationem (nominative rectif

 credentials 

 "letters entitling the bearer to certain credit or confidence," 1670s, from Medieval Latin credentialis, from credentia  "belief," from Latin credere "to believe, trust" (see credo). Probably immediately as a shortening of letters credential (1520s, with French word order); 

 agency 

 1650s, "active operation;" 1670s, "a mode of exerting power or producing effect," from Medieval Latin agentia, abstract noun from Latin agentem (nominative agens) "effective, powerful," present participle of agere "to set in motion, drive forward; to do, perform," figuratively "i

 emblem 

 1580s, "relief, raised ornament on vessels, etc.," from Latin emblema "inlaid ornamental work," from Greek emblema (genitive emblematos) "an insertion," from emballein "to insert," literally "to throw in," from assimilated form of en "in" (see en- (2)) + ballein "to throw" (from 

 month 

 "one-twelfth part of a year; one of the twelve parts into which the calendar year is arbitrarily divided," Old English monað, from Proto-Germanic *menoth- (source also of Old Saxon manoth, Old Frisian monath, Middle Dutch manet, Dutch maand, Old High German manod, German Monat, O

 Share diploma 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/diploma Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/diploma">Etymology of diploma by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of diploma. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/diploma Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of diploma," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diploma. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of diploma." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diploma. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of diploma." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/diploma (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near diploma 
 diphtheria 
 diphthong 
 diplo- 
 diplodocus 
 diploid 
 diploma 
 diplomacy 
 diplomat 
 diplomatic 
 diplomatist 
 dipper 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix