URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Charles
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:03:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Charles - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Charles - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Charles 

 Charles 

 masc. proper name, from French Charles , from Medieval Latin Carolus , from Middle High German Karl , literally "man, husband" (see carl ).

 Entries linking to Charles 

 carl (n.) 

 c. 1300, "bondsman; common man, man of low birth," from Old Norse karl "man" (as opposed to "woman"), "male, freeman," from Proto-Germanic *karlon- (source also of Dutch karel "a fellow," Old High German karl "a man, husband"). The same Proto-Germanic source produced Old English ceorl "man of low degree" (see churl ) and the masc. proper name Carl and, via French and Latin, Charles .

 The Mellere was a stout carle for the nones [Chaucer] 

 Andrew 

 masc. proper name, from Old French Andreu (Modern French André ), from Late Latin Andreas (source also of Spanish Andrés , Italian Andrea , German Andreas , Swedish and Danish Anders ), from Greek Andreas , a personal name equivalent to andreios (adj.) "manly, masculine, of or for a man; strong; stubborn," from anēr (genitive andros ) "man" (from PIE root *ner- (2) "man").

 Nearly equivalent to Charles . Andrew Millar (1590s) for some forgotten reason became English naval slang for "government authority," and especially "the Royal Navy." St. Andrew (feast day Nov. 30) has long been regarded as patron saint of Scotland; the Andrew's cross (c. 1400) supposedly resembles the one on which he was crucified.

 Carlos 
 Carolina 
 caroline 
 Charlemagne 
 Charleston 
 Charlie 
 Charlotte 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sirloin 

 the cut of beef was "knighted" by an English king for its superiority, a tale variously told of Henry VIII, James I, and Charles...The word surloin or sirloin is often said to be derived from the fact that the loin was knighted as Sir Loin by Charles...English dictionary writer Charles] Richardson) by James I....

 cabal 

 Popularized in English 1673 as an acronym for five intriguing ministers of Charles II (Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley...

 evolution 

 Modern use in biology, of species, first attested 1832 in works of Scottish geologist Charles Lyell....Charles Darwin used the word in print once only, in the closing paragraph of "The Origin of Species" (1859), and preferred...

 hair-trigger 

 [Charles James, "Military Dictionary," London, 1802]...

 no-frills 

 [Albert Barrère and Charles G. Leland, "A Dictionary of Slang, Jargon & Cant," Ballantyne Press, 1890]...

 fuchsia 

 red color (like that of the Fuchsia flowers), 1921, from the ornamental shrub (named 1703 by French botanist Charles Plumier...

 Polynesia 

 1758, Latinization of French polynésie, coined 1756 by French writer Charles de Brosses (1709-1777) in "Histoire des navigations...

 a.m. 

 also a.m., 1762 in reference to hours, an abbreviation of Latin ante meridiem "before noon" (q.v.). Synonymous with "morning" by 1776. AM as a type of radio wave broadcast, 1921, abbreviation of amplitude modulation (see amplitude). Affixed to a name, an abbreviation of artium ma

 am 

 first-person singular present indicative of be (q.v.); Old English eom "to be, to remain," (Mercian eam, Northumbrian am), from Proto-Germanic *izm(i)-, from PIE *esmi- (source also of Old Norse emi, Gothic im, Hittite esmi, Old Church Slavonic jesmi, Lithuanian esmi), first-pers

 the 

 definite article, late Old English þe, nominative masculine form of the demonstrative pronoun and adjective. After c.950, it replaced earlier se (masc.), seo (fem.), þæt (neuter), and probably represents se altered by the th- form which was used in all the masculine oblique cases

 Share Charles 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Charles Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Charles">Etymology of Charles by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Charles. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Charles Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Charles," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Charles. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Charles." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Charles. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Charles." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Charles (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Charles 
 charity 
 charivari 
 charlatan 
 charlatanism 
 Charlemagne 
 Charles 
 Charles's Wain 
 Charleston 
 charley horse 
 Charlie 
 Charlotte 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix