URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/numb
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:38:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Numb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Numb - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of numb 

 numb (adj.) 

 c. 1400, nome , "deprived of motion or feeling, powerless to feel or act," literally "taken, seized," from past participle of nimen "to take, seize," from Old English niman "to take, catch, grasp" (from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take"). The unetymological -b (to conform to comb , limb , etc.) appeared 17c. The notion is of being "taken" with palsy, shock, and especially cold. Figurative use is from 1560s.
 also from c. 1400 

 numb (v.) 

 "to make numb, deprive of sensation or power of movement," 1550s (implied in numbed ), from numb (adj.). Related: Numbing .
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to numb 

 comb (n.) 

 Old English camb (later Anglian comb ) "thin strip of toothed, stiff material" (for dressing the hair), also "fleshy crest growing on the head of the domestic fowl" (so called for its serrations), hence "crest of a hat, helmet, etc.;" also "honeycomb" (for which see honeycomb (n.)) , from Proto-Germanic *kambaz (source also of Old Saxon and Old High German camb , German Kamm , Middle Dutch cam , Dutch kam , Old Norse kambr ), literally "toothed object," from PIE *gombhos , from root *gembh- "tooth, nail."

 From c. 1300 as a tool for carding wool (probably earlier; Comber as a surname is from c. 1200). Comb-paper (1866) is marbled paper in which the design is produced mostly by use of a comb.

 limb (n.1) 

 "part or member," Old English lim "limb of the body; any part of an animal body, distinct from the head and trunk;" main branch of a tree," from Proto-Germanic *limu- (source also of Old Norse limr "limb," lim "small branch of a tree"), a variant of *lithu- (source of Old English liþ , Old Frisian lith , Old Norse liðr , Gothic liþus "a limb;" and with prefix ga- , source of German Glied "limb, member").

 The unetymological -b began to appear late 1500s for no etymological reason (perhaps by influence of limb (n.2)). The Old English plural was often limu ; limen and other plural forms in -n lasted into Middle English. Since c. 1400 especially of a leg; in Victorian English this usage was somewhat euphemistic, "out of affected or prudish unwillingness to use the word leg " [Century Dictionary]. However in Old and Middle English, and until lately in dialects, it could mean "any visible body part":

 The lymmes of generacion were shewed manyfestly. [Caxton, "The subtyl historyes and fables of Esope, Auyan, Alfonce, and Poge," 1484]

 Hence, limb-lifter "fornicator" (1570s). Limb of the law was 18c. derisive slang for a lawyer or police officer. To go out on a limb in figurative sense "enter a risky situation" is from 1897. Alliterative life and limb in reference to the body inclusively is from c. 1200. Obsolete limb-meal (adv.) "limb-from-limb, piecemeal" is from late Old English lim-mælum .

 benumb 
 nim 
 numbness 
 numbnuts 
 numbskull 
 *nem- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nim 

 "to take, take up in the hands in order to move, carry, or use; take unlawfully, steal" (archaic), Old English niman "to take, accept, receive, grasp, catch," from Proto-Germanic *nemanan (source also of Old Saxon niman, Old Frisian nima, Middle Dutch nemen, German nehmen, Gothic

 blunt 

 c. 1200, blunt, blont, "dull, obtuse" (of persons), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra "to shut one's eyes" (see blunder (v.)). Or from Old English blinnan (past participle blon) "to stop, cease, come to an end." Of tools or weapons, "not sharp, wit

 asleep 

 c. 1200, aslepe, o slæpe, "in or into a state of slumber," from Old English on slæpe (see a- (1) + sleep (n.)). The parallel form on sleep continued until c. 1550. In religious literature sometimes euphemistic or figurative for "dead" (late 13c.). The meaning "inattentive, off gu

 clumsy 

 1590s, "acting or moving as if benumbed," alteration of Middle English clumsid "numb with cold" (14c.), past participle of...clumsen, clomsen "to benumb, stiffen or paralyze with cold or fear" (early 14c.), also "become numb or stiff, as with cold...Norwegian klumsad (past participle) "speechless, palsied by a spasm or by fear or witchery;" German verklammen "grow stiff or numb...

 insensible 

 c. 1400, "lacking the power to feel with the senses, numb, dazed" (now rare in this meaning), from Late Latin insensibilis...

 trance 

 ," from Old French transe "fear of coming evil," originally "coma, passage from life to death" (12c.), from transir "be numb...

 torpedo 

 , sluggishness" (the fish so called from the effect of being jolted by the ray's electric discharges), from torpere "be numb...

 elapse 

 "to slide, slip, or glide away; pass away with or as if with a continuous gliding motion," used of time, 1640s, from French elapser, from Latin elapsus, past participle of elabi "slip or glide away, escape," from ex "out, out of, away" (see ex-) + labi "to slip, glide" (see lapse

 please 

 c. 1300, plesen, "to please or satisfy (a deity), propitiate, appease," from Old French plaisir "to please, give pleasure to, satisfy" (11c., Modern French plaire, the form of which is perhaps due to analogy of faire), from Latin placere "to be acceptable, be liked, be approved,"

 Edda 

 1771, by some identified with the name of the old woman (literally "grandmother") in the Old Norse poem "Rigsþul," by others derived from Old Norse oðr "spirit, mind, passion, song, poetry" (cognate with Old Irish faith "poet," Welsh gwawd "poem," Old English woþ "sound, melody, 

 Share numb 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/numb Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/numb">Etymology of numb by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of numb. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/numb Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of numb," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/numb. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of numb." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/numb. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of numb." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/numb (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near numb 
 nullification 
 nullifidian 
 nullify 
 nulliparous 
 nullity 
 numb 
 number 
 numberless 
 numbles 
 numbness 
 numbnuts 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close