URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/era
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:06:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Era - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Era - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of era 

 era (n.) 

 1716, earlier aera (1610s), from Late Latin aera , era "an era or epoch from which time is reckoned" (7c.), probably identical with Latin aera "counters used for calculation," plural of aes (genitive aeris ) "brass, copper, money" (see ore , also compare copper ). The Latin word's use in chronology said to have begun in 5c. Spain (where the local era, aera Hispanica , began 38 B.C.E.; some say because of a tax levied that year). Other ancient eras included the Chaldean (autumn of 311 B.C.E.), the Era of Actium (31 B.C.E.), of Antioch (49 B.C.E.), of Tyre (126 B.C.E.), the Olympiadic (July 1, 776 B.C.E.) and the Seleucidan (autumn 312 B.C.E.). In English it originally meant "the starting point of an age" (compare epoch ); meaning "system of chronological notation" is from 1640s; that of "historical period" is from 1741, as in the U.S. Era of Good Feeling (1817) was anything but.
 also from 1716 

 Entries linking to era 

 copper (n.1) 

 malleable metallic element, noted for its peculiar red color, tenacity, malleability, and electric conductivity, late Old English coper , from Proto-Germanic *kupar (source also of Middle Dutch koper , Old Norse koparr , Old High German kupfar ), from Late Latin cuprum , contraction of Latin Cyprium (aes) "Cyprian (metal)," after Greek Kyprios "Cyprus" (see Cyprus ).

 Ancient Greek had khalkos "ore, copper, bronze;" an old IE word for "ore, copper, bronze" is retained in Sanskrit ayah , Latin aes . Latin aes originally was "copper," but this was extended to its alloy with tin (see bronze ), and as this was far more extensively used than pure copper, the word's primary sense shifted to the alloy and a new word evolved for "copper," from the Latin form of the name of the island of Cyprus, where copper was mined (the alchemists associated copper with Venus).

 Aes passed into Germanic (which originally did not distinguish copper from its alloys) and became English ore . In Latin, aes was the common word for "cash, coin, debt, wages" in many figurative expressions. Chemical symbol Cu is from cuprum .

 As "a copper coin," from 1580s; as "a vessel made of copper," 1660s. The adjective, "of or resembling copper," is from 1570s; the verb, "to cover with copper" is from 1520s.

 epoch (n.) 

 1610s, epocha , "point marking the start of a new period in time" (such as the founding of Rome, the birth of Christ, the Hegira), from Medieval Latin epocha , from Greek epokhe "stoppage, fixed point of time," from epekhein "to pause, take up a position," from epi "on" (see epi- ) + ekhein "to hold" (from PIE root *segh- "to hold"). Transferred sense of "a period of time" is 1620s; geological usage (not a precise measurement) is from 1802.

 ore (n.) 

 "a metalliferous mineral or rock," especially one worth mining, 12c., a merger of Old English ora "ore, unworked metal" (related to eorþe "earth;" see earth (n.); and cognate with Low German ur "iron-containing ore," Dutch oer , Old Norse aurr "gravel"); and Old English ar "brass, copper, bronze," from Proto-Germanic *ajiz- (source also of Old Norse eir "brass, copper," German ehern "brazen," Gothic aiz "bronze"), from PIE root *aus- (2) "gold" (see aureate ). The two words were not fully assimilated till 17c.; what emerged has the regular modern form of ar but the meaning of ora .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 post-modern 

 But it has been only during the later decades of the modern era — during that time interval that might fairly be called the...post-modern era — that this mechanistic conception of things has begun seriously to affect the current system of knowledge...

 tertiary 

 The geological sense (with capital T-) of "era after the Mesozoic" (which formerly was called the Secondary) is attested...

 Mesozoic 

 The name was coined by British geologist John Phillips for the fossil era "between" the Paleozoic and what is now the Cenozoic...

 eponym 

 one whose name becomes that of a place, a people, an era, an institution, etc., 1833, from Greek eponymos "given as a name...

 rile 

 Compare heist from hoist and in the same era spile for spoil (v.)....

 gilded 

 Gilded Age as an era in U.S. history (roughly 1870-1900) is from the novel "The Gilded Age" by Mark Twain and Charles Dudley...

 fluke 

 along rapidly (to go a-fluking or some variant of it, "go very fast," is in Dana, Smyth, and other sailors' books of the era...

 measure 

 early 14c., mesuren, "to exercise moderation;" mid-14c., "to deal out or divide up by measure," also "to ascertain spatial dimensions, quantity, or capacity of by comparison with a standard;" from Old French mesurer "measure; moderate, curb" (12c.), from Late Latin mensurare "to 

 day 

 Old English dæg "period during which the sun is above the horizon," also "lifetime, definite time of existence," from Proto-Germanic *dages- "day" (source also of Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Dutch dag, Old Frisian di, dei, Old High German tag, German Tag, Old Norse dagr, Gothic dags

 ear 

 "organ of hearing," Old English eare "ear," from Proto-Germanic *auzon (source also of Old Norse eyra, Danish øre, Old Frisian are, Old Saxon ore, Middle Dutch ore, Dutch oor, Old High German ora, German Ohr, Gothic auso), from PIE *ous- "ear" (source also of Greek ous, Latin aur

 Share era 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/era Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/era">Etymology of era by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of era. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/era Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of era," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/era. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of era." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/era. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of era." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/era (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near era 
 equivocator 
 equus 
 er 
 *er- 
 -er 
 era 
 eradicate 
 eradication 
 erasable 
 erase 
 eraser 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix