URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliberate
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:43:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Deliberate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Deliberate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of deliberate 

 deliberate (adj.) 

 early 15c., "done with careful consideration," from Latin deliberatus "resolved upon, determined," past participle of deliberare "consider carefully, consult," literally "weigh well," from de, here probably "entirely" (see de- ) + -liberare , altered (probably by influence of liberare "to free, liberate") from librare "to balance, make level," from libra "pair of scales, a balance" (see Libra ). Meaning "characterized by slowness in decision, consciously unhurried" is attested by 1590s. Related: Deliberateness .
 also from early 15c. 

 deliberate (v.) 

 1540s, "weigh in the mind, consider carefully;" 1550s, "discuss and examine the reasons for or against," from Latin deliberatus , past participle of deliberare "consider carefully, consult," literally "weigh well," from de, here probably "entirely" (see de- ) + - liberare , altered (probably by influence of liberare "to free, liberate") from librare "to balance, make level," from libra "pair of scales, a balance" (see Libra ). Related: Deliberated ; deliberating . The earlier form of the verb in English was deliberen (late 14c.), from Old French deliberer and directly from Latin deliberare .
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to deliberate 

 Libra (n.) 

 zodiac constellation represented by a pair of scales, late Old English, from Latin libra "a balance, pair of scales," also "pound (unit of weight)," from Proto-Italic *leithra- "pound." De Vaan compares Greek litra "name of a Sicilian coin," which "was probably borrowed from an Italic language at the stage containing [ -thr- ]."

 Not a separate constellation in ancient Greece, where it was khelae , "the claws" of adjacent Skorpios. Nativized in Old Norse as skala-merki . Meaning "person born under the sign of Libra" is from 1894. Related: Libral ; Libran .

 deliberately (adv.) 

 late 15c., "with due consideration, with a set purpose," from deliberate (adj.) + -ly (2).

 de- 

 active word-forming element in English and in many verbs inherited from French and Latin, from Latin de "down, down from, from, off; concerning" (see de ), also used as a prefix in Latin, usually meaning "down, off, away, from among, down from," but also "down to the bottom, totally" hence "completely" (intensive or completive), which is its sense in many English words.

 As a Latin prefix it also had the function of undoing or reversing a verb's action, and hence it came to be used as a pure privative — "not, do the opposite of, undo" — which is its primary function as a living prefix in English, as in defrost (1895), defuse (1943), de-escalate (1964), etc. In some cases, a reduced form of dis- .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 debate 

 late 14c., "to quarrel, dispute," also "to combat, fight, make war" (senses now archaic), also "discuss, deliberate upon the pros and cons of," from Old French debatre (13c., Modern French débattre), originally "to fight," from de- "down, completely" (see de-) + batre "to beat," 

 consider 

 late 14c., consideren, "to fix the mind upon for careful examination, meditate upon," also "view attentively, scrutinize; not to be negligent of," from Old French considerer (13c.) "reflect on, consider, study," from Latin considerare "to look at closely, observe," probably liter

 consultation 

 past-participle stem of consultare "to consult, ask counsel of; reflect, consider maturely," frequentative of consulere "to deliberate...derivative of consul (we would rather expect consulare), it appears that the verb was original and meant 'to get together, deliberate...

 advisement 

 examination, inspection, observation," from Old French avisement "consideration, reflection; counsel, advice," from aviser "deliberate...

 destruct 

 destroy," 1958, probably a back-formation from destruction in the jargon of U.S. aerospace and defense workers to refer to deliberate...

 moratorium 

 General sense of "a postponement, deliberate temporary suspension" is recorded by 1932. Related: Moratorial....

 premeditate 

 "think about and contrive beforehand," 1540s, from pre- + meditate, or a back formation from premeditation, or else from Latin praemeditatus, past participle of praemeditari "to consider beforehand," from prae "before" (see pre-) + meditari "to consider," from a frequentative for

 see 

 Middle English sēn, from Old English seon (Anglian sean) "be or become aware of by means of the eye; look, behold;" also "perceive mentally, understand; experience; visit (a place); inspect" (contracted class V strong verb; past tense seah, past participle sewen), from Proto-Germ

 overturn 

 early 13c., of a wheel, "to rotate, roll over," from over- + turn (v.). Attested from c. 1300 in general transitive sense "to throw over violently;" figurative meaning "to ruin, destroy" is from late 14c. Of judicial decisions, "to reverse," it is attested from 1826. Related: Ove

 Share deliberate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliberate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliberate">Etymology of deliberate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of deliberate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliberate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of deliberate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliberate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of deliberate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliberate. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of deliberate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/deliberate (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near deliberate 
 Delft 
 delftware 
 Delhi 
 deli 
 Delian 
 deliberate 
 deliberately 
 deliberation 
 deliberative 
 delibrate 
 delicacies 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix