URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fountain
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:36:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fountain - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fountain - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fountain 

 fountain (n.) 

 early 15c., "spring of water that collects in a pool," from Old French fontaine "natural spring" (12c.), from Medieval Latin fontana "fountain, a spring" (source of Spanish and Italian fontana ), from post-classical noun use of fem. of Latin fontanus "of a spring," from fons (genitive fontis ) "spring (of water)," according to Watkins from PIE root *dhen- (1) "to run, flow" (source also of Sanskrit dhanayati , Old Persian danuvatiy "flows, runs").

 The extended sense of "artificial jet of water" (and the structures that make them) is recorded by c. 1500. Hence also fountain-pen (by 1823), so called for the reservoir that supplies a continuous flow of ink. "A French fountain-pen is described in 1658 and Miss Burney used one in 1789" [Weekley].

 Fountain of youth is attested by 1798.

 "Did you never hear of the 'Fountain of Youth'?" asked Dr. Heidegger, "which Ponce de Leon, the Spanish adventurer, went in search of two or three centuries ago?" [Hawthorne, "Dr. Heidegger's Experiment," 1837]
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to fountain 

 font (n.1) 

 "water basin," especially used in baptism, late Old English, from Latin fons (genitive fontis ) "fountain" (see fountain ), especially in Medieval Latin fons baptismalis "baptismal font." The word is sometimes used poetically for "a fountain; a source."

 fontanelle (n.) 

 also fontanel , 1540s, "hollow between two muscles," from French fontanelle (16c.), from Old French fontenele "small source, fountain, spring; fontanelle," diminutive of fontaine "spring" (see fountain ), on analogy of the dent in the earth where a spring arises. In reference to the "hollow" in a baby's skull, it is recorded by 1741.

 fount 
 fountainhead 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 spring 

 Middle English springen, from Old English springan "to leap, leap up, jump;" of a fountain, spring, etc., "burst forth;" also "fly up; spread, grow" (class III strong verb; past tense sprang, past participle sprungen). This is from Proto-Germanic *sprenganan (source also of Old N

 jet 

 1690s, "to sprout or spurt forth, shoot out," from French jeter "to throw, thrust," from Late Latin iectare (abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc.), in place of Latin iactare "to toss about," frequentative of iacere "to throw, cast," from PIE root *ye- "to throw, impel." Mi

 bourn 

 the winter torrents of the chalk downs, Old English brunna, burna "brook, stream," from Proto-Germanic *brunnoz "spring, fountain..." (source also of Old High German brunno, Old Norse brunnr, Old Frisian burna, German Brunnen "fountain," Gothis brunna "...

 surge 

 late 15c., "fountain, stream," of uncertain origin, probably from French sourge-, stem of sourdre "to rise, swell," from...

 source 

 The meaning "a first cause, an origin" is from late 14c., as is that of "fountain-head of a river."...

 Coca-Cola 

 Drink the brain tonic and intellectual soda fountain beverage Coca-Cola....

 soda 

 Soda fountain is from 1824 for a metal structure that can dispense carbonated water; soda jerk for the operator of one is...attested by 1915, so called for the action involved in drawing it (soda-jerker is from 1883; soda-fountain boy is from 1876...

 flow 

 Old English flowan "to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow" (class VII strong verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flowan "to flow" (source also of Middle Dutch vloyen, Dutch vloeien, vloeijen "to flow," Old Norse floa "to d

 wolf 

 Old English wulf "wolf, wolfish person, devil," from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (source also of Old Saxon wulf, Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root *wlkwo- "wolf" (source also of Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k

 fowl 

 Old English fugel "bird, feathered vertebrate," from Proto-Germanic *fuglaz, the general Germanic word for "bird" (source also of Old Saxon fugal, Old Frisian fugel, Old Norse fugl, Middle Dutch voghel, Dutch vogel, German vogel, Gothic fugls "a fowl, a bird"), perhaps a dissimil

 Share fountain 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fountain Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fountain">Etymology of fountain by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fountain. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fountain Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fountain," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fountain. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fountain." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fountain. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fountain." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fountain (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fountain 
 foundational 
 founder 
 foundling 
 foundry 
 fount 
 fountain 
 fountainhead 
 four 
 fourchette 
 four-corners 
 four-door 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix