URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/amen
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:43:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Amen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Amen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of amen 

 amen (interj.) 

 Old English, from Late Latin amen , from Ecclesiastical Greek amen , from Hebrew amen "truth," used adverbially as an expression of agreement (as in Deuteronomy xxvii.26, I Kings i.36), from Semitic root a-m-n "to be trustworthy, confirm, support."

 Compare similar use of Modern English certainly , absolutely . Used in Old English only at the end of Gospels, otherwise translated as Soðlic! or Swa hit ys , or Sy! As an expression of concurrence after prayers, it is recorded from early 13c. Amen corner is attested from 1860.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Maranatha 

 has been explained as "Our Lord, come thou" or "Our Lord hath come," apparently a solemn formula of confirmation, like amen...

 name 

 "word by which a person or thing is denoted," Old English nama, noma "name, reputation," from Proto-Germanic *naman- (source also of Old Saxon namo, Old Frisian nama, Old High German namo, German Name, Middle Dutch name, Dutch naam, Old Norse nafn, Gothic namo "name"), from PIE r

 mane 

 "growth of long hair on the back of the neck and shoulders," characteristic of the horse, lion, and some other animals, Old English manu "mane of a horse," from Proto-Germanic *mano (source also of Old Norse mön, Old Frisian mana, Middle Dutch mane, Dutch manen, Old High German m

 mean 

 "intend, have in mind;" Middle English mēnen, from Old English mænan "intend (to do something), plan; indicate (a certain object) or convey (a certain sense) when using a word," from Proto-West Germanic *menjojanan (source also of Old Frisian mena "to signify," Old Saxon menian "

 absolutely 

 late 14c., "unconditionally, completely," from absolute (adj.) + -ly (2). From mid-15c. as "without reference to anything else, not relatively;" the meaning "to the utmost degree" emerged by mid-16c. As a colloquial emphatic, by 1867, American English. "Cannot something be done 

 hit 

 late Old English hyttan, hittan "come upon, meet with, fall in with, 'hit' upon," from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse hitta "to light upon, meet with," also "to hit, strike;" Swedish hitta "to find," Danish and Norwegian hitte "to hit, find," from Proto-Germanic *hitjan,

 shoe 

 Middle English sho, "low-cut covering for the human foot," from Old English scoh, from Proto-Germanic *skokhaz (source also of Old Norse skor, Danish and Swedish sko, Old Frisian skoch, Old Saxon skoh, Middle Dutch scoe, Dutch schoen, Old High German scuoh, German Schuh, Gothic s

 abeyance 

 1520s, "state of expectation," from Anglo-French abeiance "suspension," also "expectation (especially in a lawsuit)," from Old French abeance "aspiration, powerful desire," noun of condition from abeer "aspire after, gape, open wide," from à "at" (see ad-) + ba(y)er "be open," fr

 shibboleth 

 late 14c., in Bible translations, the Hebrew word shibboleth, meaning "flood, stream," also "ear of corn," as used in Judges xii.4-6. During the slaughter at the fords of Jordan, the Gileadites took it as a password to distinguish their men from fleeing Ephraimites, because Ephra

 Jehovah 

 1530, Tyndale's transliteration of Hebrew Tetragrammaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai "my lord" (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation the lord would have been inc

 Share amen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/amen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/amen">Etymology of amen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of amen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/amen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of amen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of amen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amen. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of amen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/amen (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near amen 
 ameer 
 Amelia 
 ameliorate 
 amelioration 
 ameliorative 
 amen 
 amenability 
 amenable 
 amenableness 
 amend 
 amendable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix