URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/argent
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:13:37Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Argent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Argent - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of argent 

 argent (n.) 

 early 15c., "silver, silver coin," from Old French argent "silver, silver money; quicksilver" (11c.), from Latin argentum "silver, silver work, silver money," from PIE *arg-ent- , suffixed form of root *arg- "to shine; white," thus "silver" as "the shining or white metal." It was earlier in English in the sense of "quicksilver, the metal mercury" (c. 1300); the adjective sense "silver-colored" is from late 15c.
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to argent 

 silver (n.) 

 "rare white metal, harder than gold, softer than copper, valued for its luster and malleability," Middle English silver , from Old English seolfor , Mercian sylfur , Northumbrian sulfer , "the metal silver; silver coin, money," from Proto-Germanic *silabur- (source also of Old Saxon silvbar , Old Frisian selover , Old Norse silfr , Middle Dutch silver , Dutch zilver , Old High German silabar , German silber "silver; money," Gothic silubr "silver"), which is of uncertain origin.

 It seems to be Germanic/Balto-Slavic (source also of Old Church Slavonic s(u)rebo , Russian serebro , Polish srebro , Lithuanian sidabras "silver"), but has long been presumed to be a Wanderwort (a loan-word that has spread among several languages) displacing the usual IE word for the metal (represented by Latin argentum ; see argent ).

 Basque zilharr "silver" usually is considered a loan-word from West Germanic, but the Germanic form lately has been compared to old Celtic words used in Spain, and because the rest of Celtic uses the argentum word, this suggests the borrowing might be in the other direction, and Germanic word might be from "a Hispano-Celtic innovation due to an Iberian donor language. In this connection, the old comparison of Basque zilharr is attractive" [Boutkan].

 From c. 1300 as "articles, plates, etc. of silver, silverware." As a color name from late 15c. Chemical abbreviation Ag is from Latin argentum "silver."

 *arg- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine; white," hence "silver" as the shining or white metal.

 It might form all or part of: argent ; Argentina ; argentine ; Argo ; argue ; Argus ; hydrargyrum ; litharge .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit rajata- , Avestan erezata- , Old Persian ardata- , Armenian arcat , Greek arguron , Latin argentum , Old Irish argat , Breton arc'hant "silver;" Sanskrit arjuna- "white, shining;" Hittite harki- "white;" Greek argos "white."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 quicksilver 

 Similar formation in Dutch kwikzilver, Old High German quecsilbar, German quecksilber, French vif-argent, Italian argenta...

 tincture 

 c. 1400, "a coloring, dye," from Latin tinctura "act of dyeing or tingeing," from tinctus "dye," past participle of tingere "to tinge, dye, soak in color," originally merely "to moisten, wet, soak," from PIE root *teng- "to soak" (source also of Old High German dunkon "to soak," 

 exquisite 

 early 15c., "carefully selected," from Latin exquisitus "choice," literally "carefully sought out," from past participle stem of exquirere "search out thoroughly," from ex "out" (see ex-) + quaerere "to seek" (see query (v.)). Originally in English of any thing (good or bad, tort

 apology 

 early 15c., "defense, justification," from Late Latin apologia, from Greek apologia "a speech in defense," from apologeisthai "to speak in one's defense," from apologos "an account, story," from apo "away from, off" (see apo-) + logos "speech" (see Logos). In classical Greek, "a 

 cipher 

 late 14c., "arithmetical symbol for zero," from Old French cifre "nought, zero," Medieval Latin cifra, which, with Spanish and Italian cifra, ultimately is from Arabic sifr "zero," literally "empty, nothing," from safara "to be empty;" a loan-translation of Sanskrit sunya-s "empt

 portmanteau 

 1580s, "flexible traveling case or bag for clothes and other necessaries," from Middle French portemanteau "traveling bag," originally "court official who carried a prince's mantle" (1540s), from porte, imperative of porter "to carry" (see porter (n.1)) + manteau "cloak" (see man

 resolution 

 late 14c., resolucioun, "a breaking or reducing into parts; process of breaking up, dissolution," from Old French resolution (14c.) and directly from Latin resolutionem (nominative resolutio) "process of reducing things into simpler forms," noun of action from past-participle ste

 onomatopoeia 

 "formation of words or names by imitation of natural sounds; the naming of something by a reproduction of the sound made by it or a sound associated with it," 1570s, from Late Latin onomatopoeia, from Greek onomatopoiia "the making of a name or word" (in imitation of a sound asso

 commonwealth 

 mid-15c., commoun welthe, "a community, whole body of people in a state," from common (adj.) + wealth (n.). Specifically "state with a republican or democratic form of government" from 1610s. From 1550s as "any body of persons united by some common interest." Applied specifically

 soccer 

 1889, socca, later socker (1891), soccer (1895), originally university slang (with jocular formation -er (3)), from a shortened form of Assoc., abbreviation of association in Football Association (as distinguished from Rugby football). An unusual formation, but those who did it p

 Share argent 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/argent Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/argent">Etymology of argent by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of argent. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/argent Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of argent," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/argent. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of argent." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/argent. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of argent." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/argent (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near argent 
 Areopagite 
 Areopagus 
 Ares 
 arete 
 *arg- 
 argent 
 Argentina 
 argentine 
 Argive 
 argle 
 Argo 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix