URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pumpkin
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:53:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pumpkin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pumpkin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pumpkin 

 pumpkin (n.) 

 1640s, "gourd-like fruit of a coarse decumbent vine native to North America," an alteration of pompone , pumpion "melon, gourd, cucumber" (1540s), from French pompon , from Latin peponem (nominative pepo ) "melon," from Greek pepon "melon." The Greek word is probably originally "ripe," on the notion of "cooked (by the sun)," from peptein "to cook" (from PIE root *pekw- "to cook, ripen"). With ending conformed to words in -kin , perhaps on assumption the -on was diminutive, as it is in French. Another early English word for it was pumpilion (1590s). Thomas Harriot in the 1580s noted the Algonquin name for it was macòcqwer, from whence the now obsolete macock (1610s.)

 Figuratively, in 19c. (and later) U.S. vernacular, it has meant both "stupid, self-important person" and "person or matter of importance" (as in some pumpkins ).

 Pumpkin-pie is recorded from 1650s. Pumpkin-head , American English colloquial for "person with hair cut short all around" is recorded by 1781. Vulgar American English alternative spelling punkin attested by 1806.

 America's a dandy place:

 The people are all brothers:

 And when one's got a punkin pye,

 He shares it with the others.

 [from "A Song for the Fourth of July, 1806," in The Port Folio, Philadelphia, Aug. 30, 1806]
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to pumpkin 

 melon (n.) 

 late 14c., meloun , "herbaceous, succulent trailing annual plant," or its sweet, edible fruit, from Old French melon (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin melonem (nominative melo ), from Latin melopeponem , a kind of pumpkin, from Greek mēlopepon "gourd-apple" (name for several kinds of gourds bearing sweet fruit), from mēlon "apple" (see malic ) + pepon , a kind of gourd, which is probably a noun use of pepon "ripe" (see pumpkin ).

 Among the earliest plants to be domesticated. In Greek, melon was used in a generic way for all foreign fruits (compare similar use of apple ). The Greek plural of "melon" was used from ancient times for "a girl's breasts."

 -kin 

 diminutive suffix, first attested late 12c. in proper names adopted from Flanders and Holland. As it is not found in Old English it probably is from Middle Dutch -kin , properly a double-diminutive, from -k + -in . Equivalent to German -chen . Also borrowed in Old French as -quin , where it usually has a bad sense.

 This suffix, which is almost barren in French, has been more largely developed in the Picard patois, which uses it for new forms, such as 
 verquin , a shabby little glass (
 verre ); 
 painequin , a bad little loaf (
 pain ); 
 Pierrequin poor little 
 Pierre , &c. ["An Etymological Dictionary of the French Language," transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]

 Used in later Middle English with common nouns. In some words it is directly from Dutch or Flemish.

 *pekw- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to cook, ripen." 

 It might form all or part of: apricot ; biscuit ; charcuterie ; concoct ; concoction ; cook ; cuisine ; culinary ; decoct ; decoction ; drupe ; dyspepsia ; dyspeptic ; eupeptic ; kiln ; kitchen ; peptic ; peptide ; peptone ; precocious ; pumpkin ; ricotta ; terra-cotta .

 It might also be the source ofy: Sanskrit pakvah "cooked, ripe;" Avestan -paka- "cooked;" Greek peptein "to cook, ripen, digest," pepon "ripe;" Latin coquere "to cook, prepare food, ripen, digest, turn over in the mind," Oscan popina "kitchen;" Lithuanian kepti "to bake, roast;" Old Church Slavonic pecenu "roasted;" Welsh poeth "cooked, baked, hot."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 vegetable 

 early 15c., "capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous;" also "neither animal nor mineral, of the plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant," from Old French vegetable "living, fit to live," and directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis "growing, flourishing," from Late Lati

 squash 

 "to crush, squeeze," early 14c., squachen, from Old French esquacher, variant of esquasser, escasser, escachier "to crush, shatter, destroy, break," from Vulgar Latin *exquassare, from Latin ex "out" (see ex-) + quassare "to shatter" (see quash "to crush"). Perhaps it has been pa

 some 

 Middle English som, "someone, somebody, a certain person; a certain indefinite portion of something, some part," from Old English sum "some, a, a certain one, something, a certain quantity; a certain indefinite number" (as in some say). This is from Proto-Germanic *sumaz (so

 vine 

 c. 1300, "plant which bears the grapes from which wine is made," from Old French vigne "vine, vineyard" (12c.), from Latin vinea "vine, vineyard," from vinum "wine," from PIE *win-o- "wine," an Italic noun related to words for "wine" in Greek, Armenian, Hittite, and non-Indo-Euro

 autumn 

 season after summer and before winter, late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus "increase"), which is of unknown origin. Perhaps it is from Etruscan, but Tucker suggest

 colonel 

 "chief commander of a regiment of troops," 1540s, coronell, from French coronel (16c.), modified by dissimilation from Italian colonnella "commander of the column of soldiers at the head of a regiment," from compagna colonella "little column company," from Latin columna "pillar,"

 essence 

 late 14c., essencia (respelled late 15c. on French model), from Latin essentia "being, essence," abstract noun formed (to translate Greek ousia "being, essence") from essent-, present participle stem of esse "to be," from PIE root *es- "to be." Originally "substance of the Trinit

 dismal 

 c. 1400, "unlucky, inauspicious," in dismal day, earlier as a noun, in the dismal (c. 1300) "in days of misfortune or disaster, under inauspicious circumstances, at an unlucky time," from Anglo-French dismal (mid-13c.), apparently from Old French (li) dis mals "(the) bad days," f

 blackmail 

 1550s, "tribute paid to men allied with criminals as protection against pillage, etc.," from black (adj.) + Middle English male "rent, tribute." This is from Old English mal "lawsuit, terms, bargaining, agreement," from Old Norse mal "speech, agreement;" related to Old English mæ

 camera 

 1708, "vaulted building; arched roof or ceiling," from Latin camera "a vault, vaulted room" (source also of Italian camera, Spanish camara, French chambre), from Greek kamara "vaulted chamber, anything with an arched cover," which is of uncertain origin. A doublet of chamber. Old

 Share pumpkin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pumpkin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pumpkin">Etymology of pumpkin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pumpkin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pumpkin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pumpkin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pumpkin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pumpkin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pumpkin. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pumpkin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pumpkin (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pumpkin 
 pumiceous 
 pummel 
 pump 
 pumper 
 pumpernickel 
 pumpkin 
 pun 
 punch 
 punch-bowl 
 puncheon 
 Punchinello 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix