URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sponge
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:35:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sponge - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sponge - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sponge 

 sponge (n.) 

 Old English sponge , spunge , "absorbent and porous part of certain aquatic organisms," from Latin spongia "a sponge," also "sea animal from which a sponge comes," from Greek spongia , which is related to spongos "sponge," which is of unknown origin; Beekes calls it "an old Wanderwort." "Probably a loanword from a non-IE language, borrowed independently into Greek, Latin and Armenian in a form *sphong- " [de Vaan]. The Latin word is the source of Old Saxon spunsia , Middle Dutch spongie , Old French esponge , Spanish esponja , Italian spugna .

 In English the word is used in reference to the marine animal from 1530s; of any sponge-like substance from c. 1600. Figurative use in reference to one who absorbs without discrimination is by c. 1600. The meaning "one who persistently and parasitically lives on others" is by 1838 (compare the verb, and see sponger ).

 To throw in the sponge "quit, submit" (1860) is from prizefighting, in reference to the sponges used to cleanse the faces of combatants between rounds (compare later throw in the towel ). Sponge-cake , light and sweet, is attested by 1801, so called for its substance.

 sponge (v.) 

 late 14c., spongen , "to soak up with a sponge," also (transitive) "to cleanse or wipe with a sponge," from sponge (n.) and perhaps in part from Latin spongiare . The intransitive sense "dive for sponges, gather sponges where they grow" is from 1881. Related: Sponged ; sponging .

 The slang sense of "deprive someone of (something) by sponging" is by 1630s; the intransitive sense of "live in a parasitic manner, live at the expense of others" is attested from 1670s (to live upon the sponge "live parasitically" is by 1690s); sponger (n.) in reference to "one who persistently lives parasitically on others" also is from 1670s. Originally the victim was the sponge (1620s), because that person was being "squeezed." Sponge (n.) in a general sense of "object from which something of value may be extracted" is by 1600s. Sponge (n.) in reference to the sponger is by 1838 and reverses the older sense. 
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to sponge 

 sponger (n.) 

 1670s, "parasitical dependent," agent noun from sponge (v.) in the figurative sense. As a job on a cannon crew, one who uses a sponge to clean the weapon after discharge, it is recorded by 1828.

 fungus (n.) 

 1520s, "a mushroom," from Latin fungus "a mushroom, fungus;" used in English at first as a learned alternative to mushroom ( funge was used in this sense late 14c.). The Latin word is believed to be cognate with (or derived from) Greek sphongos , the Attic form of spongos "sponge" (see sponge (n.)). "Probably a loanword from a non-IE language, borrowed independently into Greek, Latin and Armenian in a form *sphong- ...." [de Vaan]

 spongiform 
 spongy 
 spunk 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mooch 

 mid-15c., "pretend poverty," probably from Old French muchier, mucier "to hide, sulk, conceal, hide away, keep out of sight," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from Celtic or Germanic (Liberman prefers the latter, Klein the former). Also compare Middle English michen "to pilfer

 expunge 

 lexicographers in English to "denote actual obliteration by pricking;" it adds that the sense probably was influenced by sponge...

 swab 

 Non-nautical meaning "anything used for mopping up" is from 1787; as "cloth or sponge on a handle to cleanse the mouth of...

 beautician 

 painted on or injected into the patron's facial blemish a 4-per-cent cocaine solution and then applied an electrode, the sponge...

 swamp 

 swamp-water"), of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] a dialectal survival from an Old English cognate of Old Norse svöppr "sponge...

 lunch 

 Prattle, to refreſh my sponge, upon the honey dew that clings to your raviſhing pouters. O! Mrs....

 scholar 

 Middle English scolere, from Old English scolere "student, one who receives instruction in a school, one who learns from a teacher," from Medieval Latin scholaris, "a pupil, scholar," noun use of Late Latin scholaris "of a school," from Latin schola (see school (n.1), and compare

 Passover 

 annual Jewish feast instituted to commemorate the escape from Egypt, 1530, coined by Tyndale from verbal phrase pass over, to translate Hebrew ha-pesah "Passover," from pesah (see paschal), in reference to the Lord "passing over" the houses of the Israelites in Egypt when he kill

 obtain 

 early 15c., obteinen, "to get or acquire, inherit, gain, conquer," from Old French obtenir "acquire, obtain" (14c.) and directly from Latin obtinere "hold, hold fast, take hold of, get possession of, acquire," from ob "in front of" (though perhaps intensive in this case; see ob-)

 mop 

 late 15c., mappe "bundle of coarse yarn, cloth, etc., fastened to the end of a stick for cleaning or spreading pitch on a ship's decks," perhaps from Walloon (French) mappe "napkin," from Latin mappa "napkin" (see map (n.)). Modern spelling by 1660s. General sense, of such an imp

 Share sponge 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sponge Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sponge">Etymology of sponge by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sponge. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sponge Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sponge," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sponge. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sponge." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sponge. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sponge." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sponge (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sponge 
 spondyle 
 spondylitis 
 spondylo- 
 spondylolisthesis 
 spondylosis 
 sponge 
 sponger 
 spongiform 
 spongy 
 sponsor 
 sponsorship 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix