URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/corset
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:21:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Corset - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Corset - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of corset 

 corset (n.) 

 late 14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), "a kind of laced bodice, close-fitting body garment," from Old French corset (13c.) "bodice, tunic," diminutive of cors "body," from Latin corpus "body" (from PIE root *kwrep- "body, form, appearance").

 Meaning "stiff supporting and constricting undergarment for the waist, worn chiefly by women to shape the figure," is from 1795. They fell from fashion in the changing fashions after World War I. Related: Corseted, corsetted (1829); corseting; corsetry .

 With the short skirt went an extraordinary change in the weight and material and amount of women's clothing. The boyishly slender figure became the aim of every woman's ambition, and the corset was so far abandoned that even in so short a period as the three years from 1924 to 1927 the combined sales of corsets and brassières in the department stores of the Cleveland Federal Reserve District fell off 11 per cent. [Frederick Lewis Allen, "Only Yesterday," 1931]
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to corset 

 corsetier (n.) 

 fem. corsetière , "corset-maker," by 1848, from French, from corset (see corset ).

 *kwrep- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "body, form, appearance," probably a verbal root meaning "to appear."

 It might form all or part of: corporal (adj.) "of or belonging to the body;" corporate ; corporation ; corporeal ; corps ; corpse ; corpulence ; corpulent ; corpus ; corpuscle ; corsage ; corse ; corset ; incorporeal ; incorporate ; leprechaun ; midriff .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit krp- "form, body;" Avestan kerefsh "form, body;" Latin corpus "body" (living or dead); Old English hrif "belly," Old High German href "womb, belly, abdomen."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 girdle 

 Old English gyrdel "belt, sash, cord drawn about the waist and fastened," worn by both men and women, common Germanic (cognates: Old Norse gyrðill, Swedish gördel, Old Frisian gerdel, Dutch gordel, Old High German gurtil, German Gürtel "belt"), related to Old English gyrdan "to g

 bodice 

 1560s, oddly spelled plural of body, originally the name of a tight-fitting Elizabethan inner stays or corset, laced in front...

 shape 

 Shapesmith "one who undertakes to improve the form of the body" (i.e. a corset-maker) was used in 1715....

 loop 

 The authorities at Coney Island are said to have prohibited "looping-the-loop" because women break their corset strings in...

 bob 

 milliner's materials joined the hair-net manufacturer, the hair-pin manufacturer, and the cotton goods and woolen goods and corset...

 dress 

 c. 1300, "make straight; direct, guide, control; prepare for cooking," from Old French dresser, drecier "raise (oneself); address, prepare; lift, raise, hoist; set up, arrange, set (a table), serve (food); straighten, put right, direct," from Vulgar Latin *directiare "make straig

 foundation 

 late 14c., "action of founding," from Old French fondacion "foundation" (14c.) or directly from Late Latin fundationem (nominative fundatio) "a founding," noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin fundare "to lay a bottom or foundation" (see found (v.1)). The Latin word i

 apparel 

 late 13c., appareillen, "prepare, make preparations;" late 14c., "to equip, provide with proper clothing; dress or dress up," from Old French apareillier "prepare, make (someone) ready, dress (oneself)," 12c., Modern French appareiller, from Vulgar Latin *appariculare. This is ei

 garb 

 "fashion of dress," 1620s, from earlier sense "person's outward demeanor" (c. 1600), originally "elegance, stylishness" (1590s), from French garbe "graceful outline, gracefulness, comeliness" (Modern French galbe) or directly from Italian garbo "grace, elegance, pleasing manners,

 grab 

 "seize forcibly or roughly," 1580s, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grabben "to grab," from Proto-Germanic *grab-, *grap- (source also of Old English græppian "to seize," Old Saxon garva, Old High German garba "sheaf," literally "that which is gathered up together"), from 

 Share corset 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/corset Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/corset">Etymology of corset by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of corset. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/corset Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of corset," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/corset. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of corset." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/corset. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of corset." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/corset (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near corset 
 corruption 
 corsage 
 corsair 
 corse 
 corselet 
 corset 
 corsetier 
 Corsica 
 cortege 
 Cortes 
 cortex 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix