URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuance
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:32:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nuance - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nuance - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nuance 

 nuance (n.) 

 "slight or delicate degree of difference in expression, feeling, opinion, etc.," 1781, from French nuance "slight difference, shade of color" (17c.), from nuer "to shade," from nue "cloud," from Gallo-Roman *nuba , from Latin nubes "a cloud, mist, vapor," from PIE *sneudh- "fog" (source also of Avestan snaoda "clouds," Latin obnubere "to veil," Welsh nudd "fog," Greek nython , in Hesychius "dark, dusky").

 According to Klein, the French secondary sense is a reference to "the different colors of the clouds." In reference to color or tone, "a slight variation in shade," by 1852; of music, by 1841 as a French term in English.
 also from 1781 

 nuance (v.) 

 "to give nuances to," 1886, from nuance (n.). Related: Nuanced .
 also from 1886 

 Entries linking to nuance 

 nuanced (adj.) 

 "having or showing delicate gradations in tone, etc.," 1896, past-participle adjective from the verb nuance (q.v.).

 The new co-operative history of English literature which the University of Cambridge is now publishing prints "genre" without italics. And it even permits one contributor—and a contributor who is discussing Shakespeare!—to say that something is delicately "nuanced." Is there now an English verb "to nuance"? It is terrible to think of the bad language the scholars of the venerable English university might have used if "nuanced" had been first discovered in the text of an American author. [Scribner's Magazine," January 1911]

 Nubia 

 region of Africa bordering the Red Sea south of Egypt, ultimately from a local word, said to be related to Coptic noubti "to weave," or from Nubian nub "gold." In the fashion sense "woman's light scarf" it is from French, from Latin nubes "cloud" (see nuance ).

 obnubilate 
 shade 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 shade 

 Middle English shade, schade, Kentish ssed, "dark image cast by someone or something; comparative obscurity or gloom caused by the blockage of light," from late Old English scead "partial darkness; shelter, protection," also partly from sceadu "shade, shadow, darkness; shady plac

 nicety 

 late 14c., nicete, "folly, stupidity," a sense now obsolete, from Old French niceté "foolishness, childishness, simplicity," from nice "silly" (see nice). It underwent a sense evolution parallel to that of nice, arriving at "minute, subtle point" 1580s and "exactitude, accuracy" 

 subtlety 

 c. 1300, sotilte, "skill, ingenuity," from Old French sotilte "skillfulness, cunning" (Modern French subtilité), from Latin subtilitatem (nominative subtilitas) "fineness; simplicity, slenderness," noun of quality from subtilis "fine, thin, delicate" (see subtle). From late 14c. 

 civil 

 Austin, "Lectures on Jurisprudence," 1873] The sense of "polite" was in classical Latin, but English did not pick up this nuance...

 signification 

 early 14c., significacioun, "symbolization, representation," from Old French significacion and directly from Latin significationem (nominative significatio) "a signifying, indication, expression, sign, token, meaning, emphasis," noun of action from past-participle stem of signifi

 refinement 

 1610s, "act or process of refining; state of being pure or purified," from refine + -ment. The meaning "fineness of feeling, state of being free from what is coarse or debasing" is from 1710; that of "that which proceeds from refinement or the desire to be refined, an improvement

 Hades 

 god of the dead in Greek mythology; also the name of his realm, the abode of the dead spirits, 1590s, from Greek Haidēs, in Homer the name of the god of the underworld, son of Kronos and Rhea, brother of Zeus and Poseidon. His name is of unknown origin. Perhaps literally "the inv

 significance 

 c. 1400, significaunce, "meaning" (of an omen, dream, etc.), from Old French significance or directly from Latin significantia "meaning, force, energy," from significans, present participle of significare "to mean, import, signify" (see signify). From mid-15c. as "verbal meaning;

 import 

 early 15c., "signify, show, bear or convey in meaning," from Latin importare "bring in, convey, bring in from abroad," from assimilated form of in- "into, in" (from PIE root *en "in") + portare "to carry," from PIE root *per- (2) "to lead, pass over." In English, the sense of "br

 retrieve 

 early 15c., retreven, "find or discover again," originally in reference to dogs finding lost game, from retruev-, stem of Old French retreuver (Modern French retrouver) "find again, recover, meet again, recognize," from re- "again" (see re-) + trouver "to find," probably from Vul

 Share nuance 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuance Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuance">Etymology of nuance by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nuance. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuance Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nuance," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuance. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nuance." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuance. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nuance." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nuance (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nuance 
 no-win 
 no-wise 
 noxious 
 nozzle 
 nth 
 nuance 
 nuanced 
 nub 
 nubbin 
 nubby 
 Nubia 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix