URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/harmony
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:17:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Harmony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Harmony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of harmony 

 harmony (n.) 

 late 14c., "combination of tones pleasing to the ear," from Old French harmonie , armonie "harmony," also the name of a musical instrument (12c.), from Latin harmonia , from Greek harmonia "agreement, concord of sounds," also as a proper name, the personification of music, literally "means of joining," used of ship-planks, etc., also "settled government, order," related to harmos "fastenings of a door; joint, shoulder," from PIE ar(ə)-smo- , suffixed form of root *ar- "to fit together." Modern scientific harmony, using combinations of notes to form chords, is from 16c. Sense of "agreement of feeling, concord" is from late 14c.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to harmony 

 disharmony (n.) 

 "discord, incongruity, want of harmony," c. 1600; see dis- + harmony .

 harmonic (adj.) 

 1560s, "relating to music," from Latin harmonicus , from Greek harmonikos "harmonic, musical, skilled in music," from harmonia (see harmony ). From 1660s as "tuneful, harmonious; relating to harmony" (earlier as armonical "tuneful, harmonious," c. 1500). The noun, short for harmonic tone , is recorded from 1777. Related: Harmonically .

 harmonious 
 harmonist 
 harmonium 
 harmonize 
 *ar- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 harmonize 

 late 15c., "play or sing in harmony," from French harmoniser (15c.), from Old French harmonie (see harmony). Meaning "be in harmony (with), go well together" is from 1620s. Transitive sense "bring into harmony" is from 1700; figurative sense "bring into agreement" is from 1767. M

 dissonance 

 early 15c., dissonaunce, "disagreement, discrepancy, incongruity, inconsistency" (between things), from Old French dissonance and directly from Medieval Latin dissonantia, from Latin dissonantem, present participle of dissonare "differ in sound," from dis- "apart" (see dis-) + so

 concord 

 early 14c., "agreement between persons, union in opinions or sentiment, state of mutual friendship, amiability," from Old French concorde (12c.) "concord, harmony, agreement, treaty," from Latin concordia "agreement, union," from concors (genitive concordis) "of the same mind," l

 philharmonic 

 "loving harmony or music," 1813 (in the name of a society founded in London for the promotion of instrumental music), from...French philharmonique (1739), from Italian filarmonico, literally "loving harmony," from Greek philos "loving" (see philo...-) + ta harmonika "theory of harmony, music," from neuter plural of harmonikos (see harmonic)....

 accordance 

 ;" early 14c., "agreement, concurrence, state of being in accord," from Old French acordance "agreeing, reconciliation, harmony...," noun of action from acorder "reconcile, agree, be in harmony" (see accord (v.))....Of things, "conformity, compatibility, harmony," late 14c....

 symphony 

 c. 1300, a name given to various types of musical instruments, from Old French simphonie, sifonie, simfone "musical harmony...; stringed instrument" (12c., Modern French symphonie) and directly from Latin symphonia "a unison of sounds, harmony," from...Greek symphonia "harmony, concord of sounds," from symphonos "harmonious, agreeing in sound," from assimilated form of syn...Meaning "harmony of sounds" in English is attested from late 14c.; sense of "music in parts" is from 1590s....

 discord 

 Musical sense "want of harmony between two notes sounded together; a combination of notes not in harmony with one another...

 preparation 

 late 14c., preparacioun, "act of preparing or making ready, preliminary act or operation, a previous setting in order," from Old French preparacion (13c.) and directly from Latin praeparationem (nominative praeparatio) "a making ready," noun of action from past participle stem of

 congruity 

 "agreement between things, harmony," late 14c., from Old French congruité "relevance, appropriateness" or directly from Late Latin congruitatem (nominative congruens) "agreement," from congruus "suitable, agreeing," from congruere "to agree, correspond with," literally "to come t

 congruence 

 mid-15c., "suitableness or appropriateness of one thing to another," from Latin congruentia "agreement, harmony, congruity," from congruen-, present-participle stem of congruere "agree, correspond with," literally "to come together," from assimilated form of com "with, together" 

 Share harmony 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/harmony Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/harmony">Etymology of harmony by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of harmony. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/harmony Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of harmony," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harmony. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of harmony." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harmony. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of harmony." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/harmony (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near harmony 
 harmonious 
 harmonist 
 harmonium 
 harmonization 
 harmonize 
 harmony 
 harness 
 Harold 
 harp 
 harper 
 harpist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix