URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/pluck
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:00:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Pluck - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Pluck - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of pluck 

 pluck (v.) 

 Middle English plukken , "pull (something) off or out from a surface" (especially hair or feathers, but also teeth), from late Old English ploccian , pluccian "pull off, cull," from West Germanic *plokken (source also of Middle Low German plucken , Middle Dutch plocken , Dutch plukken , Flemish plokken , German pflücken ). This is perhaps from an unrecorded Gallo-Roman or Vulgar Latin *piluccare (source of Old French peluchier , late 12c.; Italian piluccare ), a frequentative, ultimately from Latin pilare "pull out hair," from pilus "hair" (see pile (n.3)). But despite the similarities, OED finds difficulties with this and cites gaps in historical evidence. From late 14c. as "to pull sharply with a sudden jerk or force (of the strings of a bow, harp, etc.). Related: Plucked ; plucking .

 To pluck a rose, an expression said to be used by women for going to the necessary house, which in the country usually stands in the garden. [F. Grose, "Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue," 1785]

 This euphemistic use is attested from 1610s. To pluck up "summon up" (courage, heart, etc.) is from c. 1300.

 pluck (n.) 

 c. 1400, plukke , "a pull, a tug, act of plucking," from pluck (v.). Meaning "courage, boldness, determined energy" (1785), originally in pugilism slang, is a figurative use from the earlier meaning "heart, viscera" (1610s) as that which is "plucked" from slaughtered livestock in preparing the carcass for market. This sense also was perhaps influenced by figurative use of the verb in pluck up (one's courage, etc.), attested from c. 1300.
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to pluck 

 pile (n.3) 

 mid-14c., "downy plumage;" late 15c, "fine, soft hair," from Anglo-French pyle or Middle Dutch pijl , both from Latin pilus "a hair" (source of Italian pelo , Old French pel ), a word of uncertain origin. Phonological evidence rules out transmission of the English word via Old French cognate peil , poil . Meaning "soft, raised surface of a regular and closely set kind upon cloth" is from 1560s.

 plucky (adj.) 

 1831, colloquial, "spirited, courageous," from pluck (n.) in the "courage" sense + -y (2). Related: Pluckily ; pluckiness .

 plush (n.) 

 "soft fabric, cloth having a softer and longer nap than that of velvet," 1590s, from French pluche "shag, plush," contraction of peluche "hairy fabric," from Old French peluchier "to pull, to tug, to pluck" (the final process in weaving plush), from Vulgar Latin *piluccare "remove hair" (see pluck (v.)). Related: Plushy ; plushness .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hustle 

 1680s (trans.), "to shake to and fro" (especially of money in a cap, as part of a game called hustle-cap), metathesized from Dutch hutselen, husseln "to shake, to toss," frequentative of hutsen, variant of hotsen "to shake." "The stems hot-, hut- appear in a number of formations 

 roll 

 c. 1200, rolle, "rolled-up piece of parchment or paper, scroll" (especially one inscribed with an official record), from Old French rolle "document, parchment scroll, decree" (12c.), Medieval Latin rotulus "a roll of paper" (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian rullo), from Lati

 soak 

 Middle English soken, from Old English socian (intransitive) "to soak, to lie in liquid," from Proto-Germanic *sukon (source also of West Flemish soken), possibly from PIE root *seue- (2) "to take liquid" (see sup (v.2)). The Old English word is a secondary form of sucan (past pa

 excerpt 

 (implied in past participle excerpte "taken from a book"), from Latin excerptus, past participle of excerpere "pluck out,...pick out, extract," figuratively "choose, select, gather," also "to leave out, omit," from ex "out" (see ex-) + carpere "pluck..., gather," from PIE root *kerp- "to gather, pluck, harvest."...

 svelte 

 slender" (17c.), from Italian svelto "slim, slender," originally "pulled out, lengthened," past participle of svellere "to pluck...or root out," from Vulgar Latin *exvellere, from Latin ex- "out" (see ex-) + vellere "to pluck, stretch," from PIE *wel-no...

 scarce 

 according to OED is from Vulgar Latin *scarsus, from a presumed *escarpsus, earlier *excarpsus, past participle of *excarpere "pluck...out," from classical Latin excerpere "pluck out" (see excerpt)....

 convulse 

 wrench," hence "to weaken, overthrow, destroy," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + vellere "to pluck...

 wring 

 Old English wringan "press, strain, wring, twist" (class III strong verb; past tense wrang, past participle wrungen), from Proto-Germanic *wreng- (source also of Old English wringen "to wring, press out," Old Frisian wringa, Middle Dutch wringhen, Dutch wringen "to wring," Old Hi

 teach 

 Old English tæcan (past tense tæhte, past participle tæht) "to show, point out, declare, demonstrate," also "to give instruction, train, assign, direct; warn; persuade," from Proto-Germanic *taikijan "to show" (source also of Old High German zihan, German zeihen "to accuse," Goth

 mushroom 

 a word applied at first to almost any of the larger fungi but later to the agaricoid fungi and especially the edible varieties, mid-15c., muscheron, musseroun (attested 1327 as a surname, John Mussheron), from Anglo-French musherun, Old French meisseron (11c., Modern French mouss

 Share pluck 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/pluck Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/pluck">Etymology of pluck by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of pluck. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/pluck Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of pluck," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pluck. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of pluck." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/pluck. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of pluck." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/pluck (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near pluck 
 plow-boy 
 plowman 
 plowshare 
 plow-wright 
 ploy 
 pluck 
 plucky 
 plug 
 plugger 
 plug-in 
 plug-ugly 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix