URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/demon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:37:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Demon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Demon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of demon 

 demon (n.) 

 c. 1200, "an evil spirit, malignant supernatural being, an incubus, a devil," from Latin daemon "spirit," from Greek daim ō n "deity, divine power; lesser god; guiding spirit, tutelary deity" (sometimes including souls of the dead); "one's genius, lot, or fortune;" from PIE *dai-mon- "divider, provider" (of fortunes or destinies), from root *da- "to divide."

 The malignant sense is because the Greek word was used (with daimonion ) in Christian Greek translations and the Vulgate for "god of the heathen, heathen idol" and also for "unclean spirit." Jewish authors earlier had employed the Greek word in this sense, using it to render shedim "lords, idols" in the Septuagint, and Matthew viii.31 has daimones , translated as deofol in Old English, feend or deuil in Middle English. Another Old English word for this was hellcniht , literally "hell-knight."

 The usual ancient Greek sense, "supernatural agent or intelligence lower than a god, ministering spirit" is attested in English from 1560s and is sometimes written daemon or daimon for purposes of distinction. Meaning "destructive or hideous person" is from 1610s; as "an evil agency personified" (rum, etc.) from 1712.

 The Demon of Socrates (late 14c. in English) was a daimonion , a "divine principle or inward oracle." His accusers, and later the Church Fathers, however, represented this otherwise. The Demon Star (1895) is Algol (q.v.) .

 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to demon 

 Algol 

 variable star (Beta Persei) in the constellation Perseus, late 14c., literally "the Demon," from Arabic al-ghul "the demon" (see ghoul ). It corresponds, in modern representations of the constellation, to the gorgon's head Perseus holds, but probably it was so called because it visibly varies in brightness every three days, which sets it apart from other bright stars.

 The computer language (1959) is a contraction of algo(rithmic) l(anguage) ; see algorithm .

 daimon (n.) 

 a transliteration of Greek daim ō n "lesser god, guiding spirit, tutelary deity," 1852; see demon . Employed to avoid the post-classical associations of demon . Related: Daimonic .

 daemon 
 demonarchy 
 demoness 
 demoniac 
 demonic 
 demonize 
 demonology 
 devil 
 pandemonium 
 *da- 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pandemonium 

 1667, Pandæmonium, in "Paradise Lost" the name of the palace built in the middle of Hell, "the high capital of Satan and all his peers," and the abode of all the demons; coined by John Milton (1608-1674) from Greek pan- "all" (see pan-) + Late Latin daemonium "evil spirit," from 

 fiend 

 Old English feond "enemy, foe, adversary," originally present participle of feogan "to hate," from Proto-Germanic *fijand- "hating, hostile" (source also of Old Frisian fiand "enemy," Old Saxon fiond, Middle Dutch viant, Dutch vijand "enemy," Old Norse fjandi, Old High German fia

 ragamuffin 

 mid-14c., "demon;" late 14c., "a ragged lout," also in surnames (Isabella Ragamuffyn, 1344), from Middle English raggi "ragged...Raggeman (late 13c. as a surname, presumably "one who goes about in tattered clothes") was used by Langland as the name of a demon...(late 14c.), and compare Old French Ragamoffyn, name of a demon in a mystery play....

 wight 

 living being, creature, person; something, anything," from Proto-Germanic *wihti- (source also of Old Saxon wiht "thing, demon...," Dutch wicht "a little child," Old High German wiht "thing, creature, demon," German Wicht "creature, little child," Old...

 Maxwell 

 In physics, usually a reference to James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879), as in Maxwell's demon (1879; as Maxwell's "intelligent...The definition of a "demon," according to the use of this word by Maxwell, is an intelligent being endowed with free will...

 nickel 

 kopparnickel "copper-colored ore" (from which it was first obtained), a half-translation of German Kupfernickel, literally "copper demon...," from Kupfer (see copper) + Nickel "demon, goblin, rascal" (a pet form of masc. proper name Nikolaus (compare English Old...

 ogre 

 "man-eating giant of fairy tales and popular legends," 1713, hogre (in a translation of a French version of the Arabian Nights), from French ogre, first used in Perrault's "Contes," 1697, and perhaps formed by him from a dialectal variant of Italian orco "demon, monster," from La

 gore 

 "thick, clotted blood," Old English gor "dirt, dung, filth, shit," a Germanic word (cognates: Middle Dutch goor "filth, mud;" Old Norse gor "cud;" Old High German gor "animal dung"), of uncertain origin. Sense of "clotted blood" (especially shed in battle) developed by 1560s (gor

 ergo 

 c. 1400, from Latin ergo "therefore, in consequence of," possibly contracted from *e rogo "from the direction of," from ex "out of" (see ex-) + noun from regere "to direct, to guide" (from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight

 Share demon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/demon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/demon">Etymology of demon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of demon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/demon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of demon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/demon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of demon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/demon. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of demon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/demon (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near demon 
 demographics 
 demography 
 demoiselle 
 demolish 
 demolition 
 demon 
 demonarchy 
 demoness 
 demonetization 
 demonetize 
 demoniac 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix