URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fight
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:48:06Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fight - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fight - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fight 

 fight (v.) 

 Old English feohtan "to combat, contend with weapons, strive; attack; gain by fighting, win" (intransitive; class III strong verb; past tense feaht , past participle fohten ), from Proto-Germanic *fe(u)hta (source also of Old High German fehtan , German fechten , Middle Dutch and Dutch vechten , Old Frisian fiuhta "to fight"), probably from PIE *pek- (2) "to comb, to pluck out" wool or hair (source also of Lithuanian p ė šti "to pluck," Greek pekein "to comb, shear," pekos "fleece, wool;" Persian pashm "wool, down," Latin pectere "to comb," Sanskrit paksman- "eyebrows, hair"). Apparently the notion is "pulling roughly," or "to tear out one another's hair." But perhaps it is from the source of Latin pugnus "fist."

 Spelling substitution of -gh- for a "hard H" sound was a Middle English scribal habit, especially before -t- . In some late Old English examples, the middle consonant was represented by a yogh . Among provincial early Modern English spellings, Wright lists faight , fate , fecht , feeght , feight , feit , feyght , feyt , feort , foight .

 From c. 1200 as "offer resistance, struggle;" also "to quarrel, wrangle, create a disturbance." From late 14c. as "be in conflict." Transitive use from 1690s. To fight for "contest on behalf of" is from early 14c. To fight back "resist" is recorded from 1890. Well figt þat wel fligt ("he fights well that flies fast") was a Middle English proverb.

 fight (n.) 

 Old English feohte , gefeoht "a fight, combat, hostile encounter;" see fight (v.). Compare Old Frisian fiucht , Old Saxon fehta , Dutch gevecht , Old High German gifeht , German Gefecht . Meaning "power or inclination to fight" is from 1812.

 Entries linking to fight 

 yogh (n.) 

 letter name for Middle English Ȝ, now lost from the alphabet, c. 1300; see Y . OED (1989) says the name probably is identical to yoke (Middle English yogh ) and the character so called because yoke began with a sound given to yogh. It cites use of Latin jugum "yoke" to designate this letter. Middle English Compendium refers it probably to Old English eoh "yew tree" (see yew ) and also a rune name.

 bull-fight (n.) 

 also bullfight , "combat between a man and a bull," especially as a popular entertainment in Spain, 1753, from bull (n.1) + fight (n.). Related: Bull-fighter ; bull-fighting .

 dogfight 
 eight 
 fighter 
 fighting 
 fire-fight 
 flight 
 fought 
 fright 
 gunfight 
 night 
 pashmina 
 pectinate 
 peignoir 
 See All Related Words (15) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 eight 

 "1 more than seven, twice four; the number which is one more than seven; a symbol representing this number;" late 14c., eighte, earlier ehte (c. 1200), from Old English eahta, æhta, from Proto-Germanic *akhto (source also of Old Saxon ahto, Old Frisian ahta, Old Norse atta, Swedi

 flight 

 "act of flying," Old English flyht "a flying, act or power of flying," from Proto-Germanic *flukhtiz (source also of Dutch vlucht "flight of birds," Old Norse flugr, Old High German flug, German Flug "flight"), from Proto-Germanic *flugti-, suffixed form of PIE root *pleu- "to fl

 fright 

 Middle English freiht, fright, from Old English (Northumbrian) fryhto, metathesis of Old English fyrhtu "fear, dread, trembling, horrible sight," from Proto-Germanic *furkhtaz "afraid" (source also of Old Saxon forhta, Old Frisian fruchte, Old High German forhta, German Furcht, G

 barney 

 a British slang word of uncertain origin, attested from 1859 as "a fixed or sham prize-fight," also "lark, spree, rough enjoyment...Longstaffe supposes that Sir George Bowes's refusal to fight with the rebels during the rising of the north, gave rise to...the contemptuous distich: 'Coward, a coward of Barney Castell, Dare not come out to fight a battel' " And adds that...

 jussive 

 participle stem of iubere "to bid, command, to order," from PIE root *ioudh- "to cause to move" (cognates: Sanskrit yudhya- "to fight...," yodha- "to rebel;" Greek hysmine "battle, fight;" Lithuanian judėti "to move" (intransitive), judus "belligerent")....

 encounter 

 c. 1300, "to meet as an adversary," from Old French encontrer "meet, come across; confront, fight, oppose," from encontre..."a meeting; a fight; opportunity" (12c.), noun use of preposition/adverb encontre "against, counter to" from Late Latin...

 battle 

 "fight or hostile engagement between opposing forces," c. 1300, from Old French bataille "battle, single combat," also "inner...Phrase battle royal "fight involving several combatants" is from 1670s....

 press 

 c. 1300, presse, "a crowd, throng, company; crowding and jostling of a throng; a massing together," from Old French presse (n.) "a throng, a crush, a crowd; wine or cheese press" (11c.), from Latin pressare (see press (v.1)). Late Old English had press in the sense of "clothes pr

 fencing 

 mid-15c., "defending, act of protecting or keeping (something) in proper condition" (short for defencing); 1580s in the sense "art of using a sword or foil in attack and defense" (also fence-play); verbal noun from fence (v.). Meaning "putting up of fences" is from 1620s; that of

 agitate 

 1580s, "to disturb," from Latin agitatus, past participle of agitare "to put in constant or violent motion, drive onward, impel," frequentative of agere "to set in motion, drive, drive forward," figuratively "incite to action; keep in movement, stir up" (from PIE root *ag- "to dr

 Share fight 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fight Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fight">Etymology of fight by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fight. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fight Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fight," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fight. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fight." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fight. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fight." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fight (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fight 
 fifties 
 fiftieth 
 fifty 
 fig 
 figgy 
 fight 
 fighter 
 fighting 
 figment 
 figurante 
 figurative 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix