URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/coin
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:47:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Coin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Coin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of coin 

 coin (n.) 

 c. 1300, "a wedge, a wedge-shaped piece used for some purpose," from Old French coing (12c.) "a wedge; stamp; piece of money;" usually "corner, angle," from Latin cuneus "a wedge," which is of unknown origin.

 The die for stamping metal was wedge-shaped, and by late 14c. the English word came to mean "thing stamped, piece of metal converted into money by being impressed with official marks or characters" (a sense that already had developed in Old French). Meaning "coined money collectively, specie" is from late 14c.

 Compare quoin , which split off from this word 16c., taking the architectural sense. Modern French coin is "corner, angle, nook."

 The custom of striking coins as money began in western Asia Minor in 7c. B.C.E.; Greek tradition and Herodotus credit the Lydians with being first to make and use coins of silver and gold. Coin-operated (adj.), of machinery, is attested from 1890. Coin collector is attested from 1795.
 also from c. 1300 

 coin (v.) 

 mid-14c., "to make (coins) by stamping metals;" early 15c., "to stamp (metal) and convert it into coins," from coin (n.). General sense of "make, fabricate, invent" (words) is from 1580s; the phrase coin a phrase is attested from 1940 (to coin phrases is from 1898). A Middle English word for minter was coin-smiter . Related: Coined; coining .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to coin 

 quoin (n.) 

 1530s, in architecture and masonry, "cornerstone, external solid angle," a variant spelling of coin (n.); in early use also in other senses of that word, including "a wedge, wedge-like piece of stone, wood, etc."

 coinage (n.) 

 late 14c., "currency, coined money," from Old French coignage , from coignier "to coin," from coing "piece of money" (see coin (n.)). The meaning "act or process of coining money" is from early 15c.; the sense of "deliberate formation of a new word" is by 1690s, from the general sense of "something invented" (c. 1600).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mint 

 aromatic herb, plant of the genus Mentha, Old English minte (8c.), from West Germanic *minta (source also of Old Saxon minta, Middle Dutch mente, Old High German minza, German Minze), a borrowing from Latin menta, mentha "mint," itself from Greek minthē, personified as a nymph tr

 strike 

 Middle English striken, from Old English strican (past tense strac, past participle stricen) "pass lightly over, stroke, smooth, rub" (senses now obsolete), also "go, move, proceed, make one's way," from Proto-Germanic *strikanan (source also of Old Norse strykva "to stroke," Old

 picayune 

 1804, "coin of small value," in early use the Spanish half-real, a coin circulating in Louisiana, Florida, and adjacent regions..., worth about 6 cents, later a 5 cent piece; probably from Louisiana French picaillon "coin worth 5 cents," earlier the French...name of an old copper coin of Savoy (1750), from Provençal picaioun "small copper coin," from picaio "money," a word of...

 solidus 

 gold coin, late 14c., plural solidi, used of the English shilling as well as the Roman gold coin, from Late Latin solidus..., name of an imperial Roman coin (worth about 25 denarii, introduced by Constantine the Great), in full nummus solidus, literally..."solid coin," properly a coin of thick or solid metal, not of thin plate....

 numismatic 

 pertaining to historical coins and coinage," 1765, from French numismatique (late 16c.), from Latin numismat-, stem of numisma "coin..., currency, stamp on a coin," from Greek nomisma "current coin, piece of money; usage," literally "what has been sanctioned...Earlier in the same sense was nummary (1650s), from Latin nummarius, from nummus "a coin."...

 drachma 

 late 14c., dragme, "ancient Athenian coin," the principal silver coin of ancient Greece;  mid-15c. as the name of a...coin used in Syria, from Old French dragme, from Medieval Latin dragma, from Latinized form of Greek drakhme, an Attic coin...

 groat 

 medieval European coin, late 14c., probably from Middle Dutch groot, elliptical use of the adjective meaning "great, big"...(in this case, "thick"), from the name of some large coin (for example the Bremen grote sware, and compare Medieval Latin...grossi denarii in reference to a Prague coin) to distinguish it from smaller coins of the same name....

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 penny 

 English coin, Middle English peni, from Old English pening, penig, Northumbrian penning "penny," from Proto-Germanic *panninga- (source also of Old Norse penningr, Swedish pänning, Danish penge, Old Frisian panning, Old Saxon pending, Middle Dutch pennic, Dutch penning, Old High 

 Share coin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/coin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/coin">Etymology of coin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of coin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/coin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of coin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/coin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of coin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/coin. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of coin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/coin (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near coin 
 coif 
 coiffeur 
 coiffure 
 coign 
 coil 
 coin 
 coinage 
 coincide 
 coincidence 
 coincident 
 coincidental 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix