URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sphere
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:30:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sphere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sphere - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sphere 

 sphere (n.) 

 a re-Latinized spelling, attested beginning mid-15c., of Middle English spere (c. 1300) "cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow globe about the world," from Anglo-French espiere , Old French espere (13c., Modern French sphère ), from Latin sphaera "globe, ball, celestial sphere" (Medieval Latin spera ), from Greek sphaira "globe, ball, playing ball, terrestrial globe," a word of unknown origin.

 According to Beekes there are no certain cognates outside Greek, but the Greek word also has been borrowed into Syrian ( espero ), Ethiopian ( spir ), Armenian ( sp'er ), and (non-Indo-European) Georgian ( spero ).

 From late 14c. in reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos believed to revolve around the earth and contain the planets and the fixed stars; the supposed harmonious sound they made rubbing against one another was the music of the spheres (late 14c.), Milton's sphery chime .

 Also from late 14c. in the general sense of "a globe; object of spherical form, a ball," and in the geometric sense of "solid figure with all points equidistant from the center." The meaning "range of something, place or scene" of activity, knowledge, etc. is recorded c. 1600 (as in sphere of influence , 1885, originally in reference to Anglo-German colonial rivalry in Africa).
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to sphere 

 asthenosphere (n.) 

 layer of the Earth's upper mantle, 1914, literally "sphere of weakness" (by comparison with the lithosphere), from Greek asthenes "weak" (see asthenia ) + sphere .

 atmosphere (n.) 

 1630s, atmosphaera (modern form from 1670s), "gaseous envelop surrounding the earth," from Modern Latin atmosphaera , from Greek atmos "vapor, steam" (see atmo- ) + sphaira "sphere" (see sphere ). In old science, "vaporous air," which was considered a part of the earth and a contamination of the lower part of the air (n.1).

 Þe ouer partye of þe eyr is pure and clene, clere, esy & softe, ffor mevynge of stormys, of wynde and of wedir may nat reche þerto; and so it perteyneþ to heuenlych kynde. And þe neþir partye is nyʒe to þe spere of watir and of erþe, and is troubly, greet and þicke, corpulent and ful of moyst erþy vapoures, as longiþ to erþy partyes. Þe eyr strecchiþ hym kyndely al aboute fro þe ouer partye of þe erþe and of watir anon to þe spere of fire. [John of Trevisa, translation (late 14c.) of Bartholomew Glanville's  
 "De proprietatibus rerum" ] 

 First used in English in connection with the Moon, which, as it turns out, has practically none.

 'Tis Observed, in the Solary Eclipses, that there is some times a great Trepidation about the Body of the Moon, from which we may likewise argue an Atmo-sphaera, since we cannot well conceive what so probable a cause there should be of such an appearance as this, 
 Quod radii Solares a vaporibus Lunam ambientibus fuerint intercisi , that the Sun-beams were broken and refracted by the Vapours that encompassed the Moon. [Rev. John Wilkins, "Discovery of New World or Discourse tending to prove that it probable there may be another World in the Moon," 1638] 

 The figurative sense of "surrounding influence, mental or moral environment" is by c. 1800.

 ecosphere 
 hemisphere 
 lithosphere 
 magnetosphere 
 photosphere 
 planisphere 
 spherical 
 spheroid 
 spherule 
 stratosphere 
 tennis 
 troposphere 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 spherical 

 1520s, "bounded by or having the form of the surface of a sphere," from sphere + -ical. The sense of "pertaining to or related to a sphere or spheres" is from c. 1600. Related: Spherically. Alternative spheric (1550s) is from Late Latin sphaericus, from Greek sphairikos. Spheral 

 stratosphere 

 1908, from French stratosphère, literally "sphere of layers," coined by French meteorologist Léon-Philippe Teisserenc de Bort (1855-1913) from Latin stratus "a spreading out" (from past-participle stem of sternere "to spread out," from PIE root *stere- "to spread") + French -sphè

 tennis 

 mid-14c., most likely from Anglo-French tenetz "hold! receive! take!," from Old French tenez, imperative of tenir "to hold, receive, take" (see tenet), which was used as a call from the server to his opponent. The original version of the game (a favorite sport of medieval French 

 globe 

 late 14c., "a large mass;" mid-15c., "spherical solid body, a sphere," from Old French globe (14c.) and directly from Latin...globus "round mass, sphere, ball" (also, of men, "a throng, crowd, body, mass"), which is related to gleba "clod, lump of...Sense of "the planet earth," also "map of the earth or sky drawn on the surface of an artificial sphere" are attested from..."A globe is often solid, a sphere often hollow. The secondary senses of globe are physical; those of sphere are moral."...

 roundness 

 Roundness applies with equal freedom to a circle, a sphere, a cylinder, or a cone, and, by extension, to forms that by approach...Rotundity now applies usually to spheres and to forms suggesting a sphere or a hemisphere : as, the rotundity of the earth...

 pole 

 an axis;" also "the sky, the heavens" (a sense sometimes used in English from 16c.), from Greek polos "pivot, axis of a sphere...Originally principally in reference to the celestial sphere and the fixed points about which (by the revolution of the Earth...

 antagonist 

 Originally in battle or sport, extended 1620s to any sphere of human activity....

 land 

 Old English lond, land, "ground, soil," also "definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries," from Proto-Germanic *landja- (source also of Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, Gothic land, German Land), perhaps fro

 prod 

 1530s, "to poke with a stick," of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart, Century Dictionary] a variant of brod, from Middle English brodden "to goad," from Old Norse broddr "shaft, spike" (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED]. Compare dialectal prog "pointed instrument for poking

 drop 

 Middle English drope, from Old English dropa "a small, spherical mass of liquid," from Proto-Germanic *drupon (source also of Old Saxon dropo, Old Norse dropi, Dutch drop, Old High German tropfo, German Tropfen (n.)); see drop (v.). Sense of "minute quantity of anything, least po

 Share sphere 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sphere Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sphere">Etymology of sphere by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sphere. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sphere Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sphere," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sphere. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sphere." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sphere. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sphere." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sphere (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sphere 
 spessartite 
 spew 
 sphagnum 
 spheno- 
 sphenoid 
 sphere 
 spherical 
 spheroid 
 spherule 
 sphincter 
 Sphinx 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix