URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/zodiac
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:27:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Zodiac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Zodiac - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of zodiac 

 zodiac (n.) 

 "belt of constellations around the ecliptic," within which the planets move, late 14c., zodiak , from Old French zodiaque and directly from Latin zodiacus "zodiac," from Greek z ō diakos (kyklos) "zodiac (circle)," literally "circle of little animals," from z ō idion , "sign of the zodiac, sculptured figure of an animal," diminutive of z ō ion "animal" (from PIE root *gwei- "to live").

 Libra is not an animal, but it was not a zodiac constellation to the Greeks, who reckoned 11 but counted Scorpio and its claws (including what is now Libra) as a "double constellation." Libra was figured back in by the Romans.

 In Old English the zodiac was twelf tacna "the twelve signs," and in Middle English also Our Ladye's Waye and the Girdle of the Sky .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to zodiac 

 zodiacal (adj.) 

 "of, pertaining to, or situated in the zodiac," 1570s, from zodiac + -al (1).

 *gwei- 

 also *gweie- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to live."

 It might form all or part of: abiogenesis ; aerobic ; amphibian ; anaerobic ; azo- ; azoic ; azotemia ; bio- ; biography ; biology ; biome ; bionics ; biopsy ; biota ; biotic ; cenobite ; Cenozoic ; convivial ; couch (n.2) "grass;" epizoic ; epizoon ; epizootic ; macrobiotic ; Mesozoic ; microbe ; Protozoa ; protozoic ; quick ; quicken ; quicksand ; quicksilver ; quiver (v.) "to tremble;" revive ; survive ; symbiosis ; viable ; viand ; viper ; vita ; vital ; vitamin ; victuals ; viva ; vivace ; vivacious ; vivarium ; vivid ; vivify ; viviparous ; vivisection ; whiskey ; wyvern ; zodiac ; Zoe ; zoetrope ; zoic ; zoo- ; zoolatry ; zoology ; zoon ; zoophilia ; zoophobia ; zooplankton .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit jivah "alive, living;" Old Persian *jivaka- "alive," Middle Persian zhiwak "alive;" Greek bios "one's life, course or way of living, lifetime," z ōē "animal life, organic life;" Old English cwic , cwicu "living, alive;" Latin vivus "living, alive," vita "life;" Old Church Slavonic zivo "to live;" Lithuanian gyvas "living, alive," gyvata "(eternal) life;" Old Irish bethu "life," bith "age;" Welsh byd "world."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 signifier 

 The earlier form signifer meant "the zodiac" (late 14c.), from Latin....

 constellation 

 early 14c., constellacioun, "position of a planet in the zodiac;" late 14c., "one of the recognized star patterns handed...down from antiquity" (in the zodiac or not), from Old French constellacion "constellation, conjuncture (of planets)" and...The oldest sense is astrological, of the position of planets ("stars") relative to the zodiac signs on a given day, usually...

 angular 

 It is attested earlier in an astrological sense, "occupying a cardinal point of the zodiac" (late 14c.)....

 Leo 

 zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin leo "lion" (see lion)....

 astronaut 

 aéronautique, and Astronaut was used in 1880 as the name of a fictional spaceship by English writer Percy Greg in "Across the Zodiac...

 Gemini 

 zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin gemini (plural of adjective geminus) "twins" (see geminate)....

 Sagittarius 

 southern constellation; ninth sign of the zodiac, late Old English, from Latin, literally "archer," properly "pertaining...

 Scorpio 

 zodiacal constellation, late 14c., from Latin scorpio (poetic scorpius) "scorpion," also the zodiac constellation (see scorpion). The meaning "person born under or ruled by the sign of Scorpio" is recorded from 1941. Since 1922 the official (International Astronomical Union) scie

 empyrean 

 "empyreal," mid-14c. (as empyre), probably via Medieval Latin empyreus, from Greek empyros "fiery," from assimilated form of en (see en- (2)) + pyr "fire" (from PIE root *paewr- "fire"). As an adjective in English from early 15c. The etymological sense is "formed of pure fire or 

 Aquarius 

 faint constellation and 11th zodiac sign, late Old English, from Latin aquarius, literally "water carrier," properly an adjective, "pertaining to water" (see aquarium); a loan-translation of Greek Hydrokhoos "the water-pourer," the old Greek name of this constellation. The Aquari

 Share zodiac 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/zodiac Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/zodiac">Etymology of zodiac by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of zodiac. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/zodiac Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of zodiac," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zodiac. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of zodiac." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/zodiac. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of zodiac." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/zodiac (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near zodiac 
 zither 
 ziti 
 zloty 
 zoa 
 zoanthropy 
 zodiac 
 zodiacal 
 Zoe 
 zoetrope 
 Zohar 
 zoic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix