URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mannequin
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:28:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mannequin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mannequin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mannequin 

 mannequin (n.) 

 1898, "model to display clothes," from French mannequin (15c.), from Dutch manneken "model of the human figure used by artists," literally "little man" (see manikin , which had been in English in this sense from 16c.).

 Originally of persons, in a sense where we might use "model."

 A mannequin is a good-looking, admirably formed young lady, whose mission is to dress herself in her employer's latest "creations," and to impart to them the grace which only perfect forms can give. Her grammar may be bad, and her temper worse, but she must have the chic the Parisienne possesses, no matter whether she hails from the aristocratic Faubourg St. Germain or from the Faubourg Montmartre. ["The Bystander," Aug. 15, 1906]

 Later sense "artificial human model figures to display clothing" probably by 1853 in translations from French, but not common in popular use till circa 1930. Sometimes mannequin was used in English in a sense of "artificial man" (especially in translations of Hugo). An earlier term for an artificial human model was tailor's dummy (1889).
 also from 1898 

 Entries linking to mannequin 

 manikin (n.) 

 1560s, "jointed model of the human figure used by artists," from Dutch manneken , literally "little man," diminutive of Middle Dutch man (from Proto-Germanic *manwaz , from PIE root *man- (1) "man"). Sense and spelling often blended with mannequin .

 Munchkin (n.) 

 1900, coined by U.S. author L. Frank Baum (1856-1919) in "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz." He never explained how he got the word.

 The word most like it is perhaps mutchkin , an old Scottish measure of capacity for liquids, which was used by Scott. (It comes from Middle Dutch mutseken , originally "a little cap," from mutse "cap," earlier almutse "amice, hood, headdress," from Latin amictus "mantle, cloak," noun use of past participle of amicire "to wrap, throw around," a compound from ambi- "around" (see ambi- ) + iacere "to throw" (see jet (v.)).

 But some Baum scholars see a possible inspiration in Münchner Kindl , the name of the emblem of the city of Munich (German München ) or in German Männchen , literally "little man," which is cognate with mannequin .

 While she stood looking at the strange and beautiful sights, she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest people she had ever seen. They were not as big as the grown folk she had always been used to; but neither were they very small. In fact, they seemed about as tall as Dorothy, who was a well-grown child for her age, although they were, so far as looks go, many years older. ["The Wonderful Wizard of Oz"]

 *man- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "man."

 It might form all or part of: alderman ; Alemanni ; fugleman ; Herman ; hetman ; landsman ; leman ; man ; manikin ; mannequin ; mannish ; mensch ; Norman ; ombudsman ; yeoman .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit manuh , Avestan manu- , Old Church Slavonic mozi , Russian muzh "man, male;" Old English man , mann "human being, person; brave man, hero; servant, vassal."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 form 

 c. 1200, forme, fourme, "semblance, image, likeness," from Old French forme, fourme, "physical form, appearance; pleasing looks; shape, image; way, manner" (12c.), from Latin forma "form, contour, figure, shape; appearance, looks; a fine form, beauty; an outline, a model, pattern

 model 

 1570s, "likeness made to scale; architect's set of designs," from French modelle (16c., Modern French modèle), from Italian modello "a model, mold," from Vulgar Latin *modellus, from Latin modulus "a small measure, standard," diminutive of modus "manner, measure" (from PIE root *

 from 

 Old English fram, preposition denoting departure or movement away in time or space, from Proto-Germanic *fra "forward, away from" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic fram "from, away," Old Norse fra "from," fram "forward"), from PIE *pro-mo-, suffixed form of *pro 

 supporter 

 early 15c., "adherent, partisan, one who upholds or helps to carry on the interests of another," agent noun from support (v.). Fem. form supportress is by 1620s. The meaning "that which sustains the weight of something else" physically (in ship-building, etc.) is from 1590s. As "

 help 

 Old English helpan "to help, support, succor; benefit, do good to; cure, amend" (transitive, class III strong verb; past tense healp, past participle holpen), from Proto-Germanic *helpanan (source also of Old Norse hjalpa, Old Frisian helpa, Middle Dutch and Dutch helpen, Old Hig

 chic 

 1856, "style in fine art, artistic skill, faculty of producing excellence rapidly and easily," from French chic "stylishness" (19c.), originally "subtlety" (16c.), which is of unknown origin. Perhaps [Klein] it is related to German Schick, Geschick "tact, skill, aptness," from Mi

 fashion 

 c. 1300, fasoun, "physical make-up or composition; form, shape; appearance," from Old French façon, fachon, fazon "face, appearance; construction, pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature" (12c.), from Latin factionem (nominative factio) "a making or do

 defenestration 

 1620, "the action of throwing out of a window," from Latin fenestra "window." A word invented for one incident: the "Defenestration of Prague," May 21, 1618, when two Catholic deputies to the Bohemian national assembly and a secretary were tossed out the window of the castle of H

 praise 

 c. 1300, preisen, "to express admiration of, commend, adulate, flatter" (someone or something), from Old French preisier, variant of prisier "to praise, value," from Late Latin preciare, earlier pretiare "to price, value, prize," from Latin pretium "reward, prize, value, worth," 

 herpes 

 late 14c., "any inflammatory, spreading skin condition" (used of shingles, gangrene, etc.), from Latin herpes "a spreading skin eruption," from Greek herpes, the name for the disease shingles, literally "creeping," from herpein "to creep, move slowly" (cognate with Latin serpere 

 Share mannequin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mannequin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mannequin">Etymology of mannequin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mannequin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mannequin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mannequin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mannequin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mannequin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mannequin. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mannequin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mannequin (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mannequin 
 man-like 
 manliness 
 manly 
 man-made 
 manna 
 mannequin 
 manner 
 mannered 
 mannerism 
 mannerist 
 mannerly 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix