URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mansion
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:24:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mansion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mansion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mansion 

 mansion (n.) 

 mid-14c., mansioun , "chief residence of a lord," from Old French mansion "stay, permanent abode, house, habitation, home; mansion; state, situation" (13c.), from Latin mansionem (nominative mansio ) "a staying, a remaining, night quarters, station," noun of action from past-participle stem of manere "to stay, abide" (from PIE root *men- (3) "to remain").

 The sense of "any large and stately house" is from 1510s. The word also was used in Middle English as "a stop or stage of a journey," hence probably astrological sense "temporary home" (late 14c.).
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to mansion 

 maison (n.) 

  "a house," 1570s, from French maison "house" (11c.), from Latin mansionem (see mansion ).

 maisonette (n.) 

 1818, "small house," from French maisonnette , diminutive of maison "house" (11c.), from Latin mansionem (see mansion ). Meaning "a part of a building let separately" is by 1889.

 You see, this is how it stands: I live in what the fellow who let the thing to me called a "maisonette"—goodness only knows why .... [Windsor Magazine, 1902]

 menage 
 menial 
 *men- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 menage 

 1690s, "management of a household, domestic establishment," from French ménage, from Old French manage "household, family dwelling" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *mansionaticum "household, that which pertains to a house," from Latin mansionem "dwelling" (see mansion). Now generally u

 menial 

 late 14c., "pertaining to a household," from Anglo-French meignial, from Old French mesnie "household," earlier mesnede, from Vulgar Latin *mansionata, from Latin mansionem "dwelling" (see mansion). Compare Middle English meine "a household, household servants" (c. 1300; also "ch

 hall 

 Old English heall "spacious roofed residence, house; temple; law-court," any large place covered by a roof, from Proto-Germanic *hallo "covered place, hall" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German halla, German halle, Dutch hal, Old Norse höll "hall;" Old English hell, Gothic 

 manor 

 c. 1300, maner, "mansion, habitation, country residence, principal house of an estate," also "a manorial estate," from Anglo-French...

 inland 

 In Middle English and Old English the same compound meant "land immediately around the mansion of an estate, land in the...

 wick 

 at all, as a localism in East Anglia or Essex, it was once the common Old English wic "dwelling place, lodging, house, mansion...

 perplexity 

 man is forced to choose perfection of the life, or of the work, And if it take the second must refuse A heavenly mansion...

 Roman 

 noun and adjective, Old English, "of or pertaining to ancient Rome; an inhabitant or native of ancient Rome," from Latin Romanus "of Rome, Roman," from Roma "Rome" (see Rome). The adjective is c. 1300, from Old French Romain. The Old English adjective was romanisc, which yielded 

 ignore 

 1610s, "not to know, to be ignorant of," from French ignorer "be unaware of" (14c.), or directly from Latin ignorare "not to know, be unacquainted; take no notice of, disregard" (see ignorant). The original sense in English is obsolete. Sense of "pass over without notice, pay no 

 region 

 c. 1300, regioun, "tract of land of a considerable but indefinite extent," also "a kingdom, country, nation; the people of a country," from Anglo-French regioun, Old French region "land, region, province" (12c.) and directly from Latin regionem (nominative regio) "a district, por

 Share mansion 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mansion Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mansion">Etymology of mansion by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mansion. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mansion Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mansion," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mansion. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mansion." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mansion. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mansion." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mansion (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mansion 
 manpower 
 manque 
 mansard 
 manse 
 manservant 
 mansion 
 manslaughter 
 mansplain 
 man-stealer 
 mansuetude 
 manta 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close