URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/waist
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:33:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Waist - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Waist - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of waist 

 waist (n.) 

 late 14c., waste , "middle part of the body" between the chest and hips, also "part of a garment fitted for the waist, portion of a garment that covers the waist" (but, due to fashion styles, often above or below it), a word of uncertain origin.

 According to Watkins probably from Old English *wæst "growth," hence, "where the body grows," from Proto-Germanic *wahs-tu- (source also of Old English wæstm , Old Norse vöxtr , Swedish växt , Old High German wahst "growth, increase," Gothic wahstus "stature," Old English weaxan "to grow" see wax (v.)), from PIE *wegs- , extended form of root *aug- (1) "to increase." Middle English Compendium also compares wacste (early 13c.) "quality of having grown or increased," which is perhaps from Old English weaxan .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to waist 

 wax (n.) 

 Old English weax "thick, sticky substance secreted by bees and used to build their cells," from Proto-Germanic *wahsam (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German wahs , Old Norse vax , Dutch was , German Wachs ), from PIE root *wokso- "wax" (source also of Old Church Slavonic voskŭ , Lithuanian vaškas , Polish wosk , Russian vosk "wax" (but these may be from Germanic).

 In early use especially as a substance to receive a seal, or as a surface on writing tablets. Used of other similar substances from 18c.

 The slang sense of "gramophone record" is from 1932, American English (until the early 1940s, most original records were made by needle-etching onto a waxy disk which then was metal-plated to make a master). Wax museum "exhibition of life-size wax figures representing famous or notorious persons" is recorded by 1817 (compare waxwork ).

 long-waisted (adj.) 

 1650s, from long (adj.) + waist (n.).

 panty-waist 
 shirt-waist 
 waistband 
 waistcoat 
 waisted 
 waistline 
 wasp-waist 
 *aug- 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 shank 

 "leg of a human or animal," especially "the part of the leg from the knewe to the ankle," Old English sceanca "leg, shank, shinbone," specifically, the part of the leg from the knee to the ankle, from Proto-Germanic *skunkia- (source also of Middle Low German schenke, German sche

 girdle 

 Old English gyrdel "belt, sash, cord drawn about the waist and fastened," worn by both men and women, common Germanic (cognates...Modern euphemistic sense of "elastic corset not extending above the waist" first recorded 1925....

 bodice 

 In modern use, an outer laced garment covering the waist and bust worn by women, often as an ornament....

 flow 

 Go with the flow, enjoy the forces, let ankles, knees, hips and waist move subtly to soak up potential disturbances of acceleration...

 hobbyhorse 

 The hobbyhorse originally was a "Tourney Horse," a wooden or basketwork frame worn around the waist and held on with shoulder...

 hourglass 

 households shall be emancipated from them; and yet their eyes have been so generally educated to the approval of the small waist...

 wasp 

 Wasp-waist in reference to women's figures is recorded from 1870 (wasp-waisted is from 1775)....

 rapt 

 late 14c., "carried away in an ecstatic trance," from Latin raptus, past participle of rapere "seize, carry off" (see rape (v.)). A figurative sense, the notion is of being "carried up into Heaven" (bodily or in a dream), as in a saint's vision. The Latin literal sense of "carrie

 part 

 mid-13c., "division, portion of a whole, element or constituent (of something)," from Old French part "share, portion; character; power, dominion; side, way, path," from Latin partem (nominative pars) "a part, piece, a share, a division; a party or faction; a part of the body; a 

 trap 

 "contrivance for catching unawares," late Old English træppe, treppe "snare, trap," from Proto-Germanic *trep- (source also of Middle Dutch trappe "trap, snare"), related to Germanic words for "stair, step, tread" (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe "st

 Share waist 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/waist Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/waist">Etymology of waist by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of waist. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/waist Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of waist," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/waist. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of waist." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/waist. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of waist." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/waist (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near waist 
 waifish 
 wail 
 wain 
 wainscot 
 wainwright 
 waist 
 waistband 
 waistcoat 
 waisted 
 waistline 
 wait 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close