URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/council
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:13:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Council - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Council - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of council 

 council (n.) 

 "assembly of persons for consultation, deliberation or advice," early 12c., originally in the Church sense, "assembly of prelates and theologians to regulate doctrine and discipline," from Anglo-French cuncile , from Old North French concilie (Old French concile , 12c.) "assembly; council meeting; body of counsellors," from Latin concilium "a meeting, a gathering of people," from PIE *kal-yo- , suffixed form of root *kele- (2) "to shout." The notion is of a calling together. The tendency to confuse it in form and meaning with counsel has been consistent since 16c.
 also from early 12c. 

 Entries linking to council 

 counsel (n.) 

 c. 1200, "advice or instruction given;" c. 1300, "mutual advising or interchange of opinions, consultation," from Old French counseil "advice, counsel; deliberation, thought" (10c.), from Latin consilium "plan, opinion," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con- ) + root of calare "to announce, summon" (from PIE root *kele- (2) "to shout"). As a synonym for "lawyer, one who gives legal counsel," attested late 14c.

 councilor (n.) 

 "a member of a council," early 15c., an alteration of counselor by assimilation to council .

 The distinction of form and sense (
 councilor , one of a council, 
 counselor , one who counsels) is modern; there is no OF. or L. form corresponding to 
 councilor (L. as if 
 *conciliarius ) as distinguished from 
 counselor (L. 
 consiliarius ). [Century Dictionary]

 *kele- (2) 

 *kelə- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shout." Perhaps imitative.

 It might form all or part of: acclaim ; acclamation ; Aufklarung ; calendar ; chiaroscuro ; claim ; Claire ; clairvoyance ; clairvoyant ; clamor ; Clara ; claret ; clarify ; clarinet ; clarion ; clarity ; class ; clear ; cledonism ; conciliate ; conciliation ; council ; declaim ; declare ; disclaim ; ecclesiastic ; eclair ; exclaim ; glair ; hale (v.); halyard ; intercalate ; haul ; keelhaul ; low (v.); nomenclature ; paraclete ; proclaim ; reclaim ; reconcile .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit usakala "cock," literally "dawn-calling;" Latin calare "to announce solemnly, call out," clamare "to cry out, shout, proclaim;" Middle Irish cailech "cock;" Greek kalein "to call," kelados "noise," kledon "report, fame;" Old High German halan "to call;" Old English hlowan "to low, make a noise like a cow;" Lithuanian kalba "language."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 soviet 

 1917, "type of elective council forming a unit in a socialist government," from Russian sovet "governing council," literally..."council," from Old Russian suvetu "assembly," from su "with" (from *su(n)- "with, together," from PIE *ksun- "with") +...The Slavic word is a loan-translation of Greek symboulion "council of advisers."...

 sanhedrim 

 supreme council and highest ecclesiastical and judicial tribunal of the ancient Jews, 1580s, from Late Hebrew sanhedrin (...gedola) "(great) council," from Greek synedrion "assembly, council," literally "sitting together," from syn- "together" (...

 divan 

 1580s, "Oriental council of state," from Turkish divan, from Arabic diwan, from Persian devan "bundle of written sheets,...Sense evolved in Arabic through "book of accounts," to "office of accounts," "custom house," "council chamber," then to "...long, cushioned seat," such as are found along the walls in Middle Eastern council chambers....

 junta 

 1620s, "Spanish legislative council," from Spanish and Portuguese junta "council, meeting, convention," from Medieval Latin...first recorded 1640s as junto (from confusion with Spanish nouns ending in -o), originally with reference to the Cabinet Council...

 synod 

 late 14c., "ecclesiastical council," from Late Latin synodus, from Greek synodos "assembly, meeting; a coming together, conjunction...Used by Presbyterians for "assembly of ministers and other elders" from 1593 to c. 1920, when replaced by General Council...

 senate 

 c. 1200, "the legal and administrative body of ancient Rome," from Old French senat or Latin senatus "highest council of...the state in ancient Rome," literally "council of elders," from senex (genitive senis) "old man, old" (from PIE root *sen...

 cabinet 

 The sense of "private room where advisers meet" (c. 1600) led to the modern political meaning "an executive council" (1640s...); perhaps originally short for cabinet council (1620s); compare board (n.1) in its evolution from place where some group...

 meeting 

 "an action of coming together," Old English meting "assembly," verbal noun from meet (v.). Specific meaning "gathering of people for discussion, etc." is from 1510s. In 17c., in England and Ireland it was applied generally to worship assemblies of nonconformists, but this now is 

 Lyons 

 city in France in the former province of Lyonnais at the confluence of the Rhone and the Saône, from Gallo-Latin Lugudunum, which is perhaps literally "fort of Lugus," the Celtic god-name, with second element from Celtic *dunon "hill, hill-fort." The fem. adjectival form Lyonnais

 Constantinople 

 from 330 C.E. to 1930 the name of what is now Istanbul and formerly was Byzantium, the city on the European side of the Bosphorus that served as the former capital of the Byzantine and Ottoman empires, from Greek Konstantinou polis "Constantine's city," named for Roman emperor Fl

 Share council 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/council Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/council">Etymology of council by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of council. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/council Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of council," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/council. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of council." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/council. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of council." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/council (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near council 
 coulee 
 Coulomb 
 coulrophobia 
 coulter 
 Coumadin 
 council 
 councillor 
 councilor 
 counsel 
 counseling 
 counsellor 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix