URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/soda
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:31:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Soda - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Soda - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of soda 

 soda (n.) 

 late 15c., sode , "sodium carbonate, an alkaline substance extracted from certain ashes" (now made artificially), from Italian sida (or Medieval Latin soda ), in reference to a kind of saltwort from which soda was obtained, a word of uncertain origin.

 Perhaps it is from a Catalan sosa , attested from late 13c., also a word of uncertain origin. An Arabic name for a variety of saltwort has been proposed as the source, but this word has not been attested and that theory is no longer considered valid. Another theory, considered far-fetched in some quarters, traces it to Medieval Latin sodanum "a headache remedy," ultimately from Arabic suda "splitting headache."

 Soda is found naturally in alkaline lakes, in deposits where such lakes have dried, and in ash produced by burning various seaside plants. It was a major trading commodity in the medieval Mediterranean, but since commercial manufacture of it commenced in France late 18c., natural sources have been abandoned. Washing soda (sodium carbonate) is commonly distinguished from baking soda (sodium bicarbonate). A soda-cracker (1863) has baking soda as an ingredient, as does soda bread (1850).

 The meaning "carbonated water" is first recorded 1834, a shortening of soda water (1802) "water into which carbonic acid has been forced under pressure." "It rarely contains soda in any form; but the name originally applied when sodium carbonate was contained in it has been retained" [Century Dictionary, 1902]. Since 19c. they are typically flavored and sweetened with syrups.

 The first record of soda pop is by 1863, and the most frequent modern use of the word is as a shortening of this or other terms for "flavored, sweetened soda water." Compare pop (n.1). Soda fountain is from 1824 for a metal structure that can dispense carbonated water; soda jerk for the operator of one is attested by 1915, so called for the action involved in drawing it ( soda-jerker is from 1883; soda-fountain boy is from 1876). Colloquial pronunciation "sody" is represented in print from 1900 (U.S. Midwestern).
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to soda 

 pop (n.1) 

 "a hit with a smart, explosive sound," c. 1400, of imitative origin. Meaning "effervescent carbonated beverage" is from 1812.

 A new manufactory of a nectar, between soda-water and ginger-beer, and called pop, because 'pop goes the cork' when it is drawn. [Southey, letter, 1812]

 Sense of "ice cream on a stick" is from 1923 (see popsicle ). Meaning "the (brief) time of a 'pop'" is from 1530s. Pop goes the weasel , a country dance, was popular 1850s in school yards, with organ grinders, at court balls, etc.

 sodium (n.) 

 metallic alkaline element, 1807, coined by English chemist Humphry Davy from soda + -ium . So called because the element was isolated from caustic soda (sodium hydroxide). The chemical symbol Na is from natrium , the name for the element that had been proposed by Berzelius and coined from natron , a name of a type of soda.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nitre 

 (13c.), from Latin nitrum, from Greek nitron, which is possibly of Eastern origin (compare Hebrew nether "carbonate of soda...Originally a word for native soda, but also associated since the Middle Ages with saltpeter (potassium nitrate) for obscure...

 float 

 ["The Dispenser's Formulary: Or, Soda Water Guide," New York, 1915] Few soda water dispensers know what is meant by a "...Float Ice Cream Soda."...By a "float ice cream soda" is meant a soda with the ice cream floating on top, thus making a most inviting appearance and...

 spessartite 

 contains manganese as a component ; which is observable in the colour of the globule that results from melting it with soda...

 lather 

 Old English leaþr "foam, soap, washing soda," from Proto-Germanic *lauthran (source also of Old Norse lauðr "washing soap...

 Coca-Cola 

 Drink the brain tonic and intellectual soda fountain beverage Coca-Cola....

 cream 

 Cream-soda is attested by 1854....

 club 

 Club soda is by 1881, originally a proprietary name (Cantrell & Cochrane, Dublin)....

 last 

 c. 1200, "latest, final, following all others," a contraction of Old English latost (adj.) "slowest, latest," superlative of læt (see late); in some uses from late (adv.). Cognate with Old Frisian lest, Dutch laatst, Old High German laggost, German letzt. Meaning "last in space, 

 salt 

 Old English sealt "salt, sodium chloride, abundant substance essential to life, used as a condiment and meat preservative," from Proto-Germanic *saltom (source also of Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Gothic salt, Dutch zout, German Salz), from PIE root *sal- "salt." Applied fr

 slat 

 late 14c., earlier sclat (c. 1300), "a roofing slate; a thin, flat stone," from Old French esclat "split piece, chip, splinter" (Modern French éclat), a back-formation from esclater "to break, splinter, burst," which probably is from Frankish *slaitan "to tear, slit" or some othe

 Share soda 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/soda Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/soda">Etymology of soda by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of soda. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/soda Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of soda," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/soda. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of soda." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/soda. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of soda." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/soda (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near soda 
 sock 
 sockdolager 
 socket 
 Socratic 
 sod 
 soda 
 sodality 
 sodbuster 
 sodden 
 sodium 
 Sodom 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix