URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/daughter
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:14:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Daughter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Daughter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of daughter 

 daughter (n.) 

 Middle English doughter , from Old English dohtor "female child considered with reference to her parents, " from Proto-Germanic *dokhter , earlier *dhutēr (source also of Old Saxon dohtar , Old Norse dóttir , Old Frisian and Dutch dochter , German Tochter , Gothic dauhtar ), from PIE *dhugheter (source also of Sanskrit duhitar- , Avestan dugeda- , Armenian dustr , Old Church Slavonic dušti , Lithuanian duktė , Greek thygater ). The common Indo-European word, lost in Celtic and Latin (Latin filia "daughter" is fem. of filius "son").

 The modern spelling evolved 16c. in southern England. In late Old English also "woman viewed in some analogous relationship" (to her native country, church, culture, etc.). From c. 1200 of anything regarded as feminine, considered with respect to its source. Related: Daughterly .

 Daughter-in-law is attested from late 14c. (see in-law ). Earlier was sonnes wif (early 14c.), earlier still snore , from Old English snoru , cognate with Old Norse snör , archaic German Schnur , from PIE root *snuso- (source also of Sanskrit snuṣa- , Greek nyos , Latin nurus (itself the source of Old French nuere , Spanish nuera ), Old Church Slavonic snŭcha , Russian snocha ), which is of uncertain origin.

 Entries linking to daughter 

 in-law (n.) 

 1894, "anyone of a relationship not natural," abstracted from father-in-law , etc.

 The position of the 'in-laws' (a happy phrase which is attributed ... to her Majesty, than whom no one can be better acquainted with the article) is often not very apt to promote happiness. [Blackwood's Magazine, 1894]

 The earliest recorded use of the formation is in brother-in-law (13c.); the law is Canon Law, which defines degrees of relationship within which marriage is prohibited. Thus the word originally had a more narrow application; its general extension to more distant relatives of one's spouse is, according to OED "recent colloquial or journalistic phraseology." Middle English inlaue (13c.) meant "one within or restored to the protection and benefit of the law" (opposite of an outlaw ), from a verb inlauen , from Old English inlagian "reverse sentence of outlawry."

 god-daughter (n.) 

 "female godchild, girl one sponsors at her baptism," mid-13c., god-doughter , from god + daughter , modifying or replacing Old English goddohtor .

 grand-daughter 
 stepdaughter 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 son 

 "male child in relation to either or both parents," Old English sunu "son, male child," also broadly "male descendant;" also "second person of the Trinity," from Proto-Germanic *sunus (source also of Old Saxon and Old Frisian sunu, Old Norse sonr, Danish søn, Swedish son, Middle 

 boy 

 mid-13c., boie "servant, commoner, knave" (generally young and male); c. 1300, "rascal, ruffian, knave; urchin," mid-14c. as "male child before puberty" (possibly extended from the "urchin" sense). A word of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie "one fettered," from Vul

 girl 

 c. 1300, gyrle "child, young person" (of either sex but most frequently of females), of unknown origin. One guess [OED] leans toward an unrecorded Old English *gyrele, from Proto-Germanic *gurwilon-, diminutive of *gurwjoz (apparently also represented by Low German gære "boy, gir

 Electra 

 also called Laodice, a daughter of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, the accomplice of her brother Orestes in the murder of their...Especially in psychological Electra complex (1913, Jung) in reference to a daughter who feels attraction toward her father...Also the name of a daughter of Atlas, and as such a name of one of the Pleiades....

 Moses 

 According to this derivation the words of Pharaoh's daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation...of the Hebrew name Mosheh, but express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound, and...therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew verb mashah 'he drew out,' which is suggestive of the words spoken by Pharaoh's daughter...

 bride 

 Gothic cognate bruþs, however, meant "daughter-in-law," and the form of the word borrowed from Old High German into Medieval...woman went to live with her husband's family, thus the sole "newly wed female" in such a household would have been the daughter-in-law...trace the word itself to the PIE verbal root *bhreu-, which forms words for cooking and brewing, as this likely was the daughter-in-law's...

 Audrey 

 atheling) + ðryð "strength, might," from Proto-Germanic *thruthitho- "strength" (source also of Old Norse Þruðr, name of the daughter...

 accommodate 

 1530s, "fit one thing to another," from Latin accomodatus "suitable, fit, appropriate to," past participle of accomodare "make fit, make fit for, adapt, fit one thing to another," from ad "to" (see ad-) + commodare "make fit," from commodus ""proper, fit, appropriate, convenient,

 genius 

 late 14c., "tutelary or moral spirit" who guides and governs an individual through life, from Latin genius "guardian deity or spirit which watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation; wit, talent;" also "prophetic skill; the male spirit of a gens," originally "genera

 bat 

 "a stick or staff used in beating, a war-club, staff used to strike the ball in certain games," c. 1200, from rare Old English batt "cudgel," a western England word at first, probably from Welsh or another Celtic source (compare Irish and Gaelic bat, bata "staff, cudgel"), later 

 Share daughter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/daughter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/daughter">Etymology of daughter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of daughter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/daughter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of daughter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/daughter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of daughter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/daughter. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of daughter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/daughter (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near daughter 
 dateline 
 dating 
 dative 
 datum 
 daub 
 daughter 
 daunt 
 dauntless 
 dauphin 
 davenport 
 David 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix