URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ukraine
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:33:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Ukraine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Ukraine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Ukraine 

 Ukraine 

 by 1670s, from Russian or Polish Ukraina , a specific use of ukraina "border, frontier," according to Room, from Old Russian oukraina , from ou "by, at" + kraj region. He also notes that "The territory was so called because it was the borderland or 'frontier zone' of medieval Russia at the time of the Tatar invasion in the 13th century."

 Ukraine was formerly also known as 
 Little Russia , so called by contrast with 
 Great Russia , when the medieval principality here became separated from 'mainstream' czarist Russia as a result of the Mongol invasion. [Room, 2006] 

 Related: Ukrainian; Ukrainer .
 also from 1670s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Europe 

 from Latin Europa "Europe," from Greek Europe, which is of uncertain origin; as a geographic name first recorded in the Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier): "Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring per

 sic 

 "such," a Latin word insertion parenthetically in printed quotation to call attention to error in the original; literally "so, thus, in this way," related to or emphatic of si "if," from PIE root *so- "this, that" (source also of Old English sio "she"). It was used regularly in E

 Mercia 

 Anglo-Saxon kingdom of the Midlands, Latinized from Old English Mierce "men of the Marches," from mearc (see march (n.2)). Related: Mercian. Mercian law (Medieval Latin Lex Merciorum, Middle English Mercene laue, mid-12c.) was the law code of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Mercia (pe

 Crimea 

 large peninsula at the north end of the Black Sea, Modern Latin, from Greek Krimm, Krym, of uncertain origin. Suggested connections include Greek kremos "steep bank," Mongolian (Tatar) kherem "strength." Not an ancient name; in classical times it was Taurida, from a native people

 edifice 

 late 14c., from Old French edifice "building" (12c.), from Latin aedificium "building," from aedificare "to erect a building," from aedis, variant of aedes "temple, sanctuary," usually a single edifice without partitions, also, in the plural, "dwelling house, building," originall

 succor 

 c. 1200, socour, earlier socours "aid, help," from Anglo-French succors "help, aid," Old French socors, sucurres "aid, help, assistance" (Modern French secours), from Medieval Latin succursus "help, assistance," from past participle of Latin succurrere "run to help, hasten to the

 deacon 

 Middle English deken, "one who reads the Gospel in divine worship, one of a body of assistants to a priest or other clergyman," from Old English deacon, diacon, from Late Latin diaconus, from Greek diakonos "servant of the church, religious official," literally "servant," from di

 encounter 

 c. 1300, "meeting of adversaries, confrontation," from Old French encontre "meeting; fight; opportunity" (12c.), noun use of preposition/adverb encontre "against, counter to" from Late Latin incontra "in front of," from Latin in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + contra "against" (

 pride 

 Middle English prede, from late Old English pryto, Kentish prede, Mercian pride "unreasonable self-esteem, especially as one of the deadly sins; haughtiness, overbearing treatment of others; pomp, love of display," from prud (see proud (adj.)). There is debate whether Scandinavia

 flatter 

 c. 1200, flateren, flaterien, "seek to please or gratify (someone) by undue praise, praise insincerely, beguile with pleasing words," from Old French flater "to deceive; caress, fondle; prostrate, throw, fling (to the ground)" (13c.), probably from a Germanic source, perhaps from

 Share Ukraine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ukraine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ukraine">Etymology of Ukraine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Ukraine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ukraine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Ukraine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ukraine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Ukraine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ukraine. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Ukraine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Ukraine (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Ukraine 
 Uhuru 
 Uighur 
 uilleann 
 ukase 
 uke 
 Ukraine 
 ukulele 
 -ular 
 ulcer 
 ulcerate 
 ulceration 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix