URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/saffron
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Saffron - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Saffron - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of saffron 

 saffron (n.) 

 c. 1200, safroun , "product made from the dried stigmas of flowers of the autumn crocus," from Old French safran (12c.), from Medieval Latin safranum (cognate with Italian zafferano , Spanish azafran ), ultimately from Arabic az-za'faran , which is of unknown origin. The substance is noted for its sweet aroma and deep orange color. As a color word for deep yellow-orange, and an adjective, by late 14c. In reference to the crocus plant itself from early 15c. German Safran is from French; Russian shafran' is from Arabic. Related: Saffrony (adj.).
 also from c. 1200 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 crocus 

 "flowering plant best known for producing the spice and dyestuff saffron," late 14c., from Latin crocus, from Greek krokos..."crocus," also "saffron," a word probably of Semitic origin (compare Arabic kurkum), ultimately from Sanskrit kunkumam,...

 turmeric 

 Klein suggests it might be a folk-etymology corruption of Arabic kurkum "curcuma, saffron."...

 spice 

 Early druggists recognized four "types" of spices: saffron, clove, cinnamon, nutmeg....

 Brazil 

 Arabic or another Asian language (an Old Italian form, verzino, suggests to some a possible connection with Arabic wars "saffron...

 orange 

 Colors similar to modern orange in Middle English might be called citrine or saffron....

 gravy 

 Recipe for Zîrbâja […] Take a young, cleaned hen and put it in a pot with a little salt, pepper, coriander, cinnamon, saffron...

 ochre 

 common name of a type of clayey soil much used in pigments, late 13c., oker, ocre, from Old French ocre (c. 1300) and directly from Medieval Latin ocra, from Latin ochra, from Greek khra, from khros "pale yellow," a word of unknown origin. It consists hydrated sesquioxids of iron

 chore 

 "a small job or task," especially "a piece of minor domestic work of regular or frequent recurrence," 1751, American English, variant of char, from Middle English cherre "odd job," from Old English cerr, cierr "turn, change, time, occasion, affair business." Related: Chores. Cho

 yellow 

 Middle English yelwe, from Old English geolu, geolwe, "yellow," from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish gul "yellow"), from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to sh

 succor 

 c. 1200, socour, earlier socours "aid, help," from Anglo-French succors "help, aid," Old French socors, sucurres "aid, help, assistance" (Modern French secours), from Medieval Latin succursus "help, assistance," from past participle of Latin succurrere "run to help, hasten to the

 Share saffron 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/saffron Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/saffron">Etymology of saffron by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of saffron. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/saffron Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of saffron," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/saffron. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of saffron." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/saffron. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of saffron." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/saffron (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near saffron 
 safeguard 
 safekeeping 
 safely 
 safety 
 safety-pin 
 saffron 
 sag 
 saga 
 sagacious 
 sagacity 
 sagamore 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix