URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Punjab
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:59:54Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Punjab - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Punjab - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Punjab 

 Punjab 

 region on the Indian subcontinent, from Hindi Panjab , etymologically "the country of five waters," from Persian panj "five" (from PIE root *penkwe- "five") + ab "water," from Iranian *ap- (from PIE *ap- (2) "water;" see water (n.1)). So called for its five rivers. Related: Punjabi .

 Entries linking to Punjab 

 water (n.1) 

 Old English wæter , from Proto-Germanic *watr- (source also of Old Saxon watar , Old Frisian wetir , Dutch water , Old High German wazzar , German Wasser , Old Norse vatn , Gothic wato "water"), from PIE *wod-or , suffixed form of root *wed- (1) "water; wet." In ancient conceptions one of the handful of basic elements of which everything is composed.

 To have one's head above water (and thus avoid drowning) is by 1660s; in the figurative sense "out of difficulty" it is recorded from 1742.

 Water-cure for healing therapies involving water is by 1842. The crowd-control water-cannon is so called by 1964; water-fountain "drinking fountain" is by 1946. Water-buffalo is attested by 1894. W ater polo is attested from 1884; water torture from 1928.

 Waters for "seas of a particular region," especially "maritime claims of a nation," is by 1650s.

 Linguists believe PIE had two root words for water: *ap- and *wed- . The first (preserved in Sanskrit apah as well as Punjab and julep ) was "animate," referring to water as a living force; the latter referred to it as an inanimate substance. The same probably was true of fire (n.).

 *penkwe- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "five."

 It might form all or part of: cinquain ; cinque ; cinquecento ; cinquefoil ; fifteen ; fifth ; fifty ; fin (n.) "five-dollar bill;" finger ; fist ; five ; foist ; keno ; parcheesi ; penta- ; pentacle ; pentad ; Pentateuch ; Pentecost ; pentagon ; pentagram ; pentameter ; pentathlon ; Pentothal ; Pompeii ; Punjab ; punch (n.2) "type of mixed drink;" quinary ; quincunx ; quinella ; quinque- ; quinquennial ; quint ; quintain ; quintet ; quintile ; quintessence ; quintillion ; quintuple .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit panca , Greek pente , Latin quinque , Old Church Slavonic pęti, Lithuanian penki , Old Welsh pimp , Old English fif , Dutch vijf , Old High German funf .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 India 

 "the Indian subcontinent, central Asia south of the Himalayas," formerly sometimes used generally for "Asia;" Old English India, Indea, from Latin India, from Greek India "region of the Indus River," later used of the region beyond it, from Indos "Indus River," also "an Indian," 

 Pakistan 

 south Asian nation formed 1947 by division of British India, the name apparently proposed 1930s by Muslim students at Cambridge University, first element said to be an acronym from Punjab, Afghan Province, and Kashmir, three regions envisioned as forming the new state, which also

 jukebox 

 also juke-box, "machine that automatically plays selected recorded music when a coin is inserted," 1939, earlier jook organ (1937), from jook joint "roadhouse, brothel" (1935), African-American vernacular, from juke, joog "wicked, disorderly," a word in Gullah (the creolized Engl

 redeem 

 early 15c., redemen, "buy back, ransom, recover by purchase," also in a theological sense, "deliver from sin and spiritual death," from Old French redimer "buy back" and directly from Latin redimere "to redeem, buy back," from red- "back" (see re-) + emere "to take, buy, gain, pr

 stoic 

 late 14c., "philosopher of the school founded by Zeno" (c. 334-c. 262 B.C.E.), from Latin stoicus, from Greek stoikos "pertaining to a member of or the teachings of the school founded by Zeno, characterized by austere ethical doctrines," literally "pertaining to a portico," from 

 nurse 

 c. 1200, norice, nurrice, "wet-nurse, woman who nourishes or suckles an infant; foster-mother to a young child," from Old French norrice "foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny" (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin *nutricia "nurse, governess, tutoress," noun use of fem. of L

 sedition 

 mid-14c., sedicioun, "rebellion, uprising, revolt, factitious commotion in the state; concerted attempt to overthrow civil authority; violent strife between factions, civil or religious disorder, riot; rebelliousness against authority," from Old French sedicion (14c., Modern Fren

 deliver 

 c. 1200, deliveren, "save, rescue, set free, liberate," from Old French delivrer "to set free; remove; save, preserve; hand over (goods)," also used of childbirth, from Late Latin deliberare, from de "away" (see de-) + Latin liberare "to free," from liber "free, unrestricted, uni

 civil 

 late 14c., "relating to civil law or life; pertaining to the internal affairs of a state," from Old French civil "civil, relating to civil law" (13c.) and directly from Latin civilis "relating to a society, pertaining to public life, relating to the civic order, befitting a citiz

 bender 

 late 15c., "instrument for bending," agent noun from bend (v.). Slang meaning "drinking bout" is American English, attested from 1846, perhaps from the Scottish sense of "a hard drinker" (1728). Perhaps from the verb in the figurative sense of "strain, brace, wind up." Other slan

 Share Punjab 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Punjab Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Punjab">Etymology of Punjab by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Punjab. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Punjab Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Punjab," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Punjab. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Punjab." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Punjab. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Punjab." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Punjab (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Punjab 
 punishable 
 punisher 
 punishing 
 punishment 
 punitive 
 Punjab 
 punji 
 punk 
 punky 
 punnet 
 punny 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix