URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/novice
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:37:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Novice - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Novice - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of novice 

 novice (n.) 

 mid-14c., "probationer in a religious order," from Old French novice "beginner" (12c.), from Medieval Latin novicius , noun use of Latin novicius "newly imported, newly arrived, inexperienced" (of slaves), from novus "new" (see new ). Meaning "inexperienced person, one new to his circumstances" is attested from early 15c. As an adjective, "having the character of a beginner; befitting a novice," from 1520s.
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to novice 

 new (adj.) 

 Middle English neue , from Old English neowe , niowe , earlier niwe "made or established for the first time, fresh, recently made or grown; novel, unheard-of, different from the old; untried, inexperienced, unused," from Proto-Germanic *neuja- (source also of Old Saxon niuwi , Old Frisian nie , Middle Dutch nieuwe , Dutch nieuw , Old High German niuwl , German neu , Danish and Swedish ny , Gothic niujis "new").

 This is from PIE *newo- "new" (source also of Sanskrit navah , Persian nau , Hittite newash , Greek neos , Lithuanian naujas , Old Church Slavonic novu , Russian novyi , Latin novus , Old Irish nue , Welsh newydd "new").

 From mid-14c. as "novel, modern" (Gower, 1393, has go the new foot "dance the latest style"). In the names of cities and countries named for some other place, c. 1500. Meaning "not habituated, unfamiliar, unaccustomed," 1590s. Of the moon from late Old English. The adverb, "newly, for the first time," is Old English niwe , from the adjective. As a noun, "that which is new," also in Old English. There was a verb form in Old English ( niwian, neowian ) and Middle English ( neuen ) "make, invent, create; bring forth, produce, bear fruit; begin or resume (an activity); resupply; substitute," but it seems to have fallen from use.

 New Testament is from late 14c. New math in reference to a system of teaching mathematics based on investigation and discovery is from 1958. New World (adj.) to designate phenomena of the Western Hemisphere first attested 1823, in Lord Byron; the noun phrase is recorded from 1550s. New Deal in the FDR sense is attested by 1932. New school in reference to the more advanced or liberal faction of something is from 1806. New Left (1960) was a coinage of U.S. political sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916-1962). New light in reference to religions is from 1640s. New frontier , in U.S. politics, "reform and social betterment," is from 1934 (Henry Wallace) but associated with John F. Kennedy's use of it in 1960.

 novitiate (n.) 

 also noviciate , c. 1600, "state of being a novice," from French noviciat or directly from Medieval Latin novitiatus , from Late Latin novitius "novice," from Latin adjective novicius "newly arrived, inexperienced" (see novice ). Meaning "quarters in a convent occupied by novices" is from 1620s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 initiate 

 "one who has been initiated" (in secret doctrines, etc.), 1732, from obsolete or archaic past-participle adjective initiate "initiated, instructed in secret knowledge" (c. 1600), from Latin initiatus (see initiate (v.))....c. 1600, "introduce to some practice or system," also "be

 bachelor 

 c. 1300, "young man;" also "youthful knight, novice in arms," from Old French bacheler, bachelor, bachelier (11c.)...

 tenderfoot 

 1866, American English, originally of newcomers to ranching or mining districts, from tender (adj.) + foot (n.). The U.S. equivalent of what in Great Britain was generally called a greenhand. As a level in Boy Scouting, it is recorded from 1908. Among the Indians, more than half

 rookie 

 "raw recruit," 1868, a word popularized by Kipling's "Barrack-Room Ballads" (1892) but one of uncertain origin, perhaps from recruit and influenced by rook (n.1) in its secondary sense, suggesting "easy to cheat." Barrère ["A Dictionary of Slang, Jargon & Cant," 1890] has "Ro

 neophyte 

 c. 1400, neophite, "new convert" (modern spelling from 16c.), from Church Latin neophytus, from Greek neophytos "a new convert; one newly initiated," noun use of adjective meaning "newly initiated, newly converted," literally "newly planted," from neos "new" (see new) + phytos "g

 Tory 

 1566, "an outlaw," specifically "one of a class of Irish robbers noted for outrages and savage cruelty," from Irish toruighe "plunderer," originally "pursuer, searcher," from Old Irish toirighim "I pursue," from toir "pursuit," from Celtic *to-wo-ret- "a running up to," from PIE 

 troy 

 late 14c., standard system of weights for gems and precious metals, from Troyes, city in France (Roman (Civitas) Tricassium, capital of the Tricasses, a Celtic people whose name was said to mean "those with three tresses"), former site of an important fair at which this weight is

 lubber 

 mid-14c., "big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness," from lobre, earlier lobi "lazy lout," probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber "a plump, lazy fellow"). But OED suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor "swindler, parasite," with 

 rubble 

 "rough, irregular stones broken from larger masses," especially "waste fragments from the demolition of a building, etc.," late 14c., robeyl, from Anglo-French *robel "bits of broken stone," which is of obscure origin, apparently related to rubbish "waste fragments" [OED], but al

 starter 

 c. 1400, stertour "one who or that which starts; instigator," agent noun from start (v.). The meaning "one who gives the signal to start a race" is by 1620s. The mechanical sense of "apparatus for activating a machine" is from 1875. The U.S. sports sense of "player who starts the

 Share novice 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/novice Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/novice">Etymology of novice by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of novice. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/novice Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of novice," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/novice. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of novice." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/novice. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of novice." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/novice (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near novice 
 novena 
 novenary 
 novennial 
 novercal 
 Novial 
 novice 
 novitiate 
 novocain 
 Novus Ordo Seclorum 
 now 
 nowadays 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix