URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/oyster
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:30:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Oyster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Oyster - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of oyster 

 oyster (n.) 

 "edible bivalve mollusk of the family Ostreidæ ," late 13c., oistre , from Old French oistre , uistre (Modern French huître ) and directly from Latin ostrea , plural or fem. of ostreum "oyster," from Greek ostreon , from PIE root *ost- "bone." It is thus related to Greek ostrakon "a hard shell" and to osteon "a bone." The h- in the modern French word is a regular development; compare huile "oil" (Latin oleum ), huit "eight" (Latin octo ).

 Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open. [Shakespeare, "The Merry Wives of Windsor," II.ii.2]

 Oyster-bed "place where oysters breed or are bred" is from c. 1600; oyster-knife , used for opening oysters, is recorded from 1690s. Oysterman "man engaged in rearing, taking, or selling oysters" is attested from 1550s. The common statement that edible oysters are in season only in months that end in -r is recorded by 1765.
 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to oyster 

 prairie-oyster (n.) 

 "salted and peppered raw egg, drunk in booze or vinegar," by 1878, American English, from prairie + oyster (in reference to the taste or the method of consuming it). Also called prairie-cocktail (1889). Prairie-oyster as "fried calf testicle," considered a delicacy, is by 1941.

 PRAIRIE OYSTER. This simple but very nutritious drink may be taken by any person of the most delicate digestion, and has become one of the most popular delicacies since its introduction by me at Messrs. Spiers and Pond's. Its mode of preparation is very simple. Into a wine glass pat a new-laid egg ; add half a tea-spoonful of vinegar, dropping it gently down on the inside of the glass ; then drop on the yolk a little common salt, sufficient not to quite cover half the size of a threepenny-piece; pepper according to taste, The way to take this should be by placing the glass with the vinegar furthest from the mouth and swallow the contents. The vinegar being the last gives it more of an oyster-like flavour. [Leo Engel, "American & Other Drinks," London, 1878]

 *ost- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "bone."

 It might form all or part of: osseous ; ossicle ; ossuary ; ossifrage ; ossify ; osteo- ; osteology ; osteopathy ; ostracism ; ostracize ; oyster ; periosteum .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit asthi , Hittite hashtai- , Greek osteon "bone," Greek ostrakon "oyster shell," Avestan ascu- "shinbone," Latin os (genitive ossis ) "bone," osseus "bony, of bone," Welsh asgwrn , Armenian oskr , Albanian asht "bone."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Ellis Island 

 sandy island in mouth of Hudson River, said to have been called "Gull Island" by local Indians and "Oyster Island" by the...

 reefer 

 It also meant "pickpocket" in criminal slang (by 1935), and Century Dictionary also has it as "oyster that grows on reefs...

 ostracism 

 "tile, potsherd," from PIE *ost-r-, from root *ost- "bone," which also is the source of Greek osteon "bone," ostreion "oyster...

 Margaret 

 He also reports a suggested origin in Iranian *mrga-ahri-ita- "born from the shell of a bird" = "oyster."...

 ketchup 

 to recipes for different types of catsup (his book has 1 spelling of ketchup, 72 of catsup), including walnut, mushroom, oyster...

 bird 

 "feathered, warm-blooded vertebrate animal of the class Aves," Old English bird, a rare collateral form of bridd, originally meaning "young bird, nestling" (the usual Old English for "bird" being fugol, for which see fowl (n.)), which is of uncertain origin with no cognates in an

 flow 

 Old English flowan "to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow" (class VII strong verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flowan "to flow" (source also of Middle Dutch vloyen, Dutch vloeien, vloeijen "to flow," Old Norse floa "to d

 wolf 

 Old English wulf "wolf, wolfish person, devil," from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (source also of Old Saxon wulf, Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root *wlkwo- "wolf" (source also of Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k

 fowl 

 Old English fugel "bird, feathered vertebrate," from Proto-Germanic *fuglaz, the general Germanic word for "bird" (source also of Old Saxon fugal, Old Frisian fugel, Old Norse fugl, Middle Dutch voghel, Dutch vogel, German vogel, Gothic fugls "a fowl, a bird"), perhaps a dissimil

 collect 

 early 15c., "gather into one place or group" (transitive), from Old French collecter "to collect" (late 14c.), from Latin collectus, past participle of colligere "gather together," from assimilated form of com "together" (see com-) + legere "to gather," from PIE root *leg- (1) "t

 Share oyster 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/oyster Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/oyster">Etymology of oyster by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of oyster. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/oyster Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of oyster," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oyster. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of oyster." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/oyster. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of oyster." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/oyster (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near oyster 
 oxygen 
 oxymoron 
 oy 
 oyer 
 oyez 
 oyster 
 Oz 
 oz. 
 Ozark 
 Ozarks 
 ozone 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix