URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/miscellaneous
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:17:50Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Miscellaneous - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Miscellaneous - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of miscellaneous 

 miscellaneous (adj.) 

 "consisting of a mixture, diversified," 1630s, from Latin miscellaneus "mixed, miscellaneous," from miscellus "mixed," from miscere "to mix" (from PIE root *meik- "to mix"). Related: Miscellaneously; miscellaneousness .
 also from 1630s 

 Entries linking to miscellaneous 

 *meik- 

 also *meig- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to mix." 

 It might form all or part of: admix ; admixture ; immiscible ; mash ; meddle ; medley ; melange ; melee ; mestizo ; metis ; miscegenation ; miscellaneous ; miscible ; mix ; mixo- ; mixture ; mustang ; pell-mell ; promiscuous .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit misrah "mixed;" Greek misgein, mignynai "to mix, mix up, mingle; to join, bring together; join (battle); make acquainted with;" Old Church Slavonic mešo, mesiti "to mix," Russian meshat , Lithuanian maišau, maišyti "to mix, mingle," Welsh mysgu "to mix." 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mixed 

 mid-15c., also mixte, "consisting of different elements or parts," from Latin mixtus, past participle of miscēre "to mix, mingle, blend" (from PIE root *meik- "to mix," also see mix (v.)). From 1550s as "not comprised in one class or kind, indiscriminate." Of government from 1530

 motley 

 late 14c., "parti-colored, variegated in color" (originally of fabric), from Anglo-French motteley, a word of unknown origin, perhaps [OED] based on Old English mot "speck" or a cognate Germanic word (see mote). But Klein's sources say probably from Gaulish. Century Dictionary re

 sundry 

 Middle English sondri, from Old English syndrig "separate, apart, special, distinct, characteristic," all now obsolete or dialectal; from sundor "separately, apart, asunder" (see sunder) + -y (2). Compare Old High German suntaric, Swedish söndrig "broken, tattered." The meaning "

 miscellany 

 various kinds; a medley; a combination of diverse objects, parts, or elements," 1590s, from Latin miscellanea "a writing on miscellaneous...

 chap-book 

 One of a class of tracts upon homely and miscellaneous subjects which at one time formed the chief popular literature of...

 rhapsody 

 Among them was "miscellaneous collection, confused mass (of things)," thus "literary work consisting of miscellaneous or...

 inexpressible 

 [footnote in "Poems Miscellaneous and Humorous," by Edward Nairne, Canterbury, 1791] Inexpressibles is the earliest recorded...

 multifarious 

 "having great multiplicity, of great diversity or variety," 1590s, from Latin multifarius "manifold," from multifariam (adv.) "on many sides; in many places or parts," perhaps originally "that which can be expressed in many ways," from multi- "many" (see multi-) + -fariam, adverb

 havoc 

 early 15c., from the expression cry havoc "give the signal to pillage" (Anglo-French crier havok, late 14c.). Havok, the signal to soldiers to seize plunder, is from Old French havot "pillaging, looting" (in crier havot), which is related to haver "to seize, grasp," hef "hook," p

 touch 

 late 13c., "make deliberate physical contact with," from Old French tochier "to touch, hit, knock; mention, deal with" (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare "to knock, strike" as a bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative orig

 Share miscellaneous 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/miscellaneous Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/miscellaneous">Etymology of miscellaneous by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of miscellaneous. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/miscellaneous Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of miscellaneous," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/miscellaneous. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of miscellaneous." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/miscellaneous. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of miscellaneous." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/miscellaneous (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near miscellaneous 
 miscarriage 
 miscarry 
 miscast 
 miscegenate 
 miscegenation 
 miscellaneous 
 miscellany 
 mischance 
 mischaracterize 
 mischief 
 mischievous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix