URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lemon
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:38:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lemon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lemon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lemon 

 lemon (n.1) 

 "ovate, pale yellow citrus fruit," c. 1400, lymon , from Old French limon "citrus fruit" (12c.), which comes via Provençal or Italian from Arabic laimun , Persian limun . Apparently brought from India to the Levant by the Arabs 9c. or 10c.; the word is perhaps ultimately from an Austronesian word of the Malay archipelago, such as Balinese limo "lemon," Malay limaw "citrus fruit, lime" (compare lime (n.2)).

 Meaning "person with a tart disposition" is from 1863. For the sense "worthless thing," see lemon (n.2). Slang meaning "a Quaalude" is 1960s, from Lemmon , name of a pharmaceutical company that once manufactured the drug. The surname is from Middle English leman "sweetheart, lover." Lemon-juice is attested from 1610s; the candy lemon-drop from 1807. The East Indian lemon-grass (1837) is so called for its smell.
 also from c. 1400 

 lemon (n.2) 

 "worthless thing, disappointment, booby prize," 1909, American English slang; from lemon (n.1), perhaps via a criminal slang sense of "a person who is a loser, a simpleton," perhaps an image of someone a sharper can "suck the juice out of." A pool hall hustle was called a lemon game (1908); while to hand someone a lemon was British slang (1906) for "to pass off a sub-standard article as a good one." Or it simply may be a metaphor for something which leaves a bad taste in one's mouth. Specific sense of "second-hand car in poor condition" is by 1931.
 also from 1909 

 lemon (v.) 

 1767 (implied in lemoned ), from lemon (n.1).
 also from 1767 

 Entries linking to lemon 

 leman (n.) 

 "sweetheart, paramour, loved one" (archaic), c. 1200, lemman , "loved one of the opposite sex; paramour, lover; wife;" also "a spiritually beloved one; redeemed soul, believer in Christ; female saint devoted to chastity; God, Christ, the Virgin Mary;" also a term of intimate address to a friend or lover, contracted from late Old English leofman , a compound of leof "dear" (see lief ) + man "human being, person" (from PIE root *man- (1) "man").

 Originally of either gender, though in deliberate archaic usage it tends to be limited to women. Often in religious use in early Middle English, of brides of Christ, the spiritually beloved of God, etc.; by c. 1300 it could mean "betrothed lover," and by late 14c. it had the pejorative sense "concubine, mistress, gallant." For loss of medial -f- , compare had .

 lime (n.2) 

 "greenish-yellow citrus fruit," 1630s, probably via Spanish lima or Portuguese limão , said to be via Arabic lima "citrus fruit," from Persian limun , in reference to the Persian lime, which might be a hybrid of the "Key" lime and the lemon.

 The word is perhaps from or related to Sanskrit nimbu "lime." The Key lime is indigenous to India and the Malay archipelago (Arabs introduced it to the Levant, North Africa, Spain, and Persia in the Middle Ages); compare Malay (Austronesian) limaw "lime," also, generically, "citrus fruit," which might be the ultimate source. Yule and Burnell think the English got the word from the Portuguese in India. Lime-green as a color is by 1883.

 lemonade 
 lemony 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 citron 

 "large, thick-rinded, lemon-like citrus fruit," late 14c., also citrine (early 15c.), from Old French citron "citron, lemon..." (14c.), possibly from Old Provençal citron, from Latin citrus "citron-tree," and influenced by lemon; or else from augmentative...Apparently the citron was the only citrus fruit known to the Greeks and Romans; the word was used in English to also mean "lemon...

 citrus 

 , from the Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus "citron tree," the name of an African tree with aromatic wood and lemon-like...

 ghost 

 Ghost-writing also was used from c. 1902 for secret writing using lemon juice, etc....

 sour 

 The sense in whisky sour (1885) is "with lemon added" (1862). Sour cream is attested from 1855....

 punch 

 traditionally said to derive from Hindi panch "five," in reference to the number of original ingredients (spirits, water, lemon...

 mayonnaise 

 sauce made from egg yolks and salad oil, beaten together with vinegar or lemon juice to the consistency of thickened cream...

 arsenic 

 sandarakē), adapted from Syriac (al) zarniqa "arsenic," from Middle Persian zarnik "gold-colored" (arsenic trisulphide has a lemon-yellow...

 flavor 

 c. 1300, "a smell, odor" (usually a pleasing one), from Old French flaor "smell, odor; action of smelling, sense of smell," probably from Vulgar Latin flator "odor," literally "that which blows," in classical Latin "blower," from flare "to blow, puff," which according to Watkins 

 smack 

 "a taste, flavor, savor" especially a slight flavor that suggests something, Middle English smakke, from Old English smæc "taste; scent, odor," from Proto-Germanic *smakka- (source also of Old Frisian smek, Middle Dutch smæck, Dutch smaak, Old High German smac, German Geschmack, 

 tang 

 mid-14c., tang, tonge, "serpent's tongue" (thought to be a stinging organ), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tangi "spit of land; pointed end by which a blade is driven into a handle," from Proto-Germanic *tang-, from PIE *denk- "to bite" (see tongs). Later of other l

 Share lemon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lemon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lemon">Etymology of lemon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lemon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lemon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lemon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lemon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lemon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lemon. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lemon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lemon (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lemon 
 leman 
 lemma 
 lemming 
 lemniscus 
 Lemnos 
 lemon 
 lemonade 
 lemony 
 lemur 
 Lemuria 
 Lena 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix