URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/parenthesis
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:38:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Parenthesis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Parenthesis - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of parenthesis 

 parenthesis (n.) 

 1540s, "words, clauses, etc. inserted into a sentence, not grammatically connected to it but explaining or qualifying a word," from French parenthèse (15c.) or directly from Medieval Latin parenthesis "addition of a letter to a syllable in a word," from Greek parenthesis , literally "a putting in beside," from parentithenai "put in beside," from para- "beside" (see para- (1)) + en- "in" + tithenai "to put, to place" (from reduplicated form of PIE root *dhe- "to set, put").

 By 1715 the sense was extended from the inserted words to the two upright curved brackets ( parentheses ) used by printers or writers to indicate the words inserted.

 Your first figure of tollerable disorder is [Parenthesis] or by an English name the [Insertour] and is when ye will seeme for larger information or some other purpose, to peece or graffe in the middest of your tale an vnnecessary parcell of speach, which neuerthelesse may be thence without any detriment to the rest. [George Puttenham, "The Arte of English Poesie," 1589]

 A wooden parenthesis; the pillory. An iron parenthesis; a prison. ["Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence," London, 1811]
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to parenthesis 

 parenthesize (v.) 

 "insert as a parenthesis, express or state in parentheses," 1825, from parenthesis + -ize . Related: Parenthesized ; parenthesizing .

 parenthetical (adj.) 

 "of pertaining to, or of the nature of a parenthesis," 1620s, from Medieval Latin parentheticus from Greek parenthetos "put in beside," verbal adjective from parentithenai (see parenthesis ) + -al (1). Related: Parenthetically .

 *dhe- 
 para- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 aside 

 c. 1300, "off to one side;" mid-14c., "to or from the side;" late 14c., "away or apart from a normal direction or position, out of the way," from a- (1) "on" + side (n.). The noun sense of "words spoken so as to be (supposed) inaudible" is from 1727. Middle English had asidely "o

 hyperbaton 

 Classical grammarians distinguish as many as seven kinds of it: Anastrophe, hysteron proteron, hypallage, synchysis, tmesis, parenthesis...

 message 

 c. 1300, "a communication transmitted via a messenger, a notice sent through some agency," from Old French message "message, news, tidings, embassy" (11c.), from Medieval Latin missaticum, from Latin missus "a sending away, sending, dispatching; a throwing, hurling," noun use of 

 substance 

 c. 1300, substaunce, "divine part or essence" common to the persons of the Trinity;" mid-14c. in philosophy and theology, "that which exists by itself; essential nature; type or kind of thing; real or essential part;" from Old French sustance, substance "goods, possessions; natur

 content 

 early 15c., "to rest or be satisfied; to give satisfaction to," from Old French contenter (from content (adj.) "satisfied") and Medieval Latin contentare, both from Latin contentus "contained; satisfied," past participle of continere "to hold together, enclose," from assimilated 

 punctuation 

 1530s, "pointing of the psalms" (for the purpose of singing them), from Medieval Latin punctuationem (nominative punctuatio) "a marking with points in writing," noun of action from past-participle stem of punctuare "to mark with points or dots," from Latin punctus, past participl

 avatar 

 1784, "descent of a Hindu deity to earth in an incarnate or tangible form," from Sanskrit avatarana "descent" (of a deity to the earth in incarnate form), from ava- "off, down" (from PIE root *au- (2) "off, away") + base of tarati "(he) crosses over" (from PIE root *tere- (2) "cr

 Caesar 

 "an emperor, a ruler, a dictator," late 14c., cesar, from Cæsar, originally a surname of the Julian gens in Rome, elevated to a title after Caius Julius Caesar (100 B.C.E.-44 B.C.E.) became dictator; it was used as a title of emperors down to Hadrian (138 C.E.). The name is of un

 abrupt 

 1580s, "sudden, unceremonious, without notice," a figurative use from Latin abruptus "broken off," also "precipitous, steep" (as a cliff), also "disconnected," past participle of abrumpere "break off," from ab "off, away from" (see ab-) + rumpere "to break," from a nasalized form

 experiment 

 mid-14c., "action of observing or testing; an observation, test, or trial;" also "piece of evidence or empirical proof; feat of magic or sorcery," from Old French esperment "practical knowledge, cunning; enchantment, magic spell; trial, proof, example; lesson, sign, indication," 

 Share parenthesis 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/parenthesis Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/parenthesis">Etymology of parenthesis by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of parenthesis. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/parenthesis Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of parenthesis," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parenthesis. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of parenthesis." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parenthesis. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of parenthesis." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/parenthesis (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near parenthesis 
 parent 
 parentage 
 parental 
 parentcraft 
 parenteral 
 parenthesis 
 parenthesize 
 parenthetical 
 parenthood 
 parenting 
 parentless 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix