URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/tulip
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:41:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Tulip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Tulip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of tulip 

 tulip (n.) 

 well-known garden plant blooming in spring with highly colored inverted-bell-shaped flowers, 1570s, via Dutch or German tulpe , French tulipe "a tulip" (16c.), all ultimately from Turkish tülbent "turban," also "gauze, muslin," from Persian dulband "turban;" so called from the fancied resemblance of the flower to a turban.

 Introduced from Turkey to Europe, where the earliest known instance of a tulip flowering in cultivation is 1559 in the garden of Johann Heinrich Herwart in Augsburg; popularized in Holland after 1587 by Clusius. The full form of the Turkish word is represented in Italian tulipano , Spanish tulipan , but the -an tended to drop in Germanic languages, where it was mistaken for a suffix.

 The tulip tree (1705), a towering North American magnolia, is so called from its tulip-shaped flowers. The wood, tulip-wood (1843), was used by cabinet-makers.
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to tulip 

 tulipomania (n.) 

 "craze for the cultivation or buying of tulip bulbs," especially that raging among all classes in Holland in 1630s, in which many were ruined; 1710, from tulip + mania , with connective vowel, and compare French tulipomane . The Dutch term was tulpenhandel . Related: Tulipomaniac .

 turban (n.) 

 1560s, "distinctive headdress of men in Muslim nations, consisting of a scarf or shawl wound around a cap," from French turbant (15c.), from Italian turbante (Old Italian tolipante ), from Turkish tülbent "gauze, muslin, tulle," from Persian dulband "turban."

 Tulip is the same word. According to OED (1989) the change of -l- to -r- may have taken place in Portuguese India and subsequently spread to other European languages. Resemblance to Latin turbo "spinning top, that which whirls" appears coincidental but might have encouraged the form in the European words.

 A men's headdress in Muslim lands, a modification of this was popular in Europe and America c. 1776-1800 as a ladies' fashion and revived from time to time and sometimes used in reference to head coverings of Black women in the U.S. South and West Indies. Related: Turbaned .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tree 

 Old English treo, treow "tree" (also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake"), from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o-, suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with speci

 knockoff 

 also knock-off, "cheap imitation," 1966, from the verbal phrase knock off "do hastily" (1817), in reference to the casual way the things are made. The verbal phrase knock off is attested from 1640s as "desist, stop" (work, study, etc.), hence knockoff (n.) "act of leaving work" (

 intrinsic 

 late 15c., "interior, inward, internal," from Old French intrinsèque "inner" (14c.), from Medieval Latin intrinsecus "interior, internal," from Latin intrinsecus (adv.) "inwardly, on the inside," from intra "within" (see intra-) + secus "along, alongside," from PIE *sekw-os- "fol

 obsess 

 c. 1500, "to besiege" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere "watch closely; besiege, occupy; stay, remain, abide" literally "sit opposite to," from ob "against" (see ob-) + sedere "to sit," from PIE root *sed- (1) "to sit." Of evil spirits, "to 

 poignant 

 late 14c., poinaunt, "painful to physical or mental feeling" (of sauce, spice, wine as well as things that affect the feelings), from Old French poignant "sharp, pointed" (13c.), present participle of poindre "to prick, sting," from Latin pungere "to prick, pierce, sting," figura

 Vatican 

 1550s, from Latin mons Vaticanus, Roman hill on which Papal palace stands. By Klein's sources said to be an Etruscan loan-word and unrelated to vates "soothsayer, prophet, seer" (see vates), but most others seem to think it is related, on the notion of "hill of prophecy" (compare

 chaos 

 late 14c., "gaping void; empty, immeasurable space," from Old French chaos (14c.) or directly from Latin chaos, from Greek khaos "abyss, that which gapes wide open, that which is vast and empty" (from *khnwos, from PIE root *ghieh- "to yawn, gape, be wide open"). The meaning "utt

 satire 

 c. 1500, "a literary work (originally in verse) intended to ridicule prevailing vice or folly by scornful or contemptuous expression," from French satire (14c.) and directly from Latin satira "satire; poetic medley," earlier satura, in lanx satura "mixed dish, dish filled with va

 solace 

 "comfort in grief; that which brings consolation," c. 1300, solas, from Old French solaz "pleasure, entertainment, enjoyment; solace, comfort," from Latin solacium "a soothing, assuaging; comfort, consolation," from solatus, past participle of solari "to console, soothe," from a 

 religion 

 c. 1200, religioun, "state of life bound by monastic vows," also "action or conduct indicating a belief in a divine power and reverence for and desire to please it," from Anglo-French religiun (11c.), Old French religion, relegion "piety, devotion; religious community," and direc

 Share tulip 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/tulip Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/tulip">Etymology of tulip by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of tulip. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/tulip Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of tulip," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tulip. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of tulip." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/tulip. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of tulip." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/tulip (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near tulip 
 tug 
 tugboat 
 tug-of-war 
 Tuileries 
 tuition 
 tulip 
 tulipomania 
 tulle 
 tumbester 
 tumble 
 tumble-bug 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close