URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/method
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:33:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Method - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Method - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of method 

 method (n.) 

 early 15c., "regular, systematic treatment of disease," from Latin methodus "way of teaching or going," from Greek methodos "scientific inquiry, method of inquiry, investigation," originally "pursuit, a following after," from meta "in pursuit or quest of" (see meta- ) + hodos "a method, system; a way or manner" (of doing, saying, etc.), also "a traveling, journey," literally "a path, track, road," a word of uncertain origin (see Exodus ).

 Meaning "any way of doing anything, orderly regulation of conduct with a view to the attainment of an end" is from 1580s; that of "orderliness, regularity" is from 1610s. Meaning "a system or complete set of rules for attaining an end" is from 1680s. In reference to a theory of acting associated with Russian director Konstantin Stanislavski (1863-1938), it is attested from 1923.
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to method 

 Exodus 

 late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus , from Greek exodos "a military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death," literally "a going out," from ex "out" (see ex- ) + hodos "a way, path, road; a ride, journey, march," figuratively "way out, means," a word of uncertain origin.

 The book is so called because it tells of the departure of the Israelites from Egypt under the leadership of Moses. General sense (with lower-case -e- ) "departure from a place," especially "the migration of large bodies of people or animals from one country or region to another," is from 1620s.

 Beekes derives the Greek word from PIE *sod- "course" and says it is traditionally connected with Slavic words for "course" (such as Russian xod "course, progress," "which might have been borrowed from Iranian") and adds that it is perhaps also related to Sanskrit a-sad- "to tread on, go on," Avestan apa-had- "to go away; become weak," "but the relation between them is unclear, as is the connection to the PIE root *sed- "sit" (proposed in Watkins, etc.)."

 methodical (adj.) 

 1560s, "pertaining to or characterized by method," from French methodique and directly from Late Latin methodicus , from Greek methodikos , from methodos (see method ). Meaning "systematic, orderly" is by 1660s. Related: Methodically .

 methodist 
 methodize 
 methodology 
 meta- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 methodist 

 1590s, "one who is characterized by strict adherence to method," from method + -ist. With a capital M-, it refers to the Protestant religious denomination founded 1729 at Oxford University by John and Charles Wesley. The name had been used at least since 1686 for various new meth

 humor 

 Fowler ["Modern English Usage," 1926] may be of use: HUMOR: motive/aim: discovery; province: human nature; method/means:...; audience: the intelligent SATIRE: motive/aim: amendment; province: morals & manners; method/means: accentuation;...; audience: victim & bystander INVECTIVE: motive/aim: discredit; province: misconduct; method/means: direct statement...: the respectable SARDONIC: motive/aim: self-relief; province: adversity; method/means: pessimism; audience: the self...

 phonics 

 As the name of a method of teaching reading by associating letters or groups of letters with particular sounds in an alphabetic...correlations between sound and symbol, it is attested by 1901 and became prominent in that sense after 1950, though the systematic method...

 garrote 

 also garrotte, 1620s, "Spanish method of capital punishment by strangulation," from Spanish garrote "stick for twisting cord..." (the method used in the execution), of unknown origin....

 frog-march 

 also frog's march, 1871, a term that originated among London police and referred to their method of moving "a drunken or...By the 1930s, the verb was used in reference to the much more efficient (but less frog-like) method of getting someone in...

 technology 

 craft, or technique," originally referring to grammar, from tekhno-, combining form of tekhnē "art, skill, craft in work; method..., system, an art, a system or method of making or doing," from PIE *teks-na- "craft" (of weaving or fabricating), from suffixed...

 manner 

 c. 1200, manere, "kind, sort, variety," from Anglo-French manere, Old French maniere "fashion, method, manner, way; appearance...Most figurative meanings derive from the original sense "method of handling" which was extended when the word was used to...translate Latin modus "method."...

 wrinkle 

 early 15c. (transitive), probably from stem of Old English gewrinclod "wrinkled, crooked, winding," past participle of gewrinclian "to wind, crease," from perfective prefix ge- + -wrinclian "to wind," from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan, from a nasalized variant of *werg- "to turn," fr

 solution 

 late 14c., solucioun, "explanation, answer; interpretation of a dream; the dissolving of a substance in a liquid, transformation of matter to a liquid state," from Old French solucion "division, dissolving; explanation; payment" and directly from Latin solutionem (nominative solu

 system 

 1610s, "the whole creation, the universe," from Late Latin systema "an arrangement, system," from Greek systēma "organized whole, a whole compounded of parts," from stem of synistanai "to place together, organize, form in order," from syn- "together" (see syn-) + root of histanai

 Share method 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/method Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/method">Etymology of method by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of method. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/method Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of method," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/method. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of method." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/method. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of method." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/method (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near method 
 methane 
 methanol 
 methaqualone 
 Methedrine 
 methinks 
 method 
 methodical 
 methodist 
 methodize 
 methodological 
 methodology 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close