URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/same
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:03:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Same - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Same - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of same 

 same (adj.) 

 "identical, equal; unchanging; one in substance or general character," from Proto-Germanic *samaz "same" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic sama , Old High German samant , German samt "together, with," Gothic samana "together," Dutch zamelen "to collect," German zusammen "together"), from PIE *samos "same," from suffixed form of root *sem- (1) "one; as one, together with."

 Old English seems to have lost the adjective except in the adverbial phrase swa same "the same as" (literally "so same"). But the word that emerged in Middle English as "the ordinary adjectival pronominal designation of identity" [OED] is considered to be more likely (or mostly) from the Old Norse cognate same , samr "same." In its revival it replaced synonymous ilk .

 As a pronoun, "the person or thing just mentioned," from c. 1300. In Middle English also a verb and an adjective, "together, mutually" (as in comen same "gather together, unite," kissen same "embrace one another").

 Colloquial phrase same here "the same thing applies to me" as an exclamation of agreement is from 1895. All the same is from 1803 as "nevertheless, in spite of what has been mentioned." Same difference , a curious way to say "not different; equal," is attested from 1945. Often expanded for emphasis: ilk-same (mid-13c.); the self-same (early 15c.); one and the sam e is in Wycliffe (late 14c.), translating Latin unus atque idem. 

 Entries linking to same 

 ilk (adj.) 

 Old English ilca "the same" (pron.), from Proto-Germanic *ij-lik (compare German eilen ), in which the first element is from the PIE demonstrative particle *i- (see yon ) and the second is that in Old English -lic "form" (see like (adj.)). Of similar formation are each , which and such , but this word disappeared except in Scottish and thus did not undergo the usual southern sound changes. Phrase of that ilk implies coincidence of name and estate, as in Lundie of Lundie ; it was applied usually to families, so that by c. 1790 ilk began to be used with the meaning "family," then broadening to "type, sort."

 sameness (n.) 

 1580s, "oneness, unity, absence or negation of otherness," from same + -ness . From 1743 (Walpole's letters) as "want of variety, monotony."

 same-sex 
 Samoyed 
 seem 
 selfsame 
 sincere 
 soft 
 together 
 *sem- 
 -some 
 See All Related Words (11) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 seem 

 c. 1200, impersonal, hit semeth (it seems), "it appears (that something is so);" also with adjectives or phrases, "to appear to be (in some condition), have or present an appearance of being," from Old Norse soema "to honor; to put up with; to conform to (the world, etc.)," a ver

 sincere 

 1530s, "pure, unmixed, unadulterated;" also "free from pretense or falsehood," from French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus, of things, "whole, clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed," figuratively "sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful" (unadulterated by deceit), a word of un

 soft 

 Old English softe, earlier sefte, "gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed; luxurious," from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz "level, even, smooth, gentle, soft" (source also of Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and 

 tautology 

 "repetition of the same word, or use of several words conveying the same idea, in the same immediate context; repetition...of the same thing in different words; the useless repetition of the same idea or meaning," 1570s, from Late Latin tautologia..."representation of the same thing in other words," from Greek tautologia, from tautologos "repeating what has been said,..." from tauto "the same" (contraction of to auto, with to "the" + auto, see auto-) + -logos "saying," related to legein "to...

 simultaneous 

 "existing, occurring, or appearing at the same time," 1650s, from Medieval Latin simultaneus, ultimately from Latin simul..."at the same time," which is related to similis "like, resembling, of the same kind" (see similar)....The Medieval Latin word is perhaps via the extended form simultim "at the same time," or from simul with ending abstracted..."Mark Twain" back-formed from it a verb simultane "do (something) at the same time as (something else)," 1880....

 synonym 

 "word having the same sense as another," early 15c....synonyma), from Old French synonyme (12c.) and directly from Late Latin synonymum, from Greek synonymon "word having the same...sense as another," noun use of neuter of synonymos "having the same name as, synonymous," from syn- "together, same" (see...

 ensemble 

 taken together," from French ensemblée "all the parts of a thing considered together," from Late Latin insimul "at the same...time," from in- intensive prefix + simul "at the same time," related to similis "like, resembling, of the same kind" (see...Earlier in English as an adverb (mid-15c.), "together, at the same time."...

 other 

 Old English oþer "second, the second of two; additional, further" (adj.), also as a pronoun, "one of the two; a different person or thing from the one in view," from Proto-Germanic *anthera- (source also of Old Saxon athar, Old Frisian other, Old Norse annarr, Middle Dutch and Du

 throe 

 c. 1200, throwe "pain, pang of childbirth, agony of death," of uncertain origin, possibly from Old English þrawan "twist, turn, writhe" (see throw (v.)), or altered from Old English þrea (genitive þrawe) "affliction, pang, evil; threat, persecution" (related to þrowian "to suffer

 Lapland 

 northernmost part of the Scandinavian peninsula, 1570s, from Lapp, the Swedish name for this Finnic people (their name for themselves was Sabme), which probably originally was an insulting coinage (compare Middle High German lappe "simpleton"). "Formerly, the fabled home of witch

 Share same 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/same Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/same">Etymology of same by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of same. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/same Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of same," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/same. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of same." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/same. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of same." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/same (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near same 
 Samaritan 
 Samarra 
 samba 
 sambo 
 sambuca 
 same 
 sameness 
 same-sex 
 Samhain 
 Sami 
 Samian 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix