URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hypnotism
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:14:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hypnotism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hypnotism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hypnotism 

 hypnotism (n.) 

 1843, short for neuro-hypnotism (1842), coined by Dr. James Braid of Manchester, England, from hypnotic + -ism . In the same work (1843) Braid coined the verb hypnotize .
 also from 1843 

 Entries linking to hypnotism 

 hypnotic (adj.) 

 1620s, of drugs, "inducing sleep," from French hypnotique (16c.) "inclined to sleep, soporific," from Late Latin hypnoticus , from Greek hypnotikos "inclined to sleep, putting to sleep, sleepy," from hypnoun "put to sleep," from hypnos "sleep" (from PIE root *swep- "to sleep"). Modern sense of "pertaining to an induced trance" first recorded in English 1843, along with hypnotize , hypnotism , hypnotist , in the works of hypnotism pioneer Dr. James Braid. Related: Hypnotical ; hypnotically .

 hypnotize (v.) 

 1843 (Braid); see hypnotic + -ize . Related: Hypnotized ; hypnotizing .

 hypnosis 
 -ism 
 *swep- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mesmerism 

 "the doctrine that one person can exercise influence over the will and nervous system of another and produce certain phenomena by virtue of a supposed emanation called animal magnetism," 1798, from French mesmérisme, named for Franz Anton Mesmer (1734-1815), Austrian physician wh

 suggestion 

 mid-14c., suggestioun, "action of prompting or urging," originally especially "a prompting to evil," from Anglo-French and Old French suggestioun "hint; temptation," from Latin suggestionem (nominative suggestio) "an addition, intimation, suggestion," noun of action from suggestu

 influence 

 late 14c., an astrological term, "streaming ethereal power from the stars when in certain positions, acting upon character or destiny of men," from Old French influence "emanation from the stars that acts upon one's character and destiny" (13c.), also "a flow of water, a flowing 

 disorder 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "destroy or derange the order of, throw into confusion," from dis- "not" (see dis-) + order (v.). Replaced earlier disordeine (mid-14c.), from Old French desordainer, from Medieval Latin disordinare "throw into disorder," from Latin dis- + ordinare "to order, 

 orient 

 late 14c., "the direction east; the part of the horizon where the sun first appears," also (now with capital O-) "the eastern regions of the world, eastern countries" (originally vaguely meaning the region east and south of Europe, what is now called the Middle East but also some

 companion 

 c. 1300, "one who accompanies or associates with another," from Old French compagnon "fellow, mate, friend, partner" (12c.), from Late Latin companionem (nominative companio), literally "bread fellow, messmate," from Latin com "with, together" (see com-) + panis "bread," from PIE

 Saxon 

 c. 1200, Sexun, Saxun, "member of a people or tribe formerly living in northern Germania who invaded and settled in Britain 5c.-6c.," from Late Latin Saxonem (nominative Saxo; also source of Old French saisoigne, French Saxon, Spanish Sajon, Italian Sassone), usually found in plu

 sweet 

 Old English swete, Mercian swoete, "pleasing to the senses, mind or feelings; having a pleasant disposition," from Proto-Germanic *swotja- (source also of Old Saxon swoti, Old Frisian swet, Swedish söt, Danish sød, Middle Dutch soete, Dutch zoet, Old High German swuozi, German sü

 minion 

 c. 1500, "a favorite; a darling, one who or that which is beloved" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French mignon "a favorite, darling" (n.), also a term of (probably homosexual) abuse; as an adjective, "dainty, pleasing, favorite," from mignot "pretty, attractive, dainty, gracio

 harangue 

 "a public address; a formal, vehement, or passionate address;" also "any formal or pompous speech; a declamation; a tirade," mid-15c., arang, Scottish (in English from c. 1600), from French harangue "a public address" (14c.), from Old Italian aringo "public square, platform; pulp

 Share hypnotism 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hypnotism Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hypnotism">Etymology of hypnotism by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hypnotism. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hypnotism Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hypnotism," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hypnotism. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hypnotism." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hypnotism. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hypnotism." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hypnotism (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hypnotism 
 hypnopompic 
 hypnosis 
 hypnotherapy 
 hypnotic 
 hypnotise 
 hypnotism 
 hypnotist 
 hypnotize 
 hypo 
 hypo- 
 hypo-allergenic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix