URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stomach
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:10:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stomach - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stomach - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stomach 

 stomach (n.) 

 late 14c. variant of earlier stomake (early 14c.), "the human stomach, internal pouch of the body into which food is digested," from Old French stomaque , estomac "stomach," from Latin stomachus "throat, gullet; stomach," also "taste, inclination, liking; distaste, dislike;" also "pride, indignation," which were thought to have their origin in that organ (source also of Spanish estómago , Italian stomaco ), from Greek stomakhos "throat, gullet, esophagus," literally "mouth, opening," from stoma "mouth" (see stoma ). The native word is maw (Old English maga glosses stomachus ).

 Applied anciently to the openings of various internal organs, especially that of the stomach, then by the later Greek physicians to the stomach itself.

 Some 16c. anatomists tried to correct the sense of the word back to "esophagus" and introduce ventricle for what we call the stomach. The meaning "belly, midriff, surface of the body over the stomach" is from c. 1400.

 In Middle English also stomack, stomac, stommak, stomoke; the spelling of the ending of the word was conformed to Latin regularly from 16c., but the pronunciation remains as in Middle English. A 19c. attempt to make it look as it sounds yielded stummik (1888), stummock .

 Related: Stomachal (1580s); stomachical (c. 1600); stomachic (1650s). Stomachous (1540s), stomachate (1540s, from Latin stomachatus ) seem to have been used only in figurative senses.

 The classical figurative senses also were in Middle English, such as "relish, inclination, desire; courage, spirit; inmost thoughts, consciousness; temper, disposition" (mid-15c.) or early Modern English, when the stomach was regarded as the seat of thought and emotion as well as hunger. It also sometimes was regarded in Middle Ages as the seat of sexual desire.
 also from late 14c. 

 stomach (v.) 

 "tolerate, put up with," 1570s, from stomach (n.), probably in reference to digestion. The earlier sense of the verb was rather opposite, "be offended at, resent" (1520s, now obsolete), echoing Latin stomachari "to be resentful, be irritated, be angry," from stomachus (n.) in its secondary sense of "pride, indignation" (see the noun). For this sense also compare Old English  belgan  (v.) "to become angry," literally "to belly," probably from the notion of "swelling."

 A literal sense of "take into the stomach and digest" is attested from 1822, more or less facetious (Praed, the satirist); OED calls it nonce-use." Related: Stomached ; stomaching .
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to stomach 

 maw (n.) 

 Middle English maue , from Old English maga "stomach" (of men and animals, including fish and birds; in Modern English only of animals unless insultingly of humans), from Proto-Germanic *magan- "bag, stomach" (source also of Old Frisian maga , Old Norse magi , Danish mave , Middle Dutch maghe , Dutch maag , Old High German mago , German Magen "stomach"), from PIE *mak- "leather bag" (source also of Welsh megin "bellows," Lithuanian makas , Old Church Slavonic mošina "bag, pouch"). Meaning "throat, gullet" is from late 14c. Metaphoric of voracity from late 14c.

 stoma (n.) 

 "orifice, small opening in an animal body," 1680s, in zoology, Modern Latin, from Greek stoma (plural stomata , genitive stomatos ) "mouth; mouthpiece; talk, voice; mouth of a river; any outlet or inlet."

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE root *stom-en- , denoting various body parts and orifices (source also of Avestan staman- "mouth" (of a dog), Hittite shtamar "mouth," Middle Breton staffn "mouth, jawbone," Cornish stefenic "palate").

 In botany, in reference to small slits in leaves, etc., by 1837. The surgical sense is attested by 1937. Related: Stomal .

 belly 
 stomach-ache 
 stomacher 
 tummy 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 belly 

 a general Germanic word for "leather bag, pouch, pod" that in English has evolved to mean a part of the body; Middle English beli, from from Old English belg, bylig (West Saxon), bælg (Anglian) "leather bag, purse, pouch, pod, husk, bellows," from Proto-Germanic *balgiz "bag" (so

 abdomen 

 1540s, "flesh or meat of the belly" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin abdomen "the belly," a word of unknown origin, Perhaps [OED, Watkins] from abdere "conceal" (from ab "off, away" + PIE root *dhe- "to set, put"), with a sense of "concealment of the viscera," or else "what is 

 digest 

 late 14c., in reference to Justinian's law codes in ancient Rome, from Late Latin digesta, from neuter plural of Latin digestus, literally "digested thing," noun use of past participle of digerere "to separate, divide, arrange," etymologically "to carry apart," from dis- "apart" 

 ventral 

 1739, from French ventral or directly from Late Latin ventralis "of or pertaining to the belly or stomach," from Latin venter...(genitive ventris) "belly, paunch; stomach, appetite; womb, unborn child," from PIE *wend-tri- (source also of Latin vesica...Sanskrit vastih "bladder," Old High German wanast, German wanst "paunch, belly"), perhaps from root *udero- "abdomen, womb, stomach...

 rennet 

 "inner membrane in the stomach of an unweaned calf or other animal," used for making cheese, etc.; also the mass of curdled...milk found in the stomach, mid-15c., probably from an unrecorded Old English *rynet, related to gerennan "cause to run together...

 cardiac 

 Greek kardia also could mean "stomach" and Latin cardiacus "pertaining to the stomach."...

 queasy 

 mid-15c., kyse, coysy, of food, "unsettling to the stomach, apt to cause nausea;" by 1540s of persons or the stomach, "affected...

 allow 

 early 14c., allouen, "to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of;" also, "take into account or give credit for," also, in law and philosophy, "recognize, admit as valid" (a privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as "sanction or perm

 brook 

 "small natural stream," Old English broc "flowing stream, torrent," of obscure origin, probably from Proto-Germanic *broka- which yielded words in German (Bruch) and Dutch (broek) that have a sense of "marsh, bog." In Sussex and Kent, it means "water-meadow," and in plural, "low,

 bear 

 Old English beran "to carry, bring; bring forth, give birth to, produce; to endure without resistance; to support, hold up, sustain; to wear" (class IV strong verb; past tense bær, past participle boren), from Proto-Germanic *beranan (source also of Old Saxon beran, Old Frisian b

 Share stomach 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stomach Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stomach">Etymology of stomach by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stomach. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stomach Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stomach," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stomach. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stomach." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stomach. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stomach." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stomach (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stomach 
 stolen 
 stolid 
 stolidity 
 stolon 
 stoma 
 stomach 
 stomach-ache 
 stomacher 
 stomatitis 
 stomp 
 stone 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix