URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/dozen
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:54:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Dozen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Dozen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of dozen 

 dozen (n.) 

 c. 1300, doseine , "collection of twelve things or units," from Old French dozaine "a dozen, a number of twelve" in various usages, from doze (12c.) "twelve," from Latin duodecim "twelve," from duo "two" (from PIE root *dwo- "two") + decem "ten" (from PIE root *dekm- "ten"). The Old French fem. suffix -aine is characteristically added to cardinals to form collectives in a precise sense ("exactly 12," not "about 12").

 The Latin word's descendants are widespread: Spanish docena , Dutch dozijn , German dutzend , Danish dusin , Russian duizhina , etc. The dozens "invective contest" (1928) originated in slave culture, the custom is probably African, the word probably from bulldoze (q.v.) in its original sense of "a whipping, a thrashing."
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to dozen 

 bulldoze (v.) 

 by 1880, "intimidate by violence," from an earlier noun, bulldose "a severe beating or lashing" (1876), said by contemporary sources to be literally "a dose fit for a bull," a slang word referring to the intimidation beating of black voters (by either blacks or whites) in the chaotic 1876 presidential election. See bull (n.1) + dose (n.). The bull element in it seems to be connected to that in bull-whip and might be directly from that word. The meaning "use a mechanical ground-clearing caterpillar tractor" is from 1942 (see bulldozer ); figurative use in this sense is by 1948. Related: Bulldozed ; bulldozing .

 duodecimal (adj.) 

 "reckoning by twelves and powers of twelve," 1714, from Latin in duodecimo (folded) "in a twelfth" of a sheet, from ablative of duodecimus "twelfth" (from duodecim "twelve;" see dozen ) + -al (1).

 Divisions based on 10s are convenient for arithmetical calculation and computation of numbers. Duodecimal reckoning (as in ounces, inches) is better suited to practical use in weights and measures for material substances (food, drink).

 Thus English, like many other Germanic languages, retains a shadow number system based on 12. Eleven and twelve ought to be the first numbers of the "teens" series. Their Old English forms, enleofan and twel(eo)f(an) , are more transparent: "leave one" and "leave two."

 Old English also had hund endleofantig for "110" and hund twelftig for "120." "One hundred" was hund teantig . The -tig formation (see -ty (1)) ran through 12 cycles, and could have bequeathed Modern English *eleventy ("110") and *twelfty ("120"), but already in Anglo-Saxon times it was being obscured.

 Old Norse used hundrað for "120" and þusend for "1,200." Tvauhundrað was "240" and þriuhundrað was "360." Older Germanic legal texts distinguished a "common hundred" (100) from a "great hundred" (120).

 Among all its conveniences, the decimal division has the great disadvantage of being itself divisible only by the numbers two and five. The duodecimal division, divisible by two, three, four, and six, would offer so many advantages over it, that while the French theory was in contemplation, the question was discussed, ... whether the number twelve should not be substituted for ten, as the term of the periodical return to the unit. [John Quincy Adams, "Report of the Secretary of State Upon Weights and Measures," 1821]

 duodecimo 
 duodenary 
 duodenum 
 *dekm- 
 *dwo- 
 dodeca- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 duodecimo 

 size of paper or page (more or less 6.5 to 7.5 inches high and 4.5 inches wide), 1650s, from Latin in duodecimo (folded) "in a twelfth" of a sheet, from ablative of duodecimus "twelfth," from duodecim "twelve" (see dozen). So called because made originally by folding a printer's 

 duodenum 

 "first portion of the small intestine," late 14c., also duodene, from Medieval Latin duodenum digitorium "space of twelve digits," from Latin duodeni "twelve each" (from duodecim "twelve;" see dozen). Coined by Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187) in "Canon Avicennae," a loan-translation 

 twelve 

 "1 more than eleven, twice six; the number which is one more than eleven; a symbol representing this number;" Old English twelf "twelve," literally "two left" (over ten), from Proto-Germanic *twa-lif-, a compound of *twa- (from PIE root *dwo- "two") + *lif- (from PIE root *leikw-

 poulter 

 14 syllables, is said to be so called for suggesting "the poulter's old practice of giving an extra egg with the second dozen...not certainly howe to name it, vnlesse I should say that it doth consist of Poulter's measure, which giueth xii. for one dozen...

 baker 

 [Letterbook in the City of London Records Office, Guildhall, 1441] Baker's dozen "thirteen" is from 1590s....Hence the expression, still in use, "A baker's dozen." [H.T....

 sheaf 

 Also used for "a handful or quiver-ful of arrows" (late 14c.), sometimes specifically as "two dozen arrows."...

 thirteen 

 Not an unlucky number in medieval England, but associated rather with the customary "extra item" (as in baker's dozen)....

 Mississippi 

 originally the name of the river, from the French rendering of an Algonquian name (French missionaries first penetrated the river valley in its upper reaches) meaning "big river;" compare Ojibwa mshi- "big," ziibi "river." Organized as a U.S. territory 1798; admitted as a state 1

 inflation 

 mid-14c., "swelling caused by gathering of 'wind' in the body; flatulence," also, figuratively, "outbursts of pride," from Latin inflationem (nominative inflatio) "a puffing up, a blowing into; flatulence," noun of action from past-participle stem of inflare "blow into, puff up,"

 window 

 c. 1200, literally "wind eye," from Old Norse vindauga, from vindr "wind" (see wind (n.1)) + auga "eye" (from PIE root *okw- "to see"). Replaced Old English eagþyrl, literally "eye-hole," and eagduru, literally "eye-door." Compare Old Frisian andern "window," literally "breath-do

 Share dozen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/dozen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/dozen">Etymology of dozen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of dozen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/dozen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of dozen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dozen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of dozen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/dozen. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of dozen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/dozen (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near dozen 
 doxology 
 doxy 
 doyen 
 doyenne 
 doze 
 dozen 
 dozy 
 Dr. Pepper 
 drab 
 drabble 
 drachma 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix