URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/science
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:07:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Science - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Science - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of science 

 science (n.) 

 mid-14c., "state or fact of knowing; what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information;" also "assurance of knowledge, certitude, certainty," from Old French science "knowledge, learning, application; corpus of human knowledge" (12c.), from Latin scientia "knowledge, a knowing; expertness," from sciens (genitive scientis ) "intelligent, skilled," present participle of scire "to know."

 The original notion in the Latin verb probably is "to separate one thing from another, to distinguish," or else "to incise." This is related to scindere "to cut, divide" (from PIE root *skei- "to cut, split;" source also of Greek skhizein "to split, rend, cleave," Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan "to divide, separate").

 OED writes that the oldest English sense of the word now is restricted to theology and philosophy. From late 14c. in English as "book-learning," also "a particular branch of knowledge or of learning, systematized knowledge regarding a particular group of objects;" also "skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness." From c. 1400 as "experiential knowledge;" also "a skill resulting from training, handicraft; a trade."

 From late 14c. in the more specific sense of "collective human knowledge," especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning. The modern (restricted) sense of "body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a particular subject or speculation" is attested by 1725; in 17c.-18c. this commonly was philosophy .

 The sense of "non-arts studies" is attested from 1670s. The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek epistemē ) and methods for effecting practical results ( tekhnē ), but science sometimes is used for practical applications and art for applications of skill.

 The predominant modern use, "natural and physical science," generally restricted to study of the phenomena of the material universe and its laws, is by mid-19c.

 The men who founded modern science had two merits which are not necessarily found together: Immense patience in observation, and great boldness in framing hypotheses. The second of these merits had belonged to the earliest Greek philosophers; the first existed, to a considerable degree, in the later astronomers of antiquity. But no one among the ancients, except perhaps Aristarchus, possessed both merits, and no one in the Middle Ages possessed either. [Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy," 1945] 

 Science, since people must do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to "The Mismeasure of Man," 1981]

 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to science 

 bioscience (n.) 

 "life-science," 1957, from bio- "life" + science .

 conscious (adj.) 

 c. 1600, "knowing, privy to" (poetic), from Latin conscius "knowing, aware," from conscire "be (mutually) aware," from assimilated form of com "with," or "thoroughly" (see con- ) + scire "to know" (see science ). The Latin word probably is a loan-translation of Greek syneidos .

 The sense of "knowing or perceiving within oneself, sensible inwardly, aware" is from 1630s, perhaps a shortening of conscious to oneself (1620s). Also compare the Latin sense evolution in conscience . From 1650s as "aware (of a fact)." Sense of "active and awake, endowed with active mental faculties" is from 1837. Related: Consciously .

 life-science 
 nescience 
 nescient 
 neuroscience 
 nice 
 omniscience 
 omniscient 
 plebiscite 
 prescience 
 prescient 
 pseudo-science 
 science fiction 
 scienter 
 scientific 
 scientism 
 scientist 
 Scientology 
 scilicet 
 See All Related Words (23) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nice 

 late 13c., "foolish, ignorant, frivolous, senseless," from Old French nice (12c.) "careless, clumsy; weak; poor, needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish," from Latin nescius "ignorant, unaware," literally "not-knowing," from ne- "not" (from PIE root *ne- "not") + stem of scire "to 

 plebiscite 

 "direct vote of the people, an expression of the will or pleasure of the whole people in regard to some matter already decided upon," 1852 (originally in English in reference to France), from French plébiscite (1776 in modern sense, originally with reference to Switzerland), from

 pseudo-science 

 also pseudoscience, "a pretended or mistaken science," 1796 (the earliest reference is to alchemy), from pseudo- + science. The term pseudo-science is hybrid, and therefore objectionable. Pseudognosy would be better etymology, but the unlearned might be apt to association with i

 physics 

 1580s, "natural science, the science of the principles operative in organic nature," from physic in sense of "natural science...The current restricted sense of "science treating of properties of matter and energy" is from 1715....Before the rise of modern science, physics was usually defined as the science of that which is movable, or the science of...It was commonly made to include all natural science....

 civics 

 "the science of government, study of the rights and responsibilities of a citizen," 1885, in American Institute of Civics...Civics,' however unfamiliar the word, could be wisely applied with a broader significance than that attached to 'Political Science...,' as including not only the science of government, but political economy, and that part of social science which is related...

 physiology 

 natural philosophy" (a sense now obsolete), from French physiologie (16c.) or directly from Latin physiologia "natural science..., study of nature," from Greek physiologia "natural science, inquiry into nature," from physios "nature" (see physio-) +...Meaning "science of the normal function of living things" is attested from 1610s. Related: Physiologic; physiologist....The two words [ physics/physiology] had once the same wide meaning of natural science or natural philosophy....

 mathematic 

 "mathematical science," late 14c. as singular noun, mathematik (replaced since early 17c. by mathematics, q.v.), from Old...French mathematique and directly from Latin mathematica (plural), from Greek mathēmatike tekhnē "mathematical science,"...mathematics, scientific, astronomical; pertaining to learning, disposed to learn," from mathēma (genitive mathēmatos) "science...

 discipline 

 c. 1200, "penitential chastisement; punishment for the sake of correction," from Old French descepline "discipline, physical punishment; teaching; suffering; martyrdom" (11c., Modern French discipline) and directly from Latin disciplina "instruction given, teaching, learning, kno

 nutrition 

 1550s, "act or process by which organisms absorb their proper food into their systems and build it into living tissue," from Old French nutrition (14c.) and directly from Latin nutritionem (nominative nutritio) "a nourishing," noun of action from past-participle stem of nutrire "

 nose 

 Middle English nose, from Old English nosu "the nose of the human head, the special organ of breathing and smelling," from Proto-Germanic *nuso- (source also of Old Norse nös, Old Frisian nose, Dutch neus, Old High German nasa, German Nase), from PIE root *nas- "nose." Used of be

 Share science 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/science Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/science">Etymology of science by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of science. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/science Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of science," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/science. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of science." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/science. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of science." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/science (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near science 
 schwarmerei 
 Schwenkfeldian 
 sciamachy 
 sciatic 
 sciatica 
 science 
 science fiction 
 scienter 
 scientific 
 scientism 
 scientist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix