URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Latvia
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:52:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Latvia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Latvia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Latvia 

 Latvia 

 Baltic nation, first independent in 1918, named for its inhabitants, Latvian Latvji , whose ancient name is of unknown origin. In English, the people name was Lett . Parts of the modern state were known previously as Livonia (from Estonian liiv "sand") and Courland (from Curonians , the name of a Lettish people, which is of unknown origin). Related: Latvian .
 also from 1918 

 Entries linking to Latvia 

 Lett (n.) 

 1831, from German Lette , from Old High German liuti "people" (German Leute ), perhaps a German folk-etymologizing of the native name, Latvji (see Latvia ). Combining form Letto- . Related: Lettic (1840); Lettish (1794).

 Livonia 

 former name of the region around northern Latvia and southern Estonia, also a former Baltic province of Russia, Modern Latin, ultimately from Estonian liiv "sand." Related: Livonian (1650s). The native name in English was Livland .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Europe 

 from Latin Europa "Europe," from Greek Europe, which is of uncertain origin; as a geographic name first recorded in the Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier): "Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring per

 blacklist 

 also black-list, "list of persons who have incurred suspicion, earned punishment, or are for any reason deemed objectionable by the makers and users of the list," 1610s, from black (adj.), here indicative of disgrace, censure, punishment (a sense attested from 1590s, in black boo

 daughter 

 Middle English doughter, from Old English dohtor "female child considered with reference to her parents," from Proto-Germanic *dokhter, earlier *dhutēr (source also of Old Saxon dohtar, Old Norse dóttir, Old Frisian and Dutch dochter, German Tochter, Gothic dauhtar), from PIE *dh

 leader 

 Old English lædere "one who leads, one first or most prominent," agent noun from lædan "to guide, conduct" (see lead (v.)). Cognate with Old Frisian ledera, Dutch leider, Old High German leitari, German Leiter. As a title for the head of an authoritarian state, from 1918 (transla

 enterprise 

 early 15c., "an undertaking," formerly also enterprize, from Old French enterprise "an undertaking," noun use of fem. past participle of entreprendre "undertake, take in hand" (12c.), from entre- "between" (see entre-) + prendre "to take," contraction of prehendere "to catch hold

 attitude 

 1660s, "posture or position of a figure in a statue or painting," via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine "disposition, posture," also "aptness, promptitude," from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo; see aptitude, which is its doublet). Originally 17c. a tech

 offend 

 early 14c., offenden, "to disobey or sin against (a person, human or divine)," a sense now obsolete, from Old French ofendre "hit, attack, injure; sin against; antagonize, excite to anger" and directly from Latin offendere "to hit, thrust, or strike against," figuratively "to stu

 copacetic 

 "fine, excellent, going well," 1919, but it may have origins in 19c. U.S. Southern Black speech. Origin unknown; suspects include Latin, Yiddish (Hebrew kol b'seder), Italian, Louisiana French (coupe-sétique), and Native American. Among the linguists, none of these is considered 

 engage 

 early 15c., engagen, "to pledge" (something, as security for payment), from Old French engagier "bind (by promise or oath), pledge; pawn" (12c.), from phrase en gage "under pledge," from en "in" (see en- (1)) + gage "pledge," through Frankish from Proto-Germanic *wadiare "pledge"

 Platonic 

 1530s, "of or pertaining to Greek philosopher Plato" (429 B.C.E.-c. 347 B.C.E.), from Latin Platonicus, from Greek Platōnikos. The name is Greek Platōn, a nickname in reference to his broad shoulders (from platys "broad;" from PIE root *plat- "to spread"); his original name was A

 Share Latvia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Latvia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Latvia">Etymology of Latvia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Latvia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Latvia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Latvia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Latvia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Latvia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Latvia. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Latvia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Latvia (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Latvia 
 latter 
 latter-day 
 latterly 
 lattice 
 latticework 
 Latvia 
 laud 
 laudable 
 laudanum 
 laudation 
 laudative 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix