URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcove
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alcove - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alcove - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alcove 

 alcove (n.) 

 "vaulted recess," 1670s, from French alcôve (17c.), from Spanish alcoba , from Arabic al-qobbah "the vaulted chamber," from Semitic base q-b-b "to be bent, crooked, vaulted." The al- is the Arabic definite article, "the."
 also from 1670s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 bay 

 "inlet, recess in the shore of a sea or lake," c. 1400, from Old French baie, Late Latin baia (source of Spanish and Portuguese bahia, Italian baja), which is perhaps ultimately from Iberian (Celtic) bahia...."opening in a wall," especially a space between two columns, late 14c. 

 dinette 

 "small room or alcove set aside for meals," 1930, from dine + diminutive (or false French) suffix -ette....

 cubicle 

 mid-15c., "bedroom, bedchamber," from Latin cubiculum "bedroom," from cubare "to lie down," which is perhaps from a PIE *kub-, with cognates in Middle Welsh kyscu, Middle Cornish koska, Middle Breton cousquet "to sleep," but de Vaan regards the PIE origin of the Latin word as "un

 stall 

 [place in a stable for animals] Middle English stalle, from Old English steall "standing place, any fixed place or position, state; place where cattle are kept, stable; fishing ground," from Proto-Germanic *stalli- (source also of Old Norse stallr "pedestal for idols, altar; crib

 carrel 

 1590s, "a small study in a cloister," from Medieval Latin carula "enclosure in a cloister in which to sit and read," which is of unknown origin; perhaps from Latin corolla "little crown, garland," used in various senses of "ring" (for example, in a c. 1330 description of Stonehen

 niche 

 1610s, "shallow recess in a wall," from French niche "recess (for a dog), kennel" (14c.), perhaps from Italian nicchia "niche, nook," which is said to be from nicchio "seashell," itself said by Klein, Barnhart, etc. to be probably from Latin mitulus "mussel," but the change of -m

 recess 

 1530s, "act of receding or going back or away" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin recessus "a going back, retreat," from recessum, past participle of recedere "to go back, fall back; withdraw, depart, retire," from re- "back" (see re-) + cedere "to go" (from PIE root *ked- "to go

 atheist 

 1570s, "godless person, one who denies the existence of a supreme, intelligent being to whom moral obligation is due," from French athéiste (16c.), from Greek atheos "without god, denying the gods; abandoned of the gods; godless, ungodly," from a- "without" (see a- (3)) + theos "

 dust 

 "fine, dry particles of earth or other matter so light that they can be raised and carried by the wind," Old English dust, from Proto-Germanic *dunstaz (source also of Old High German tunst "storm, breath," German Dunst "mist, vapor," Danish dyst "milldust," Dutch duist), from PI

 bead 

 mid-14c., bede, "prayer bead," from Old English gebed "prayer," with intensive or collective prefix *ge- + Proto-Germanic *bidam "entreaty." This reconstructed word is also the source of Middle Dutch bede, Old High German beta, German bitte, Gothic bida "prayer, request," which a

 Share alcove 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcove Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcove">Etymology of alcove by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alcove. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcove Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alcove," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcove. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alcove." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcove. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alcove." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alcove (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alcove 
 alchemy 
 alcohol 
 alcoholic 
 alcoholism 
 Alcoran 
 alcove 
 Alcyone 
 Aldebaran 
 aldehyde 
 alder 
 alderman 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix