URL: https://www.cais-soas.com/CAIS/Languages/pahlavi/hamestagan.htm
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:34:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: HAMÊSTAGÂN - A Place Between Hell and Heaven | CAIS

HAMÊSTAGÂN - A Place Between Hell and Heaven | CAIS 

 CAIS 

 The Circle of Ancient Iranian Studies 

   Home 

 About CAIS 

 Articles 

 News Archive 

Announcements 

 Seminars 

Submission 

 Contact Us 

 Copyright 

 Disclaimer 

 Search 

 Follow us on 

 ANCIENT 
IRANIAN  MYTHOLOGY 

 HAMÊSTAGÂN 

 A 
Place Between Hell and Heaven 

 By: Professor 
Philippe Gignoux 

 ( Nper. Dûzax ) A word of uncertain etymology, used in 
Pahlavi literature to designate the intermediate stage between paradise and hell 
(see below). It is related to the Avestan h ə miiasaite , 
attested in Yasna 33.1, where, according to Helmut Humbach (I, p. 136, 
II, p. 93), it means "reckoned together," in a passage referring to 
the one "whose defects and virtues are counted together" ( ham.yâ.saiti ). 
Gert Klingenschmitt (1972) has shown that the expression misuuan- gâtu- 
in the Young Avesta should not be confused with hamêstagân , contrary to 
Mary Boyce ( Zoroastrianism I, p. 237), who, following Christian 
Bartholomae's definition as "place of mixture" ( AirWb , col. 
1168), thinks that they are equivalent. Gert Klingenschmitt translates the word 
as "raised together (to the same height)." David N. MacKenzie (p. 41) 
interprets it as "the neutral station between the earth and the sky," 
which should not be compared to "the Limbos," nor the purgatory of 
Christianity. 

 Situating this intermediate place between hell (q.v.) and 
paradise took place rather late and probably resulted from the queries of 
Mazdean theologians, who were concerned to allot a proper destiny to the soul of 
the deceased whose sins and good deeds were exactly equal when weighed on the 
scales of the god Rašnu. It is indicated in Ardâ Wirâz-nâmag 
(6.5) that this category of the dead remains in hamêstagân until the 
resurrection. They are subjected to the cold and heat of atmospheric movements, 
but that is their sole suffering. In the Dâdestân î Mênog î xrad 
(chapter 7), the Spirit of Wisdom is asked about the number of paradises, of hamêstagân s, 
and of hells. The answer is that there are three paradises and that hamêstagân 
 is situated between the earth and the sphere of the stars (the first 
paradise) and that the only adversary of those who go there is cold and heat. 
The Pahlavi Rivayat (ch. 65, 1-2) is more restrictive, because, 
according to it, even those people whose good deeds outweigh their mistakes but 
have not done the yašt , will also go to hamêstagân . According 
to the Dâdestân î dênîg (23.6), there are two hamêstagân s, 
 the hamêstagân of the good and the hamêstagân of the 
wicked, an emphasis surely dictated by strict adherence to dualism. It seems 
that Keršâsp/Garšâsb, whose heroic deeds are counterbalanced by grave 
mistakes, deserved to go to hamêstîg axwân , ( Dênkard 9.14.4) 
which is none but hamêstagân . In the Dênkard VIII (14.7-8), it 
is also called "the place of those whose good deeds and sins are 
equal" ( gyâg î hâwandân î kirbag ud winâh ), and, according to 
the Dênkard V (ch. 8), it is "an intermediate place" between 
the center of the earth and the sphere of the stars, combining elements of both. 
According to the Pahlavi Rivayat (ch. 31, c8), after having 
repented and confessed, Jam, coming from the north, became the king of hamê-stagân . 
Perhaps it is the same possible evolution of which speaks chapter 350 of the Dênkard 
III (de Menasce, p. 320), where it is said that one can go from hell to hamêstagân , 
and from there to paradise by changing one's moral conduct, no doubt in 
comparison with one's conduct in this world(?). 

 Bibliography 

 Raháim 'Afifi, AsâtÂir wa farhang-e Irân dar neveštahâ-ye 
 Pahlavi , Tehran, 1374 Š./1995, pp. 642-43.  

 Jaleh Amuzgar and Ahmad Tafazzoli, Le cinquieàme livre 
 du Dênkard , transcribed with commentaries, Studia Iranica, Cahier 23, 
 Paris, 2000.  

 Philippe Gignoux, "L'enfer et le paradis d'apreàs les 
 sources pehlevies," JA 256, 1968, pp. 219-45.  

 Idem, tr., Ardâ Wîrâz-nâmag as Le Livre d'Ardâ 
 Vîrâz , with transcription and commentary, Paris, 1984, pp. 52, 160.  

 Helmut Humbach, Joseph Elfenbein, and Prods Oktor Skjœrvø, 
 The Gâthâs of Zarathushtra and the Other Old Avestan Texts , 2 
 vols., Heidelberg, 1991.  

 Gert Klingenschmitt, "Avestisch h ə memiiâsaitê 
 und Pahlavi hmystk÷n," Münchener Studien zur 
 Sprachwissenschaft 30, 1972, pp. 79-92.  

 Herman Lommel, Die Religion Zarathustras nach dem Awesta 
 dargestelt , Hildesheim and New York, 1971, pp. 192-93, 214.  

 David N. MacKenzie, A Concise Pahlavi Dictionary , 
 London, 1971. Jean de Menasce, tr., Le Troisieàme livre du Dênkart , 
 Paris, 1973.  

 Zartošt Bahrâm Paždu, Ardâ Virâf-nâma-ye manzáum , 
 ed. Raháim 'Afifi, Mašhad, 1343 Š./1964, p. 39, v. 713.  

 Fereydun Vahman, facs. ed., transcribed and tr., Ardâ 
 Wirâz-nâmag as Ardâ Wîrâz Nâmag, The Iranian 'Divina Commedia' , 
 London, 1986, pp. 97, 98.  

 Edward William West, tr., Š , in idem, tr . 
 Pahlavi Texts , SBE 5, Delhi, 1970, pp. 293-94.  

 A. V. Williams, ed. with commentary, The Pahlavi Rivâyat 
 Accompanying the Dâdestân î Dênîg , 2 vols., Copenhagen, 1990 

 Source/Extracted 
 From:  Encyclopaedia Iranica  

 Please 
 note: CAIS 
 has the privilege to publish the above article, originating from the 
 above-mentioned source for 
 educational purposes only (Read Only) . This 
 article has been published by CAIS in accordance with the author(s) / source's 
 copyright-policy -- therefore, the ownership and copyright of this 
 page-file remains with the author(s) / source .  To be used for any other purposes, you must 
 directly obtain a  
 written permission from the copyright owner concerned .   (For 
 more information, please 
 refer to CAIS Copyright Policy ). 

 <META 
name="verify-v1" 
content="Kb4N15t1UVWj7aEXtMAMsR2vpb1WAyOpb5tfwsdcn1w=" /> 

 Persian 

 NOT Farsi 

 Encyclopaedia Iranica 

 The British Institute of 
 Persian Studies 

 The British Museum 

 The Royal 

 Asiatic Society 

 of Great Britain and Ireland 

Please use your " Back " button (top left) to return to the previous page 

 Copyright © 1998-2026 
 The Circle of Ancient Iranian Studies (CAIS)