URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adam
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:37:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Adam - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Adam - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Adam 

 Adam 

 masc. proper name, the biblical name of the first man, progenitor of the human race, from Hebrew adam "man," literally "(the one formed from the) ground" (Hebrew adamah "ground"); compare Latin homo "man," humanus "human," humus "earth, ground, soil." Compare homunculus .

 The name also was used to signify the evil inherent in human nature (as a consequence of Adam's fall), and other qualities (e.g. nakedness, gardening) associated with the biblical Adam. Adam's ale for "water" is colloquial from 1640s. To not know (someone) from Adam "not know him at all" is recorded by 1784 (with later elaborations up to from Adam's off ox , 1880). The pet form of the name in Middle English was Addy , hence Addison ; other old pet forms ( Adkin , Adcock ) also survive in surnames.

 Entries linking to Adam 

 homunculus (n.) 

 "tiny human being produced artificially," 1650s, from Latin homunculus (plural homunculi ), literally "little person," with -culus , diminutive suffix, + homo (genitive hominis ), which technically meant "male human," but it also was used with a sense "the human race, mankind;" while in Vulgar Latin it could be used as "one, anyone, they, people" and in logical and scholastic writing as "a human being, person."

 This is conjectured to be from PIE *(dh)ghomon- (source also of Old Irish duine , Welsh dyn , Breton den "man;" Old Prussian smunents , smunets "man;" Old Lithuanian žmuo "person," Lithuanian žmogus "man," žmones "people," Gothic guma , Old High German gomo , Old Norse gume , Old English guma "man"). The literal sense is "earthling," from PIE root *dhghem- "earth" (compare human (adj.)). Other Latin diminutives from homo included homullus , homuncio .

 Adamite (n.) 

 by 1630s as "human being, descendant of Adam" the Biblical first man, from Adam + -ite (1). The term was used from 1620s in reference to Christian perfectionist sects or groups that practice nudism (or, as a 1657 poem has it, "Cast off their petticoats and breeches"), recalling the state of Adam before the Fall. They existed in 2c. North Africa, 14c.-15c. central Europe, and 1840s America. Related: Adamic ; Adamitic ; Adamitism .

 pre-adamite (n.) 

 also preadamite , "one who lived before Adam," 1660s, from pre- + Adam + -ite . Originally in reference to the supposed progenitors of the Gentiles, based on a belief that the biblical Adam was the first parent only of the Jews and their kin.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ecstasy 

 late 14c., extasie "elation," from Old French estaise "ecstasy, rapture," from Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis "entrancement, astonishment, insanity; any displacement or removal from the proper place," in New Testament "a trance," from existanai "displace, put out of plac

 go 

 Old English gan "to advance, walk; depart, go away; happen, take place; conquer; observe, practice, exercise," from West Germanic *gaian (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian gan, Middle Dutch gaen, Dutch gaan, Old High German gan, German gehen), from PIE root *ghē- "to release,

 X 

 The entire entry for X in Johnson's dictionary (1756) is: "X is a letter, which, though found in Saxon words, begins no word in the English language." Most English words beginning in -x- are of Greek origin (see chi) or modern commercial coinages. East Anglian in 14c. showed a te

 Adam's apple 

 corresponding to Latin pomum Adami, perhaps an inexact translation of Hebrew tappuah haadam, literally "man's swelling," from ha-adam...reference is to the legend that a piece of the forbidden fruit (commonly believed to have been an apple) that Eve gave Adam...

 Cain 

 elder son of Adam and Eve, the first murderer and the first fratricide, from Hebrew Qayin, literally "created one," also...Why are Adam and Eve the oldest sugar planters? Because they were he first to raise Cain....

 ring 

 ["Adam Fitz-Adam," "The World," Edinburgh, 1776]...

 transgression 

 late 14c., from Old French transgression "transgression," particularly that relating to Adam and the Fall (12c.), from Late...

 not 

 negative particle, a word expressing negation, denial, refusal, or prohibition, mid-13c., unstressed variant of noht, naht "in no way" (see naught). As an interjection to negate what was said before or reveal it as sarcasm, it is attested by 1900, popularized 1989 by "Wayne's Wor

 know 

 Old English cnawan (class VII strong verb; past tense cneow, past participle cnawen), "perceive a thing to be identical with another," also "be able to distinguish" generally (tocnawan); "perceive or understand as a fact or truth" (opposed to believe); "know how (to do something)

 from 

 Old English fram, preposition denoting departure or movement away in time or space, from Proto-Germanic *fra "forward, away from" (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic fram "from, away," Old Norse fra "from," fram "forward"), from PIE *pro-mo-, suffixed form of *pro 

 Share Adam 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adam Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adam">Etymology of Adam by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Adam. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adam Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Adam," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adam. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Adam." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adam. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Adam." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Adam (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Adam 
 ad nauseam 
 ad valorem 
 Ada 
 adage 
 adagio 
 Adam 
 Adam's apple 
 adamant 
 adamantine 
 Adamite 
 adapt 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix