URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bourgeois
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:09:05Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bourgeois - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bourgeois - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bourgeois 

 bourgeois (adj.) 

 1560s, "of or pertaining to the French middle class," from French bourgeois , from Old French burgeis, borjois "town dweller" (as distinct from "peasant"), from borc "town, village," from Frankish *burg "city" (via Germanic from PIE root *bhergh- (2) "high," with derivatives referring to hills and hill-forts).

 The word was later extended to tradespeople or citizens of middle rank in other nations. The sense of "socially or aesthetically conventional; middle-class in manners or taste" is from 1764. Also (from the position of the upper class) "wanting in dignity or refinement, common, not aristocratic." As a noun, "citizen or freeman of a city," 1670s. In communist and socialist writing, "a capitalist, anyone deemed an exploiter of the proletariat" (1883).

 "
 Bourgeois ," I observed, "is an epithet which the riff-raff apply to what is respectable, and the aristocracy to what is decent." [Anthony Hope, "The Dolly Dialogues," 1907]

 "But after all," Fanning was saying, "it's better to be a good ordinary bourgeois than a bad ordinary bohemian, or a sham aristocrat, or a secondrate intellectual ...." [Aldous Huxley, "After the Fireworks," 1930]
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to bourgeois 

 bourgeoise (adj.) 

 proper French fem. of bourgeois (q.v.).

 burgeois 

 obsolete form of bourgeois .

 burgess 
 *bhergh- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 burgess 

 c. 1200, burgeis "citizen of a borough, inhabitant of a walled town," from Old French borjois (Modern French bourgeois), from Late Latin burgensis (see bourgeois). Applied from late 15c. to borough representatives in Parliament and used later in Virginia and Maryland to denote me

 burgher 

 1560s, "freeman of a burgh," from Middle Dutch burgher or German Bürger, from Middle High German burger, from Old High German burgari, literally "inhabitant of a fortress," from burg "fortress, citadel" (from PIE root *bhergh- (2) "high," with derivatives referring to hills and h

 bourgeoisie 

 body of freemen in a French town," hence, "the French middle class," also extended to that of other countries, from French bourgeois...

 petit 

 Replaced by petty in most usages, except in established forms such as petit bourgeois "conventional middle-class" (1832;...

 survivor 

 His mere survival calls for the coldness, the basic principle of bourgeois subjectivity, without which there could have been...

 merchant 

 "one engaged in the business of buying commercial commodities and selling them again for profit," early 13c., marchaunt (late 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French marchaunt "merchant, shopkeeper" (Old French marcheant, Modern French marchand), from Vulgar Latin *mercatantem (nom

 controller 

 late 14c., "official in charge of accounts in a king's household," from Anglo-French contrerolleour (late 13c.), Old French contrerelleor (Modern French contrôleur), from Medieval Latin contrarotulator, agent noun from *contra-rotulare (see control (v.)). Broader sense of "office

 accountant 

 mid-15c., "accounting officer, one who renders accounts," from Old French acontant (Modern French accomptant), from present participle of aconter "to count, enumerate" (see account (v.)). The sense of "professional maker of accounts" is recorded from 1530s. The word also was an a

 factor 

 early 15c., "commercial agent, deputy, one who buys or sells for another," from French facteur "agent, representative" (Old French factor, faitor "doer, author, creator"), from Latin factor "doer, maker, performer," in Medieval Latin, "agent," agent noun from past participle stem

 broker 

 mid-14c. (mid-13c. in surnames), "commercial agent, factor," also "an agent in sordid business," from Anglo-French brocour "small trader," from abrokur "retailer of wine, tapster;" perhaps from Portuguese alborcar "barter," but more likely from Old French brocheor, from brochier 

 Share bourgeois 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bourgeois Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bourgeois">Etymology of bourgeois by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bourgeois. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bourgeois Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bourgeois," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bourgeois. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bourgeois." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bourgeois. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bourgeois." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bourgeois (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bourgeois 
 bountiful 
 bounty 
 bouquet 
 bourbon 
 bourdon 
 bourgeois 
 bourgeoise 
 bourgeoisie 
 bourn 
 bourse 
 bouse 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close