URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mission
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:34:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mission - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mission - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mission 

 mission (n.) 

 1590s, "a sending abroad" (as an agent), originally of Jesuits, from Latin missionem (nominative missio ) "act of sending, a dispatching; a release, a setting at liberty; discharge from service, dismissal," noun of action from past-participle stem of mittere "to release, let go; send, throw," which de Vaan traces to a PIE *m(e)ith- "to exchange, remove," also source of Sanskrit methete , mimetha "to become hostile, quarrel," Gothic in-maidjan "to change;" he writes, "From original 'exchange', the meaning developed to 'give, bestow' ... and 'let go, send'."

 Meaning "an organized effort for the spread of religion or for enlightenment of a community" is by 1640s; that of "a missionary post or station" is by 1769. The diplomatic sense of "body of persons sent to a foreign land on commercial or political business" is from 1620s; in American English, sometimes "a foreign legation or embassy, the office of a foreign envoy" (1805).

 General sense of "that for which one is sent or commissioned" is from 1670s; meaning "that for which a person or thing is destined" (as in man on a mission , one's mission in life ) is by 1805. Meaning "dispatch of an aircraft on a military operation" (by 1929, American English) was extended to spacecraft flights (1962), hence, mission control "team on the ground responsible for directing a spacecraft and its crew" (1964). As a style of furniture, said to be imitative of furniture in the buildings of original Spanish missions to western North America, it is attested from 1900.
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to mission 

 admissible (adj.) 

 1610s, "allowable," from French admissible , from past-participle stem of Latin admittere "allow to enter, admit, give entrance," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + mittere "let go, send" (see mission ). The meaning "capable of being allowed entrance" is from 1775; the specific sense of "capable of being used in a legal decision or judicial investigation" is by 1849.

 admission (n.) 

 early 15c., "acceptance, reception, approval," from Latin admissionem (nominative admissio ) "a letting in," noun of action from past-participle stem of admittere "admit, give entrance; grant an audience," of acts, "let be done, allow, permit," from ad "to" (see ad- ) + mittere "let go, send" (see mission ).

 The meaning "an acknowledging" is from 1530s. The literal sense of "act of allowing to enter, admittance," is from 1620s. As short for admission price , by 1792.

 admit 
 commission 
 commit 
 compromise 
 demise 
 demiss 
 demission 
 demit 
 dismiss 
 emit 
 intermission 
 intermit 
 manumission 
 manumit 
 mass 
 mess 
 message 
 mise en scene 
 See All Related Words (33) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 admit 

 late 14c., admitten, "let in," from Latin admittere "admit, give entrance, allow to enter; grant an audience," of acts, "let be done, allow, permit," from ad "to" (see ad-) + mittere "let go, send" (see mission). The sense of "concede in argument as valid or true" is recorded by 

 commission 

 mid-14c., "authority entrusted to someone, delegated authority or power," from Old French commission and directly from Latin commissionem (nominative commissio) "act of committing," in Medieval Latin "delegation of business," noun of action from past participle stem of committere

 commit 

 late 14c., "to give in charge, entrust," from Latin committere "to unite, connect, combine; to bring together," from com "with, together" (see com-) + mittere "to release, let go; send, throw" (see mission). The evolution of the modern range of meanings in English is not entirely

 Alamo 

 nickname of Franciscan Mission San Antonio de Valeroin (begun 1718, dissolved 1793) in San Antonio, Texas; American Spanish...public walk with a row of trees on each side"); but the popular name seems to date from the period 1803-13, when the old mission...

 salvation 

 Salvation Army, with quasi-military organization and a mission to spark revival among the masses, is attested from 1878;...it was founded 1865 as the Christian Mission by Methodist evangelist the Rev....

 care package 

 The name was repackaged late 1940s to "Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere," to reflect its expanded mission...

 destruct 

 flight by a friendly agent; popularized 1966 in form self-destruct in the voice-over at the beginning of TV spy drama "Mission...

 embassy 

 1570s, "position of an ambassador," from French embassee "mission, charge, office of ambassador," Old French ambassee, from Italian ambasciata, from Old Provençal ambaisada "office of ambassador," from Gaulish *ambactos "dependant, vassal," literally "one going around" (from PIE 

 charge 

 early 13c., chargen, "to load, put a burden on or in; fill with something to be retained," from Old French chargier "to load, burden, weigh down," from Late Latin carricare "to load a wagon or cart," from Latin carrus "two-wheeled wagon" (see car). The senses of "entrust," "comma

 assignment 

 late 14c., "an order, request, directive," from Old French assignement "(legal) assignment (of dower, etc.)," from Late Latin assignamentum, noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin assignare/adsignare "to allot, assign, award" (see assign). The meaning "appointment to o

 Share mission 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mission Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mission">Etymology of mission by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mission. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mission Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mission," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mission. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mission." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mission. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mission." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mission (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mission 
 missal 
 missel 
 misshapen 
 missile 
 missing 
 mission 
 missionary 
 Mississippi 
 missive 
 Missouri 
 misspeak 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix