URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/stop
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:20:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stop - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Stop - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of stop 

 stop (v.) 

 Middle English stoppen , "obstruct (a passage) with a physical barrier; close up by filling, stuffing, or plugging," from Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian "to stop up, stifle"), a general West Germanic word, cognate with Old Saxon stuppon , West Frisian stopje , Middle Low German stoppen , Old High German stopfon , German stopfen "to plug, stop up," Old Low Frankish (be)stuppon "to stop (the ears)." Related: Stopped ; stopping .

 These words are said by many sources to be a Germanic borrowing of Vulgar Latin *stuppare "to stop or stuff with tow or oakum" (source of Italian stoppare , French étouper "to stop with tow"), from Latin stuppa "coarse part of flax, tow." In support of this theory, it is said that plugs made of tow were used from ancient times in the Rhine valley. Century Dictionary says this "suits phonetically," but "is on grounds of meaning somewhat doubtful." Barnhart, for one, proposes the whole Germanic group might be native, from a native base *stoppon .

 Senses having to do with "bring or come to a halt; discontinue or cause to cease from a course or action" developed in 15c. in English (but have been adopted in other languages). They extend from the notion of "prevent a flow by blocking a hole," and in some cases the sense might have been influenced by Latin stupere "be stunned, be stupefied."

 The transitive sense of "hinder from progress or procedure, put a stop to" (a thief, a clock, conception) is by late 14c., as is that of "hold (someone or something) back from a specified course or purpose." By c. 1400 stop could mean "shut (someone in something), confine, shut away from." By 1400 stop also was used as "prevent the continuance of" and by 1520s intransitively as "cease from forward motion, come to a stand."

 The transitive meaning "leave off, desist" is by 1520s; the intransitive meaning "check oneself" is 1680s. Of travelers, "make a halt or stay, tarry," by 1711. Of immaterial things, "discontinue, cease, come to an end," by 1733. In reference to the ears "to plug or cover," early 14c.

 stop (n.) 

 late 14c., "a plug;" mid-15c., "a cessation" from motion or action, from stop (v.). Of mechanisms of musical instruments for stopping a hole and changing the tone, from c. 1500. Especially in reference to organs, "a set of pipes producing the same sound," presumably in reference to the knob activating them. Opening one swells the sound, hence figurative phrase pull out the stops "make every possible effort" (1909).

 By 1560s as "a pause in speaking;" by 1590 as "mark to indicate a pause or stop in reading, a punctuation mark." The end of a sentence was a full stop , hence in punctuation "period," which, shortened to stop , was regularly printed in telegram messages at the end of sentences by 1936.

 By 1500 as a kind of thrust in fencing. From 1660s in phonetics, "alphabetic sound involving complete closure of the mouth-organs." By 1831 in photography. The meaning "a stopping place" is from 1889.

 Stop-sign , indicating traffic should stop, is by 1918. To put a stop to some activity "cause to cease, temporarily or permanently" is from 1670s (earlier give a stop to , 1580s).
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to stop 

 backstop (n.) 

 1819, "something at the back as a barrier;" see back (adj.) + stop (n.). In U.S. baseball, from 1889, "fence a short distance behind the catcher on a baseball team;" the figurative extension to the catcher himself is by 1890. The verb is attested from 1956 in the sense of "support." Related: Backstopped ; backstopping .

 door-stop (n.) 

 "device placed behind a door to prevent it from being opened too widely," 1859, from door + stop (n.).

 estop 
 non-stop 
 one-stop 
 shortstop 
 shtup 
 stifle 
 stop-and-go 
 stop-cock 
 stopgap 
 stopless 
 stop-light 
 stop-motion 
 stop-over 
 stoppage 
 stopper 
 stop-watch 
 stuff 
 truck-stop 
 See All Related Words (22) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stifle 

 late 14c., stuflen, "have difficulty breathing, choke, suffocate; drown, suffocate by drowning," a word of of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Old French estouffer "to stifle, smother" (Modern French étouffer), itself of uncertain etymology but perhaps from a Germanic 

 stopgap 

 also stop-gap, "that which fills a hiatus, an expedient in an emergency," 1680s, from stop (v.) + gap (n.); the notion probably being of something that plugs a leak, but it may be in part from gap (n.) in a specific military sense "opening or breach in defenses by which attack ma

 stopper 

 1530s, "one who or that which brings to a stop or stand," agent noun from stop (v.). It is attested by 1590s as "something that obstructs" a hole or passage; the specific sense of "glass plug for a bottle neck" is by 1660s. As a verb from 1760s, "close or secure with a stopp

 arrest 

 "to cause to stop," also "to detain legally," late 14c., from Old French arester "to stay, stop" (12c., Modern French arrêter...), from Vulgar Latin *arrestare "to stop, restrain" (source also of Italian arrestare, Spanish and Portuguese arrestar),...from ad "to" (see ad-) + Latin restare "to stop, remain behind, stay back," from re- "back" (see re-) + stare "to stand"...

 pause 

 rest in singing or speaking," from Old French pausee "a pause, interruption" (14c.) and directly from Latin pausa "a halt, stop..., cessation," from Greek pausis "stopping, ceasing," from pauein "to stop (trans.), hold back, arrest, to cause to cease,...Later also "a hesitation proceeding from doubt or uncertainty;" hence to give (one) pause "cause to stop or hesitate" (c....

 cease 

 c. 1300, cesen, "stop moving, acting, or speaking; come to an end," from Old French cesser "come to an end, stop, cease;...The transitive sense "put a stop to," now rare, is from late 14c. Related: Ceased; ceasing....

 stem 

 [hold back the flow of], early 14c., stemmen, "stop, halt, tarry" (intransitive, now obsolete); mid-14c...."stop the flow of, check, dam up" (liquid, speech, etc.); from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse stemma "to stop,..." from Proto-Germanic *stamjan (source also of Swedish stämma, Old Saxon stemmian, Middle Dutch stemon, German stemmen "stop...

 plug 

 1620s, "piece of wood or other substance, usually in the form of a peg or bottle-cork, used to stop a hole in a vessel," originally a seamen's term, probably from Dutch plug, Middle Dutch plugge "bung, stopper," related to Norwegian plugg, Danish pløg (the Scandinavian words also

 climax 

 1580s, in the rhetorical sense ("a chain of reasoning in graduating steps from weaker to stronger"), from Late Latin climax (genitive climacis), from Greek klimax "propositions rising in effectiveness," literally "ladder," from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- "to lean." Original

 contain 

 c. 1300, "restrain (someone), control (oneself), behave (in a certain way)," from Old French contein-, tonic stem of contenir, from Latin continere (transitive) "to hold together, enclose," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + tenere "to hold" (from PIE root

 Share stop 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/stop Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/stop">Etymology of stop by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of stop. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/stop Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of stop," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stop. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of stop." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/stop. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of stop." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/stop (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near stop 
 stooge 
 stool 
 stool pigeon 
 stool-ball 
 stoop 
 stop 
 stop-and-go 
 stop-cock 
 stope 
 stopgap 
 stopless 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close