URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/aniline
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:23:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Aniline - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Aniline - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of aniline 

 aniline (n.) 

 chemical base used in making colorful dyes, 1843, coined 1841 by German chemist Carl Julius Fritzsche and adopted by Hofmann, ultimately from Portuguese anil "the indigo shrub," from Arabic an-nil "the indigo," assimilated from al-nil (with Arabic definite article al- ), from Persian nila , ultimately from Sanskrit nili "indigo," from nilah "dark blue."

 With suffix -ine indicating "derived substance" (see -ine (1); also see -ine (2) for the later, more precise, use of the suffix in chemistry). Discovered in 1826 in indigo and at first called crystallin ; it became commercially important in 1856 when mauve dye was made from it. As an adjective from 1860.
 also from 1843 

 Entries linking to aniline 

 indigo (n.) 

 17c. spelling change of indico (1550s), "blue powder obtained from certain plants and used as a dye," from Spanish indico , Portuguese endego , and Dutch (via Portuguese) indigo , all from Latin indicum "indigo," from Greek indikon "blue dye from India," literally "Indian (substance)," neuter of indikos "Indian," from India (see India ).

 Replaced Middle English ynde (late 13c., from Old French inde "indigo; blue, violet" (13c.), from Latin indicum ). Earlier name in Mediterranean languages was annil , anil (see aniline ). As "the color of indigo" from 1620s. As the name of the violet-blue color of the spectrum, 1704 (Newton).

 sulfa 

 by 1951, short for sulfa drug (1942), the name for the group of drugs derived from sulfanilamide ("amide of sulfanilic acid "), which is attested by 1937. Sulfanilamide is so called because it is a sulphonic derivative of the dye-stuff aniline . For the first element, see sulfur . The spelling sulpha is standard in Britain.

 -ine 
 -ine 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 magenta 

 brilliant crimson aniline dye, also the color it produces, 1860, named in honor of the Battle of Magenta in Italy, where...

 red 

 Red is one of the most general color-names, and embraces colors ranging in hue from rose aniline to scarlet iodide of mercury...

 anime 

 c. 1985, Japanese for "animation," a word that seems to have arisen in Japan in the 1970s, said in Japanese sources to be an abbreviation of English animation. Manga (q.v.) is Japanese for "comic book, graphic novel," but anime largely are based on manga and until 1970s, anime we

 Maine 

 U.S. state, probably ultimately from French Maine, region in France (named for the river that runs through it, which has a name of Gaulish origin). The name was applied to that part of coastal North America by French explorers. The Maine law in late 19c.-early 20c. prohibitionist

 oil 

 late 12c., "olive oil," from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile "oil" (12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum "oil, olive oil" (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from Greek elaion "olive tree," from elaia (see olive). Nearly all the European 

 refrain 

 mid-14c., refreinen, transitive, "exercise control over, restrain; hold (someone or something) back from action," senses now obsolete, also "exercise control over" (thoughts, desires, feelings, vices, etc.); from Old French refraigner, refrener, refreiner "restrain, repress, keep

 presume 

 late 14c., presumen, "to take upon oneself, to take liberty," also "to take for granted, believe or accept upon probable evidence, presuppose," especially overconfidently, from Old French presumer (12c.) and directly from Latin praesumere "anticipate," in Late Latin, "assume," fr

 macabre 

 early 15c., in Macabrees daunce, daunce of Machabree, a kind of morality show or allegorical representation of death and his victims, from Old French (danse) Macabré "(dance) of Death" (1376), which is of uncertain origin. John Lydgate (c. 1370–c. 1451), the monk/poet who first t

 counsel 

 c. 1200, "advice or instruction given;" c. 1300, "mutual advising or interchange of opinions, consultation," from Old French counseil "advice, counsel; deliberation, thought" (10c.), from Latin consilium "plan, opinion," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + 

 translate 

 early 14c., "to remove from one place to another," also "to turn from one language to another," from Old French translater and directly from Latin translatus "carried over," serving as past participle of transferre "to bring over, carry over" (see transfer), from trans "across, b

 Share aniline 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/aniline Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/aniline">Etymology of aniline by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of aniline. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/aniline Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of aniline," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aniline. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of aniline." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/aniline. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of aniline." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/aniline (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near aniline 
 anhungered 
 anhydrous 
 ani 
 anigh 
 anil 
 aniline 
 anima 
 anima mundi 
 animadversion 
 animadvert 
 animal 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix