URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/James
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T22:54:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: James - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

James - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of James 

 James 

 masc. proper name, New Testament name of two of Christ's disciples, late 12c. Middle English vernacular form of Late Latin Jacomus (source of Old French James , Spanish Jaime , Italian Giacomo ), altered from Latin Jacobus (see Jacob ).

 The Welsh form was Iago , the Cornish Jago . James the Greater (July 25) was son of Zebedee and brother of St. John; James the Less (May 1) is obscure and scarcely mentioned in Scripture; he is said to have been called that for being shorter or younger than the other. Fictional British spy James Bond dates from 1953, created by British author Ian Fleming (1908-1964), who plausibly is said to have taken the name from that of U.S. ornithologist James Bond (1900-1989), an expert on Caribbean birds.
 also from late 12c. 

 Entries linking to James 

 Jacob 

 masc. proper name; Old Testament patriarch, son of Isaac and Rebecca and father of the founders of the twelve tribes, from Late Latin Iacobus , from Greek Iakobos , from Hebrew Ya'aqobh , literally "one that takes by the heel; a supplanter" (Genesis xxv.26), a derivative of 'aqebh "heel."

 In Spanish as Jago , Iago , also Diego ; with alterations as Italian Giacomo , James , and (contracted) Spanish Jaime . Old French Jacques is from a diminutive of Iacobus (see Jack ). The most popular name for boys born in the U.S. from 1999 through 2008. Jacob's ladder , in various transferred uses is attested by 1733, is from Genesis xxviii.12.

 Dago (n.) 

 1823, from Spanish Diego "James" (see James ). Said to have been originally American English slang for "one born of Spanish parents," especially in New Orleans; it was also used of Spanish or Portuguese sailors on English or American ships. By 1900 it had broadened to include non-sailors and shifted to mean chiefly "Italian." James the Greater is the patron saint of Spain, and Diego as generic for "a Spaniard" is attested in English from 1610s. Dago red "cheap Italian wine" is attested by 1899.

 Jacobean 
 Jemmy 
 Jimbo 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Jamesian 

 "of or in the mode of James," 1875 in reference to William James (1842-1910), U.S. philosopher and exponent of pragmatism...; 1905 in reference to his brother Henry James (1843-1916), U.S. expatriate novelist....seldom, yet it is all unforgettable. […] No man who has not lived on both sides of the Atlantic can well appraise Henry James...[Ezra Pound, from “Henry James,” Little Review, August 1918]...

 sirloin 

 is because the cut of beef was "knighted" by an English king for its superiority, a tale variously told of Henry VIII, James...English dictionary writer Charles] Richardson) by James I....Chronology makes short work of this statement; the word being in use long before James I was born....

 helpmeet 

 also help-meet, a ghost word from the 1611 "King James" translation of the Bible, in which it was at first a two-word noun-adjective...2004) suggests sustainer beside him as the closest possible in English to the original: The Hebrew 'ezer kenegdo (King James...

 fertile 

 Fertile Crescent (1914) was coined by U.S. archaeologist James H....

 cardigan 

 "close-fitting knitted woolen jacket or waistcoat," 1868, from James Thomas Brudenell (1797-1868), 7th Earl of Cardigan,...

 closed 

 closed shop "workplace in which only union members are employed" is from 1904; closed system first recorded 1896 in William James...

 hair-trigger 

 [Charles James, "Military Dictionary," London, 1802]...

 interrupt 

 c. 1400, "to interfere with a legal right," from Latin interruptus, past participle of interrumpere "break apart, break off, break through," from inter "between" (see inter-) + rumpere "to break" (see rupture (n.), and compare corrupt (adj.)). Meaning "to break into, break in upo

 jam 

 "to press tightly" (trans.), 1719; "to become wedged" (intrans.), 1706, of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of Middle English cham "to bite upon something; gnash the teeth" (late 14c.; see champ (v.)). Of a malfunction in the moving parts of machinery by 1851. Sense of "cause in

 choke 

 c. 1300, transitive, "to stop the breath by preventing air from entering the windpipe;" late 14c., "to make to suffocate, deprive of the power of drawing breath," of persons as well as swallowed objects; a shortening of acheken (c. 1200), from Old English aceocian "to choke, suff

 Share James 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/James Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/James">Etymology of James by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of James. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/James Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of James," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/James. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of James." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/James. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of James." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/James (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near James 
 jam 
 Jamaica 
 jamb 
 jambalaya 
 jamboree 
 James 
 Jamesian 
 jams 
 Jane 
 Janet 
 jangle 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix