URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/yard
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:24:16Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Yard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Yard - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of yard 

 yard (n.1) 

 "relatively small patch of ground around a dwelling," Middle English yerd , from Old English geard "fenced enclosure, garden, court; residence, house," from Proto-Germanic *gardan- , a word of uncertain origin; perhaps (Watkins) from PIE *ghor-to- , suffixed form of root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose," with derivatives meaning "enclosure."

 As enclosure in which any work or business is carried on, by late 14c. As "college campus enclosed by the main buildings," 1630s. As "prison enclosure for outdoor exercise," by 1777. In railway usage, "ground adjacent to a train station or terminus, used for switching or coupling trains," 1827. Yard sale , a commercial offering of miscellaneous second-hand items on the front lawn of a private house, is attested by 1965.

 Germanic cognates include Old Norse garðr "enclosure, garden, yard;" Old Frisian garda , Dutch gaard , Old High German garto , German Garten "garden;" Gothic gards "house," garda "stall" (n.).

 yard (n.2) 

 stadard unit of English long measure, Middle English yerd , from Old English gerd (Mercian), gierd (West Saxon) "rod, staff, pole, stick;" also a measure of length," from Proto-Germanic *gazdjo "stick, rod," reconstructed to be from PIE root *ghazdh-o- "rod, staff, pole" (source also of Latin hasta "shaft, staff").

 The nautical yard-arm , a long spar tapered at both ends and lashed to the mast of a ship from which certain sails are suspended, retains the otherwise obsolete original sense of "rod, staff." Yard in the nautical sense is by late 13c. (as in man the yards and like expressions).

 As a unit of length, in Anglo-Saxon times a land measure of roughly 5 meters (later called rod (n.), pole , or perch (n.1)). The yard measure of three feet is attested from late Old English. Especially by late 14c. as a standard measure for cloth (a rough equivalent for commercial measure was the ell of 45 inches, and the verge ).

 Middle English yerd (Old English gierd ) also was "yard-land, yard of land," a varying measure but often about 30 acres or a quarter of a hide.

 Germanic cognates include Old Saxon gerda , Old Frisian ierde , Dutch gard "rod;" Old High German garta , German gerte "switch, twig," Old Norse gaddr "spike, sting, nail."

 The slang meaning "one hundred dollars" is attested by 1926, American English. In Middle English and after, the word also was a euphemism for "penis" (as in "Love's Labour's Lost," V.ii.676).

 Entries linking to yard 

 ell (n.1) 

 unit of measure, Old English eln , originally "forearm, length of the arm" (as a measure, anywhere from a foot and a half to two feet), from PIE root *el- "elbow, forearm." The exact distance varied, in part depending on whose arm was used as the base and whether it was measured from the shoulder to the fingertip or the wrist: the Scottish ell was 37.2 inches, the Flemish 27 inches. Latin ulna also was a unit of linear measure, and compare cubit . The modern English unit of 45 inches seems to have been set in Tudor times.

 Whereas shee tooke an inche of liberty before, tooke an ell afterwardes [Humfrey Gifford, "A Posie of Gilloflowers," 1580].

 perch (n.1) 

 "rod or pole on which a bird alights and rests," late 13c., originally only "a pole, rod, stick, stake," from Old French perche "unit of linear measurement" (5.5 yards), also "measuring rod, pole, bar" used to measure this length (13c.), from Latin pertica "pole, long staff, measuring rod," which is related to Oscan perek "pole," Umbrian perkaf "twigs, rods." Meaning "a bar fixed horizontally for a hawk or tame bird to rest on" is attested from late 14c.; this led to the general sense of "any thing that any bird alights or rests on" (late 15c.). Figurative sense of "an elevated or secure position" is recorded from 1520s.

 rod 
 yard-arm 
 atelier 
 backyard 
 barnyard 
 boneyard 
 brickyard 
 churchyard 
 courtyard 
 dockyard 
 door-yard 
 G 
 gad 
 graveyard 
 halyard 
 hangar 
 Hildegard 
 lanyard 
 See All Related Words (34) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 barnyard 

 also barn-yard, 1510s, from barn + yard (n.1). Figurative of coarse or uncivilized behavior from 1920. The very speeches in which Jefferson and Lincoln spoke of their hope for the future are incomprehensible to most of the voters of that future, since the vocabulary and syntax o

 gad 

 mid-15c., gadden, "go quickly, hurry," of uncertain origin, perhaps from gad (n.) "sharp stick for driving oxen" on the notion of moving as animals do when being driven by a gad. There also was a Middle English gadeling (Old English gædeling) "kinsman, companion in arms; fellow, 

 hangar 

 1852, "shed for carriages," from French hangar "shed," which is of uncertain origin. Probably from hanghart (14c.), which is perhaps an alteration of Middle Dutch *ham-gaerd "enclosure near a house" [Barnhart, Watkins], from a Proto-Germanic compound *haimgardaz of the elements t

 antenna 

 1640s, "feeler or horn of an insect or other arthropod," from Latin antenna, antemna "sail yard," the long yard that sticks...

 Midgard 

 root *medhyo- "middle") + Proto-Germanic *gardoz "enclosure, tract" (from PIE root *gher- (1) "to grasp, enclose;" compare yard...

 Elmo 

 Elmo's Fire "corposant," name given by seamen to the brushes and jets of electric light seen on the tips of masts and yard-arms...

 commensurable 

 "having a common measure" (as a yard and a foot, both of which may be measured by inches), 1550s, from Late Latin commensurabilis...

 M 

 13th letter of the English alphabet, from Greek mu, from Semitic mem. It represents a very stable and unchanging sound in Indo-European, described by Johnson as "a kind of humming inward." The Roman symbol for 1,000; sometimes used in this sense in English 15c.-16c.; but in late 

 grand 

 late 14c., grant "large, big" (early 12c. in surnames), from Anglo-French graunt and directly from Old French grant, grand (10c., Modern French grand) "large, tall; grown-up; great, powerful, important; strict, severe; extensive; numerous," from Latin grandis "big, great; full, a

 cape 

 "sleeveless cloak, circular covering for the shoulders," a Spanish style, late 16c., from French cape, from Spanish capa, from Late Latin cappa "hooded cloak" (see cap (n.), which is a doublet). Late Old English had capa, cæppe "cloak with a hood," directly from Latin...."promont

 Share yard 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/yard Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/yard">Etymology of yard by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of yard. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/yard Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of yard," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/yard. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of yard." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/yard. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of yard." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/yard (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near yard 
 Yankee Doodle 
 yap 
 yappy 
 yar 
 Yarborough 
 yard 
 yardage 
 yard-arm 
 yardbird 
 yardstick 
 yare 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix