URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/barbarian
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:52:23Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Barbarian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Barbarian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Origin and history of barbarian 

 barbarian (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "foreign, of another nation or culture," from Medieval Latin barbarinus (see barbarian (n.)). The meaning "of or pertaining to savages, rude, uncivilized" is from 1590s.
 also from mid-14c. 

 barbarian (n.) 

 early 15c., in reference to classical history, "a non-Roman or non-Greek," earlier barbar (late 14c.) "non-Roman or non-Greek person; non-Christian; person speaking a language different from one's own," from Medieval Latin barbarinus (source of Old French barbarin "Berber, pagan, Saracen, barbarian"), from Latin barbarus "strange, foreign, barbarous," from Greek barbaros "foreign, strange; ignorant," from PIE root *barbar- echoic of unintelligible speech of foreigners (compare Sanskrit barbara- "stammering," also "non-Aryan," Latin balbus "stammering," Czech blblati "to stammer").

 Greek barbaroi (plural noun) meant "all that are not Greek," but especially the Medes and Persians; originally it was not entirely pejorative, but its sense became moreso after the Persian wars. The Romans (technically themselves barbaroi ) took up the word and applied it to tribes or nations which had no Greek or Roman accomplishments.

 Also in Middle English (c. 1400) "native of the Barbary coast;" meaning "rude, wild person" is from 1610s. Occasionally in 19c. English distinguished from savage (n.) as being a step closer to civilization. Sometimes, in reference to Renaissance Italy, "a non-Italian." It also was used to translate the usual Chinese word of contempt for foreigners.

 Barbarian applies to whatever pertains to the life of an uncivilized people, without special reference to its moral aspects. 
 Barbarous properly expresses the bad side of barbarian life and character, especially its inhumanity or cruelty: as, a 
 barbarous act. 
 Barbaric expresses the characteristic love of barbarians for adornment, magnificence, noise, etc., but it is not commonly applied to persons: it implies the lack of cultivated taste .... [Century Dictionary, 1889]
 also from early 15c. 

 Entries linking to barbarian 

 Barbara 

 fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of barbarus "strange, foreign, barbarous," from Greek barbaros (see barbarian (n.)). For women, unlike men, the concept of "alien" presumably could be felt as "exotic" and thus make an appealing name. Popularized as a Christian name by the legend of Saint Barbara, early 4c. martyr, whose cult flourished from 7c. The common Middle English form was Barbary . A top 10 name in popularity for girls born in the U.S. between 1927 and 1958.

 barbaric (adj.) 

 late 15c., "uncultured, uncivilized, unpolished," from French barbarique (15c.), from Latin barbaricus "foreign, strange, outlandish," from Greek barbarikos "like a foreigner," from barbaros "foreign, rude" (see barbarian (n.)). The meaning "pertaining to or characteristic of barbarians" is from 1660s. Related: Barbarically .

 barbarism 
 barbarity 
 barbarize 
 barbarous 
 Barbary 
 booby 
 gook 
 rhubarb 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 More to explore

 barbarism 

 mid-15c., "uncivilized or rude nature, ignorance or want of culture," from French barbarisme "barbarism of language" (13c.), from Latin barbarismus, from Greek barbarismos "foreign speech," from barbarizein "to do as a foreigner does," from barbaros (see barbarian (n.)).  On

 rhubarb 

 late 14c., rubarbe, medicinal root-stock of a plant native to China and Tibet, from Old French rubarbe and directly from Medieval Latin reubarbarum, from Greek rha barbaron "foreign rhubarb," from rha "rhubarb," perhaps ultimately from a source akin to Persian rewend "rhubarb" (a

 peasant 

 "rural person of inferior rank or condition," usually engaged in agricultural labor, early 15c., paisaunt, from Anglo-French paisant (early 14c.), Old French paisant, paisent "local inhabitant" (12c., Modern French paysan), earlier paisenc, from pais "country, region" (Modern Fre

 Roman holiday 

 to holidays for gladiatorial combat; the expression seems to be entirely traceable to an oft-quoted passage on a dying barbarian...

 ecumenical 

 world (as known to the ancient Greeks); the Greeks and their neighbors considered as developed human society (as opposed to barbarian...

 Arian 

 condemned at Nice, 325, but the dissension was widespread and split the Church for about a century during the crucial time of barbarian...

 archer 

 an unmanly tactic, and the Romans seem to have had little appreciation for it until their later encounters with mounted barbarian...

 wild 

 Old English wilde "in the natural state, uncultivated, untamed, undomesticated, uncontrolled," from Proto-Germanic *wildia- (source also of Old Saxon wildi, Old Norse villr, Old Frisian wilde, Dutch wild, Old High German wildi, German wild, Gothic wilþeis "wild," German Wild (n.)

 churl 

 Old English ceorl "peasant, one of the lowest class of freemen, man without rank," from Proto-Germanic *kerlaz, *karlaz (source also of Old Frisian zerl "man, fellow," Middle Low German kerle, Dutch kerel "freeman of low degree," German Kerl "man, husband," Old Norse karl "old ma

 lurch 

 "sudden pitch to one side," 1784, from earlier lee-larches (1765), a nautical term for "the sudden roll which a ship makes to lee-ward in a high sea, when a large wave strikes her, and bears her weather-side violently up, which depresses the other in proportion" ["Complete Dictio

 Share barbarian 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/barbarian Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/barbarian">Etymology of barbarian by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of barbarian. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/barbarian Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of barbarian," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/barbarian. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of barbarian." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/barbarian. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of barbarian." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/barbarian (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near barbarian 
 Bar Mitzvah 
 Barabbas 
 barb 
 Barbados 
 Barbara 
 barbarian 
 barbaric 
 barbarism 
 barbarity 
 barbarize 
 barbarous 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix