URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cream
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:06:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cream - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cream - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cream 

 cream (n.) 

 early 14c., creyme , "the rich and buttery part of milk," from Old French cresme, craime, creme "chrism, holy oil" (13c., Modern French crème ). This word is a blend of Late Latin chrisma "ointment" (from Greek khrisma "unguent;" from PIE root *ghrei- "to rub") and Late Latin cramum "cream," which is of uncertain origin, perhaps from Gaulish. The French word replaced Old English ream; it was re-borrowed 19c. as creme .

 From early 15c. as "dish or confection made from or resembling cream." The figurative sense of "most excellent element or part" is from 1580s. It is attested from 1660s as "any part that separates from the rest and rises to the surface" and also in its application to substances resembling cream.

 Cream-cheese is from 1580s. Cream-soda is attested by 1854. Cream-colored (also cream-coloured ) "having the pale, yellowish-white color of cream," is from 1707. Cold cream , a cosmetic, is by 1709, translating Latin ceratum refrigerans (see cold (adj.)).
 also from early 14c. 

 cream (v.) 

 mid-15c., "to foam, to froth," from cream (n.). From 1610s in figurative sense of "remove the best part of." Meaning "to beat, thrash, wreck" is 1929, U.S. slang; the exact sense connection is unclear. There was a slang cream (v.) in the 1920s that meant "cheat, deceive, especially by guile." Related: Creamed ; creaming .
 also from mid-15c. 

 Entries linking to cream 

 cold (adj.) 

 Old English cald (Anglian), ceald (West Saxon) "producing strongly the sensation which results when the temperature of the skin is lowered," also "having a low temperature," from Proto-Germanic *kaldjon (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon kald , Old High German and German kalt , Old Norse kaldr , Gothic kalds "cold"), from PIE root *gel- "cold; to freeze" (source also of Latin gelare "to freeze," gelu "frost," glacies "ice").

 The sense of "unmoved by strong feeling" was in late Old English. The meaning "having a relatively low temperature, not heated" is from mid-13c. The sense of "dead" is from mid-14c.

 The meaning "not strong, affecting the senses only slightly" (in reference to scent or trails in hunting or tracking) is from 1590s; hence the extended sense in seeking-games, "distant from the object of search" (1864).

 Cold front in weather is from 1921. Cold sweat is by 1630s. Cold-call (v.) in the sales pitch sense is recorded by 1964 (implied in cold-calling ; the noun cold call is by 1953; cold-selling is from 1947). Cold comfort (by 1650s) is "little comfort, something which offers little cheer." To throw cold water on in the figurative sense of "discourage by unexpected reluctance or indifference" is from 1808.

 Cold cream , a cosmetic, is by 1709, translating Latin ceratum refrigerans , a preparation of oil, wax and water said to have been invented by 2c. Greek physician Galen. The name refers to the ancient theory of disease, where imbalance of "hot" and "cold" humors were believed to cause illness. The illness could be treated by remedies of the opposite nature, which however might not be "hot" or "cold" in a literal sense.

 Japanese has two words for "cold:" samui for coldness in the atmosphere or environment; tsumetai for things which are cold to touch, and also in the figurative sense, with reference to personalities, behaviors, etc.

 creme (n.) 

 French crème (see cream (n.)), used in various names of syrupy liqueurs in English from 1821, in phrases in English cookery books from 1845. For crème brûlée , see brulee . Used of cosmetic creams with French names from 1822, of English cosmetic names from 1857. 

 creamer 
 creamery 
 creampuff 
 creamy 
 creme de la creme 
 ice-cream 
 *ghrei- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pick 

 early 13c., picken "to peck;" c. 1300, piken "to work with a pick, to dig up," probably representing a fusion of Old English *pician "to prick," (implied by picung "a piercing, pricking," an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata) with Old Norse pikka "to prick, peck," both from a Germanic 

 emollient 

 "softening, making soft or supple," 1640s, from French émollient (16c.), from Latin emollientem (nominative emolliens), present participle of emollire "to make soft, soften," from assimilated form of ex "out" (see ex-) + mollire "soften," from mollis "soft" (from PIE root *mel- (

 skim 

 early 15c. skimmen, "lift the scum from by a sliding motion, clear (a liquid) from matter floating on the surface" (the agent noun skimmer, for the utensil used, is attested from late 14c.), from Old French escumer "remove scum," from escume (Modern French écume) "scum," from a G

 Neapolitan 

 As a type of ice cream, from 1871; originally meaning both "ice cream of three layers and flavors" and "ice cream made with...eggs added to the cream before freezing."...

 float 

 In the latter case it would be known as a "sherbet float" or an "ice-cream float."...By a "float ice cream soda" is meant a soda with the ice cream floating on top, thus making a most inviting appearance and...impressing the customer that you are liberal with your ice cream, when you are not really giving any more than the fellow...that mixes his ice cream "out of sight."...

 palomino 

 "horse with a light brown or cream coat and a pale mane and tail," 1899, (earlier palomino horse), from American Spanish...palomino "cream-colored horse," from Spanish, literally "young dove," perhaps from Italian palombino "dove-colored," from...

 wolfram 

 It looks like "wolf-cream" (from rahm "cream"), but the second element might be Middle High German ram (German Rahm) "dirty...

 apply 

 late 14c., "join or combine (with); attach (to something), adhere," from Old French aploiier "apply, use, attach" (12c., Modern French appliquer), from Latin applicare "attach to, join, connect;" figuratively, "devote (oneself) to, give attention," from ad "to" (see ad-) + plicar

 modify 

 late 14c., modifien, "alter, amend, adjust, change the properties, form, or function of;" also "set limits, keep within the bounds of reason; choose a middle course," from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare "to limit, measure off, restrain," from modus "measure, ma

 crush 

 mid-14c., "smash, shatter, break into fragments or small particles; force down and bruise by heavy weight," also figuratively, "overpower, subdue," from Old French cruissir (Modern French écraser), variant of croissir "to gnash (teeth), crash, smash, break," which is perhaps from

 Share cream 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cream Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cream">Etymology of cream by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cream. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cream Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cream," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cream. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cream." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cream. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cream." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cream (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cream 
 craze 
 craziness 
 crazy 
 creak 
 creaky 
 cream 
 creamer 
 creamery 
 creampuff 
 Creamsicle 
 creamy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix