URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/buss
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:45:04Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Buss - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Buss - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of buss 

 buss (n.) 

 "a kiss," 1560s; probably of imitative origin, as are Welsh and Gaelic bus "kiss, lip," French baiser "kiss" (12c., from Latin basiare ), Spanish buz , German dialectal Buss , Turkish bus , Persian busa , Hindi bosa .
 also from 1560s 

 buss (v.) 

 "to kiss," 1570s, from buss (n.). Related: Bussed ; bussing .

 Kissing and bussing differ both in this,

 We busse our wantons, but our wives we kisse.

 [Robert Herrick, "Hesperides," 1648]
 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to buss 

 bussing (n.) 

 "kissing," 1570s, verbal noun from buss (v.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 kiss 

 Old English cyssan "to touch with the lips" (in respect, reverence, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *kussjan (source also of Old Saxon kussian, Old Norse kyssa, Old Frisian kessa, Middle Dutch cussen, Dutch, Old High German kussen, German küssen, Norwegian and Danish kysse, Swedish ky

 jitney 

 "Skiddo," she cried, "you stingy cuss," "You're looking for a jitney buss."...

 omnibus 

 1829, "long-bodied, four-wheeled public vehicle with seats for passengers," from French (voiture) omnibus "(carriage) for all, common (conveyance)," from Latin omnibus "for all," dative plural of omnis "all" (see omni-). Introduced by Jacques Lafitte in Paris in 1819 or '20, used

 smack 

 "a taste, flavor, savor" especially a slight flavor that suggests something, Middle English smakke, from Old English smæc "taste; scent, odor," from Proto-Germanic *smakka- (source also of Old Frisian smek, Middle Dutch smæck, Dutch smaak, Old High German smac, German Geschmack, 

 window 

 c. 1200, literally "wind eye," from Old Norse vindauga, from vindr "wind" (see wind (n.1)) + auga "eye" (from PIE root *okw- "to see"). Replaced Old English eagþyrl, literally "eye-hole," and eagduru, literally "eye-door." Compare Old Frisian andern "window," literally "breath-do

 dire 

 "causing or attended by great fear, dreadful, awful," 1560s, from Latin dirus "fearful, awful, boding ill," a religious term, which is of unknown origin. Apparently a dialect word in Latin; perhaps from Oscan and Umbrian and perhaps cognate with Greek deinos "terrible," Sanskrit 

 ride 

 Middle English riden, from Old English ridan "sit or be carried on" (as on horseback), "move forward; rock; float, sail" (class I strong verb; past tense rad, past participle riden), from Proto-Germanic *ridan (source also of Old Norse riða, Old Saxon ridan, Old Frisian rida "to 

 car 

 c. 1300, "wheeled vehicle," from Anglo-French carre, Old North French carre, from Vulgar Latin *carra, related to Latin carrum, carrus (plural carra), originally "two-wheeled Celtic war chariot," from Gaulish karros, a Celtic word (compare Old Irish and Welsh carr "cart, wagon," 

 arc 

 late 14c., "part of a curved line," originally in reference to the sun's apparent motion across the sky, from Old French arc "bow, arch, vault" (12c.), from Latin arcus "a bow, arch," from Proto-Italic *arkwo- "bow." This has Germanic cognates in Gothic arhvazna, Old English earh

 Share buss 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/buss Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/buss">Etymology of buss by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of buss. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/buss Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of buss," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/buss. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of buss." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/buss. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of buss." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/buss (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near buss 
 busing 
 busk 
 busker 
 buskin 
 busking 
 buss 
 bussing 
 bust 
 bustard 
 busted 
 buster 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix