URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/angel
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:38:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Angel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Angel - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of angel 

 angel (n.) 

 "one of a class of spiritual beings, attendants and messengers of God," a c. 1300 fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g- ) and Old French angele . Both are from Late Latin angelus , from Greek angelos , literally "messenger, envoy, one that announces," in the New Testament "divine messenger," which is possibly related to angaros "mounted courier," both from an unknown Oriental word.

 Watkins (2000) compared Sanskrit ajira- "swift," but Beekes reports this "has now been abandoned." Beekes compares angelos to Greek angaros "Persian mounted carrier," for which an Iranian origin has been sought. Klein suggests Semitic sources.

 The Greek word was used in Scriptural translations for Hebrew mal'akh (yehowah) "messenger (of Jehovah)," from base l-'-k "to send." An Old English word for it was aerendgast , literally "errand-spirit."

 Of persons, "one who is loving, gracious, or lovely," by 1590s. The medieval English gold coin (a new issue of the noble , first struck 1465 by Edward IV) was so called for the image of archangel Michael slaying the dragon, which was stamped on it. It was the particular coin given to patients who had been "touched" for the King's Evil and likely was the coin most punned and played upon by the Elizabethan dramatists.

 Angel food cake is attested by 1881; angel dust "phencyclidine" is from 1968.

 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to angel 

 Angela 

 fem. proper name, Latin fem. of angelus "angel" (see angel ).

 angel-fish (n.) 

 also angelfish , 1660s, from angel + fish (n.); so called for its wing-like pectoral fins.

 angelic 
 angelolatry 
 archangel 
 evangelist 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 evangelist 

 late 12c., "Matthew, Mark, Luke or John," from Old French evangelist and directly from Late Latin evangelista, from Greek euangelistes "preacher of the gospel," literally "bringer of good news," from euangelizesthai "bring good news," from eu- "good" (see eu-) + angellein "announ

 saint 

 early 12c. as an adjective, seinte, "holy, divinely inspired, worthy of worship," used before proper names (Sainte Marian Magdalene, etc.), from Old French saint, seinte "holy, pious, devout," from Latin sanctus "holy, consecrated," past participle of sancire "consecrate" (see sa

 angle 

 "to fish with a hook," mid-15c., from Old English angel (n.)...Compare Old English angul, Old Norse öngull, Old High German angul, German Angel "fishhook."...

 errand 

 In Old English, ærendgast was "angel," ærendraca was "ambassador."...

 annunciation 

 The Church festival (March 25) commemorates the visit of the angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, foretelling the incarnation...

 sprite 

 It is attested by mid-14c. specifically as "immaterial being; angel, demon, elf, fairy; apparition, ghost," also of persons...

 Ariel 

 Heywood and Milton is the name of an angel, in Shakespeare of "an Ayrie spirit"; in Astron....

 phrase 

 1520s, "manner or style of expression," also "brief expression with some unity; two or more words expressing what is practically a single notion," from Late Latin phrasis "diction," from Greek phrasis "speech, way of speaking, enunciation, phraseology," from phrazein "to tell, de

 seraph 

 in reference to the winged, human-like celestial creatures that hovered above God's throne in Isaiah's dream, 1667, a word first used by Milton (probably on analogy of cherub/cherubim), a back-formed singular from Seraphim (attested from Old English). An earlier singular in Engli

 wing 

 late 12c., wenge, "forelimb fitted for flight of a bird or bat," also the part of some insects resembling a wing in form or function, from Old Norse vængr "wing of a bird, aisle, etc." (cognate with Danish and Swedish vinge "wing"), of unknown origin, perhaps from a Proto-Germani

 Share angel 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/angel Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/angel">Etymology of angel by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of angel. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/angel Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of angel," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/angel. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of angel." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/angel. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of angel." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/angel (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near angel 
 aneurism 
 aneurysm 
 anew 
 anext 
 anfractuous 
 angel 
 Angela 
 Angeleno 
 angel-fish 
 angelic 
 Angelica 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix