URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitrogen
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:35:26Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nitrogen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nitrogen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nitrogen 

 nitrogen (n.) 

 colorless, odorless gaseous element, 1794, from French nitrogène , coined 1790 by French chemist Jean Antoine Chaptal (1756-1832), from Greek nitron "sodium carbonate" (see nitro- ) + French gène "producing," from Greek -gen "giving birth to" (see -gen ). The gas was identified in part by analysis of nitre. An earlier name for it was mephitic air (1772), and Lavoisier called it azote (see azo- ). It forms about 78% of the weight of the Earth's atmosphere. Related: Nitrogenic; nitrogenous .
 also from 1794 

 Entries linking to nitrogen 

 azo- 

 before vowels az- , word-forming element denoting the presence of nitrogen, used from late 19c. as combining form of azote (1791), the old term for "nitrogen," from Greek a- "not, without" (see a- (3)) + zoion "a living being" (from PIE root *gwei- "to live"). Azote was coined in French by Lavoisier & de Morveau because living things cannot survive in the pure gas.

 -gen 

 word-forming element technically meaning "something produced," but mainly, in modern use, "thing that produces or causes," from French -gène (18c.), from Greek -genes "born of, produced by," which is from the same source as genos "birth," genea "race, family," from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget," with derivatives referring to procreation and familial and tribal groups. First used in late 18th century French chemistry (see oxygen ), it probably involves a misunderstanding of -genes , as though it meant "that which produces."

 nitro- 

 before vowels nitr- , word-forming element used scientifically and indicating nitrogen, nitrate, or nitric acid; from Greek nitron (see nitre ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 N 

 fourteenth letter of the English alphabet; in chemistry, the symbol for nitrogen. In late Middle English writing, a and an commonly were joined to the following noun, if that word began with a vowel, which caused confusion over how such words ought to be divided when written sepa

 cyan- 

 word-forming element used in science for the carbon-nitrogen compound radical, from a Latinized form of Greek kyanos "dark...

 nitrous 

 The more precise use in chemistry (designating a compound in which the nitrogen has a lower valence than the corresponding...

 air 

 c. 1300, "invisible gases that surround the earth," from Old French air "atmosphere, breeze, weather" (12c.), from Latin aer "air, lower atmosphere, sky," from Greek aēr (genitive aeros) "mist, haze, clouds," later "atmosphere" (perhaps related to aenai "to blow, breathe"), which

 gas 

 1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos "empty space" (see chaos). The sound of Dutch "g" is roughly equivalent to that of Greek "kh." First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644), probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of "pro

 sag 

 late 14c., saggen, "hang down unevenly," also in Middle English "sink, be mired, sink down," possibly from a Scandinavian source related to Old Norse sokkva "to sink," or from Middle Low German sacken "to settle, sink" (as dregs in wine), from denasalized derivative of Proto-Germ

 element 

 c. 1300, "earth, air, fire, or water; one of the four things regarded by the ancients as the constituents of all things," from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementum "rudiment, first principle, matter in its most basic form" (translating Greek stoikheion), origin and ori

 atomic 

 "pertaining to atoms," 1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic. Atomic number is attested from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy is recorded by 1906 in the modern sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903). March

 number 

 c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl

 pardon 

 c. 1300, pardoun, "papal indulgence, forgiveness of sins or wrongdoing," from Old French pardon, from pardoner "to grant; forgive" (11c., Modern French pardonner), "to grant, forgive," and directly from Medieval Latin perdonum, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare "to give wholeheartedly

 Share nitrogen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitrogen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitrogen">Etymology of nitrogen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nitrogen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitrogen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nitrogen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitrogen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nitrogen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitrogen. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nitrogen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nitrogen (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nitrogen 
 nitre 
 nitric 
 nitrification 
 nitro 
 nitro- 
 nitrogen 
 nitroglycerine 
 nitrous 
 nitty 
 nitty-gritty 
 nitwit 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix