URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chauffeur
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:14:55Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chauffeur - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chauffeur - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chauffeur 

 chauffeur (n.) 

 1896, "a motorist," from French chauffeur , literally "stoker," operator of a steam engine, French nickname for early motorists, from chauffer "to heat," from Old French chaufer "to heat, warm up; to become hot" (see chafe ). The first motor-cars were steam-driven. The sense of "professional or paid driver of a private motor car" is from 1902.

 The '95 Duryea wagon, which won the Chicago contest last Fall, was exhibited at the Detroit Horse Show last week. Charles B. King, treasurer of the American Motor League, acted as "chauffeur," as the French say. [The Horseless Age, April 1896]

 In early 20c. British English shover  was a jocular nativized form of the word.
 also from 1896 

 chauffeur (v.) 

 "convey by car, drive as a chauffeur," 1902, from chauffeur (n.). Related: Chauffeured ; chauffeuring .
 also from 1902 

 Entries linking to chauffeur 

 chafe (v.) 

 c. 1300, chaufen , "be provoked, grow or be excited;" late 14c. in literal sense of "to make warm, to heat" (also intransitive, "to grow warm or hot"), especially (early 15c.) "to warm by rubbing, excite heat by friction," from Old French chaufer "heat, warm up, become warm" (12c., Modern French chauffer ), from Vulgar Latin *calefare , from Latin calefacere "to make hot, make warm," from calere "be warm" (from PIE root *kele- (1) "warm") + facere "to make, do" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, put").

 From 1520s as "abrade the skin by rubbing." Figurative senses from late 14c. include now-obsolete "kindle (joy), inspire, make passionate" as well as "provoke, vex, anger." Related: Chafed ; chafing . Chafing-dish is from late 15c.

 ch 

 digraph used in Old French for the "tsh" sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French "tsha." This was introduced to English after the Norman Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste , charity , chief (adj.). Under French influence, -ch- also was inserted into Anglo-Saxon words that had the same sound (such as bleach , chest , church ) which in Old English still was written with a simple -c- , and into those that had formerly been spelled with a -c- and pronounced "k" such as chin and much .

 As French evolved, the "t" sound dropped out of -ch- , so in later loan-words from French - ch- has only the sound "sh-" ( chauffeur , machine (n.), chivalry , etc.).

 It turns up as well in words from classical languages ( chaos , echo , etc.). Most uses of -ch- in Roman Latin were in words from Greek, which in Greek would be pronounced correctly as /k/ + /h/, as in modern blockhead , but most Romans would have said merely /k/, and this was the regular pronunciation in English. Before c. 1500 such words were regularly spelled with a -c- ( Crist, cronicle, scoole ), but Modern English has preserved or restored the etymological spelling in most of them ( chemical , chorus , monarch ). 

 Sometimes ch- is written to keep -c- hard before a front vowel, as still in modern Italian. In some languages (Welsh, Spanish, Czech) ch- can be treated as a separate letter and words in it are alphabetized after -c- (or, in Czech and Slovak, after -h- ). The sound also is heard in words from more distant languages (as in cheetah , chintz ), and the digraph also is used to represent the sound in Scottish loch .

 chauffer 
 *dhe- 
 *kele- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 drive 

 Old English drifan "to compel or urge to move, impel in some direction or manner; to hunt (deer), pursue; to rush against" (class I strong verb; past tense draf, past participle drifen), from Proto-Germanic *dreibanan (source also of Old Frisian driva "I lead, impel, drive (away)

 driver 

 "one who or that which drives" in various senses, late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname); agent noun from drive (v.). Earliest sense is "herdsman, drover, one who drives livestock." From mid-15c. as "one who drives a vehicle." In U.S., "overseer of a gang of slaves," by 1796. Meaning

 around 

 c. 1300, "in circumference, in a circle, on every side," from phrase on round; see a- (1) + round (adj.). It was rare before 1600. In the sense of "here and there with no fixed direction" it is attested from 1776 in American English (British English prefers about). As a prepositi

 cocktail 

 "drink made from water, sugar, spirits and bitters" first attested 1798, but the reason for the application of the name, and the image intended, if any, were obscure even to contemporaries. Ayto ("Diner's Dictionary") derives it from cocktail "horse with a docked tail" (the word 

 scrutiny 

 early 15c., "the formal enumerating of the votes in an election to an office or dignity" (according to OED, "Now chiefly in Canon Law"), from Late Latin scrutinium "a search, inquiry" (in Medieval Latin, "a mode of election by ballot"), from Latin scrutari "to examine, investigat

 fascinate 

 1590s, "bewitch, enchant," from French fasciner (14c.), from Latin fascinatus, past participle of fascinare "bewitch, enchant, fascinate," from fascinus "a charm, enchantment, spell, witchcraft," which is of uncertain origin. Earliest used of witches and of serpents, who were sai

 waffle 

 "kind of batter-cake, baked crisp in irons and served hot," 1744, from Dutch wafel "waffle," from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German wafel, from Proto-Germanic *wabila- "web, honeycomb" (source also of Old High German waba "honeycomb," German Wabe), related to Old High German weba

 latitude 

 late 14c., "breadth," from Old French latitude (13c.) and directly from Latin latitudo "breadth, width, extent, size," from lātus (adj.) "wide, broad, extensive" Old Latin stlatus, from PIE *stleto-, suffixed form of root *stele- "to spread, to extend" (source also of Old Church 

 overcome 

 Old English ofercuman "to reach, overtake, move or pass over," also "to conquer, prevail over, defeat in combat" (the Devil, evil spirits, sin, temptation, etc.), from ofer (see over) + cuman "to come" (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High 

 wanton 

 early 14c., wan-towen, "resistant to control; willful," from Middle English privative word-forming element wan- "wanting, lacking, deficient," from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with un- (1), and is cognate with Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur "misgovernment," wan

 Share chauffeur 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chauffeur Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chauffeur">Etymology of chauffeur by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chauffeur. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chauffeur Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chauffeur," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chauffeur. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chauffeur." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chauffeur. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chauffeur." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chauffeur (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chauffeur 
 chatter 
 chatterbox 
 chatty 
 Chaucerian 
 chauffer 
 chauffeur 
 Chautauqua 
 chauvinism 
 chauvinist 
 chav 
 chaw 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix