URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/checkmate
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:52:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Checkmate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Checkmate - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of checkmate 

 checkmate (n.) 

 mid-14c., in chess, said of a king when it is in check and cannot escape it, from Old French eschec mat (Modern French échec et mat ), which (with Spanish jaque y mate , Italian scacco-matto ) is from Arabic shah mat "the king died" (see check (n.1)), which according to Barnhart is a misinterpretation of Persian mat "be astonished" as mata "to die," mat "he is dead." Hence Persian shah mat , if it is the ultimate source of the word, would be literally "the king is left helpless, the king is stumped."
 also from mid-14c. 

 checkmate (v.) 

 late 14c., figurative, "to thwart, frustrate;" see checkmate (n.). As a verb in chess, from 1789. Related: Checkmated ; checkmating .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to checkmate 

 check (n.1) 

 c. 1300, in chess, "a call noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in immediate peril," from Old French eschequier "a check at chess" (also "chess board, chess set"), from eschec "the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate," from Vulgar Latin *scaccus , from Arabic shah , from Persian shah "king," the principal piece in a chess game (see shah ; also compare checkmate (n.)). Also c. 1300 in a generalized sense, "harmful incident or event, hostile environment."

 As "an exposure of the king to a direct attack from an opposing piece" early 15c. When his king is in check, a player's choices are severely limited. From that notion come the many extended senses: From the notion of "a sudden stoppage, hindrance, restraint" (1510s) comes that of "act or means of checking or restraining," also "means of detecting or exposing or preventing error; a check against forgery or alteration."

 Hence: "a counter-register as a token of ownership used to check against, and prevent, loss or theft" (as in hat check , etc.), 1812. Hence also the financial use for "written order for money drawn on a bank, money draft" (1798, often spelled cheque ), which was probably influenced by exchequer . Hence also "mark put against names or items on a list indicating they have been verified or otherwise examined" (by 1856).

 From its use in chess the word has been widely transferred in French and English. In the sense-extension, the sb. and vb. have acted and reacted on each other, so that it is difficult to trace and exhibit the order in which special senses arose [OED]

 The meaning "restaurant bill" is from 1869. Checking account  is attested from 1897, American English. Blank check in the figurative sense is attested by 1849 (compare carte blanche ). Checks and balances is from 1782, perhaps originally suggesting machinery.

 matador (n.) 

 "the slayer of the bull in a bull-fight," 1670s, from Spanish matador , literally "killer," from matar "to kill," which is of uncertain origin. Probably from Latin mactāre "to kill," originally "to honor by sacrifice," but this presents phonetic difficulties: "the regular evolution of this Latin base would have yielded *meitar in Portuguese and *mechar in Spanish" [Eva Núñez Méndez, "Diachronic Applications in Hispanic Linguistics"]. The alternative might be Arabic mata "he died," from Persian (see second element in checkmate ). Fem. form is matadora .

 mate (v.2) 

 "to checkmate," c. 1300, from Old French mater "to checkmate, defeat, overcome," from mat "checkmated" (see checkmate (v.)).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mat 

 Or the French word might represent a transferred use from chess of mater "to checkmate, defeat," from Arabic (see mate (v...

 chess 

 a checkered board of 64 squares, 13c., from Old French esches "chessmen," plural of eschec "game of chess, chessboard; checkmate...

 stalemate 

 .) + mate (n.2) "checkmate."...

 triumph 

 late 14c., "success in battle, conquest," also "spiritual victory" and "a procession celebrating victory in war," from Old French triumphe (12c., Modern French triomphe), from Latin triumphus "an achievement, a success; celebratory procession for a victorious general or admiral,"

 victory 

 c. 1300, "military supremacy, victory in battle or a physical contest," from Anglo-French and Old French victorie (12c.) and directly from Latin victoria "victory," from past participle stem of vincere "to overcome, conquer" (from nasalized form of PIE root *weik- (3) "to fight, 

 shell 

 "hard outer covering," Middle English shel, shelle, from Old English sciell, scill, Anglian scell "seashell; eggshell," which is related to Old English scealu "shell, husk," from Proto-Germanic *skaljo "piece cut off; shell; scale" (source also of West Frisian skyl "peel, rind," 

 vanquish 

 mid-14c., "to defeat in battle, conquer," from Old French venquis-, extended stem of veintre "to defeat," from Latin vincere "to overcome, conquer" (from nasalized form of PIE root *weik- (3) "to fight, conquer"). Influenced in Middle English by French vainquiss-, present stem of

 tame 

 c. 1200, of persons, "in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior;" mid-13c., of animals, "domesticated, reclaimed from wildness," also, of persons, "meek, gentle-natured, compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities," from oblique forms of Old Engl

 team 

 Old English team "descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft animals yoked together," from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (source also of Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam "bridle; progeny, line of descent," Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, Germa

 meat 

 Middle English mēte, from Old English mete "food, nourishment, sustenance" (paired with drink), "item of food; animal food, fodder," also "a meal, repast," from Proto-Germanic *mati (source also of Old Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats

 Share checkmate 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/checkmate Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/checkmate">Etymology of checkmate by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of checkmate. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/checkmate Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of checkmate," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/checkmate. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of checkmate." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/checkmate. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of checkmate." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/checkmate (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near checkmate 
 checker 
 checker-board 
 checkered 
 checkers 
 check-list 
 checkmate 
 checkout 
 checkpoint 
 check-up 
 cheddar 
 cheek 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix