URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/balm
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:49:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Balm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Balm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of balm 

 balm (n.) 

 c. 1200, basme , "oily, resinous aromatic substance exuding naturally from shrubs of the genus Commiphora," from Old French basme , baume , balme "balsam, balm" (12c., Modern French baume ), from Latin balsamum , from Greek balsamon "balsam," from Hebrew (Semitic) basam "spice," which is related to Aramaic busma , Arabic basham "balsam, spice, perfume." The spelling was refashioned 15c.-16c. on the Latin model. Compare balsam .

 As the name of a tree which yields the substance, it is attested from late 14c.; from mid-15c. it was extended to various fragrant garden herbs. Also by extension, "any aromatic preparation used in healing wounds or soothing pain, or as a perfume or in anointing" (late 14c.). Hence the transferred sense of "healing or soothing influence" (1540s). Biblical Balm of Gilead (esteemed for its medicinal properties) is from Coverdale (Jeremiah viii.22); the Hebrew word there is tsori , which was rendered in Septuagint and Vulgate as "resin" (Greek rhētinē , Latin resina ).
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to balm 

 balsam (n.) 

 1570s, "aromatic resin used for healing wounds and soothing pains," from Latin balsamum "gum of the balsam tree," ultimately from Semitic (see balm ). There is an isolated Old English use from c. 1000, and Middle English used balsamum . Originally in reference to Balm of Gilead, later extended to various other aromatic preparations from trees and shrubs. As a type of flowering plant of the Impatiens family, it is attested from 1741.

 balmy (adj.) 

 c. 1500, "delicately fragrant," from balm + -y (2). Figurative use for "soft and soothing" dates from c. 1600. In reference to breezes, air, etc., "mild, fragrant" (combining both earlier senses), it is attested from 1704.

 The meaning "weak-minded, idiotic," by 1851, is from London slang, perhaps by confusion with barmy . Related: Balmily .

 embalm (v.) 

 late 14c., embaumen "to apply balm or ointment; to embalm a corpse," from Old French embaumer , earlier embausmer , "preserve (a corpse) with spices," from assimilated form of en- "in" (see en- (1)) + baume "balm" (see balm ) + verbal suffix -er . Balm in Middle English also had a specific sense of "aromatic preparation for embalming dead bodies." The -l- was inserted in English 1500s in imitation of Latin. Related: Embalmed ; embalming .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 salve 

 "medicinal ointment or adhesive preparation for external use on wounds and sores," Old English sealf "healing ointment," from West Germanic *salbo- "oily substance" (source also of Old Saxon salba, Middle Dutch salve, Dutch zalf, Old High German salba, German salbe "ointment"), f

 horseradish 

 once-common figurative adjectival sense of horse as "strong, large, coarse," as in in obsolete horse mushroom (1866), horse-balm...

 lip 

 Lip gloss is attested from 1939; lip balm from 1877. Related: Lips....

 therapeutic 

 pertaining to the healing of disease, 1640s, from Modern Latin therapeuticus "curing, healing," from Greek therapeutikos, from therapeutein "to cure, treat medically," primarily "do service, take care of, provide for," of unknown origin, related to therapon "attendant." Therapeut

 remedy 

 c. 1200, remedie, "means of counteracting sin or evil of any kind; cure for a vice or temptation;" late 14c., "a cure for a disease or disorder, medicine or process which restores health;" from Anglo-French remedie, Old French remede "remedy, cure" (12c., Modern French remède) an

 smirch 

 late 15c., smorchen, "to discolor, to make dirty" (also compare bismorched, mid-15c.), a word of uncertain origin, perhaps (OED) from Old French esmorcher "to torture," which is perhaps also "befoul, stain," from es- "out" (see ex-) + morcher "to bite," from Latin morsus, past pa

 cure 

 c. 1300, "care, heed," from Latin cura "care, concern, trouble," with many figurative extensions over time such as "study; administration; office of a parish priest; a mistress," and also "means of healing, successful remedial treatment of a disease" (late 14c.), from Old Latin c

 empirical 

 1560s, originally in medicine, "pertaining to or derived from experience or experiments," from Latin empiricus (n.) "a physician guided by experience," from Greek empeirikos "experienced," from empeiria "experience; mere experience or practice without knowledge," especially in me

 equivocal 

 "of doubtful signification, capable of being understood in different senses," c. 1600, with -al (1) + Late Latin aequivocus "of identical sound, of equal voice, of equal significance, ambiguous, of like sound," past participle of aequivocare, from aequus "equal" (see equal (adj.)

 woman 

 "adult female human," late Old English wimman, wiman (plural wimmen), literally "woman-man," alteration of wifman (plural wifmen) "woman, female servant" (8c.), a compound of wif "woman" (see wife) + man "human being" (in Old English used in reference to both sexes; see man (n.))

 Share balm 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/balm Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/balm">Etymology of balm by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of balm. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/balm Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of balm," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/balm. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of balm." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/balm. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of balm." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/balm (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near balm 
 ballroom 
 balls 
 ballsy 
 bally 
 ballyhoo 
 balm 
 balmy 
 balneal 
 baloney 
 balsa 
 balsam 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix