URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortar
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:33:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mortar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mortar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mortar 

 mortar (n.1) 

 "mixture of cement, material used (in building) for binding together stones or bricks," mid-13c., from Old French mortier "builder's mortar, plaster; bowl for mixing" (13c.) and directly from Latin mortarium "mortar, mixture of lime and sand," also "crushed drugs," which probably is the same word as mortarium "bowl for mixing or pounding" (see mortar (n.2)), with the sense transferred from the bowl to the material prepared in it. Dutch mortel , German Mörtel are from Latin or French.
 also from mid-13c. 

 mortar (n.2) 

 "bowl for pounding, vessel in which substances are beaten to powder by means of a pestle," c. 1200, from Old French mortier "bowl; builder's mortar" and directly from Latin mortarium "bowl for mixing or pounding," also used of the material prepared in it, a word of unknown origin as it is impossible now to determine which sense was original. Watkins says probably from PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm;" de Vaan finds this plausible. Late Old English had mortere , from the same Latin source, which might also be a source of the modern word. German Mörser also is from Latin.
 also from c. 1200 

 mortar (n.3) 

 "short cannon, ordnance piece short in proportion to the size of its bore," fired at a high angle and meant to secure a vertical fall of the projectile, 1620s, originally mortar-piece (1550s), from French mortier "short cannon," in Old French, "bowl for mixing or pounding" (see mortar (n.2)). So called for its shape.
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to mortar 

 mortarboard (n.) 

 also mortar-board , 1823, "square board used by masons to hold mortar for plastering," from mortar (n.1) + board (n.1). By 1854 in reference to the academic cap, probably so called because it resembles the mason's board. Earlier it was called a mortar cap (1680s) or simply morter (c. 1600), from French mortier .

 *mer- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to rub away, harm." Possibly identical with the root *mer- that means "to die" and forms words referring to death and to beings subject to death.

 It might form all or part of: amaranth ; ambrosia ; amortize ; Amritsar ; immortal ; manticore ; marasmus ; mare (n.3) "night-goblin, incubus;" morbid ; mordacious ; mordant ; moribund ; morsel ; mort (n.2) "note sounded on a horn at the death of the quarry;" mortal ; mortality ; mortar ; mortgage ; mortify ; mortmain ; mortuary ; murder ; murrain ; nightmare ; post-mortem ; remorse .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit mrnati "crushes, bruises," mriyate "to kill," martave "to die," mrta- "died, dead," mrtih "death," martah "mortal man," amrta- "immortal;" Avestan miriia- "to die," miryeite "dies," Old Persian martiya- "man;" Hittite mer- "to disappear, vanish," marnu- "to make disappear;" Armenian meranim "to die;" Greek marainein "to consume, exhaust, put out, quench," marasmus "consumption," emorten "died," brotos "mortal" (hence ambrotos "immortal"); Latin mors (genitive mortis ) "death," mori "to die;" Armenian merani- "to die;" Gothic maurþr , Old English morþ "murder;" Old Irish marb , Welsh marw "dead;" Lithuanian mirti "to die," mirtis "death;" Old Church Slavonic mreti "to die," mrutvu "dead;" Russian mertvyj , Serbo-Croatian mrtav "dead."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share mortar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortar">Etymology of mortar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mortar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mortar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mortar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortar. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mortar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortar (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mortar 
 morsel 
 mort 
 mortal 
 mortality 
 mortally 
 mortar 
 mortarboard 
 mortgage 
 mortgagee 
 mortgagor 
 mortician 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix