URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sofa
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:37:22Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sofa - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sofa - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sofa 

 sofa (n.) 

 1620s, "raised section of a floor, covered with carpets and cushions," as a feature of Eastern interiors, from Turkish sofa , from Arabic suffah "bench of stone or wood; a couch." The meaning "long stuffed seat for reclining" is recorded from 1717. Sofa bed , "sofa designed to double as a bed" is by 1794.
 also from 1620s 

 Entries linking to sofa 

 sofa-bed (n.) 

 "piece of furniture forming a sofa but capable of being opened or altered into a bed," 1805, from sofa + bed (n.).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 couch 

 c. 1300, "to spread or lay on a surface, to overlay," from Old French couchier "to lay down, place; go to bed, put to bed," from Latin collocare "to lay, place, station, arrange," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see com-) + locare "to place," from locus "a place" (

 lounge 

 c. 1500, "to loll idly, act or rest lazily and indifferently, move indolently if at all," Scottish, a word of uncertain origin. The meaning "recline lazily" is from 1746. Perhaps [Barnhart] it is from French s'allonger (paresseusement) "to lounge about, lie at full length," from 

 kaffeeklatsch 

 THE living-room in a German household always contains a large sofa at one side of the room, which is the seat of honor accorded...At a Kaffeeklatsch (literally, coffee gossip) the guests of honor are seated on this sofa, and the large round table is wheeled...

 bundling 

 bundling has prevailed 160 years in New England, and, I verily believe, with ten times more chastity than the sitting on a sofa...Bundling takes place only in cold seasons of the year—the sofa in summer is more dangerous than the bed in winter....

 Chesterfield 

 As a kind of overcoat and a kind of sofa (both 19c.), in reference to earls of Chesterfield....

 squab 

 young bird," earlier (1630s) "unformed, lumpish person" and used at various times for any sort of flabby mass, such as sofa...

 anti-macassar 

 The cloth was laid to protect chair and sofa fabric from men leaning their oily heads back against it....

 convertible 

 late 14c., "interchangeable," from Old French convertible "interchangeable" (13c.) and directly from Late Latin convertibilis "changeable," from Latin convertere "to turn around; transform," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con-) + vertere "to turn" (from PIE ro

 viand 

 "article of food," early 14c., from Anglo-French viaunde, Old French viande "food (vegetable as well as animal), victuals, provisions" (11c.), a dissimilation of Vulgar Latin *vivanda, from Late Latin vivenda "things for living, things to be lived upon," in classical Latin, "be l

 divan 

 1580s, "Oriental council of state," from Turkish divan, from Arabic diwan, from Persian devan "bundle of written sheets, small book, collection of poems" (as in the "Divan i-Hafiz"), related to debir "writer." Sense evolved in Arabic through "book of accounts," to "office of acco

 Share sofa 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sofa Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sofa">Etymology of sofa by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sofa. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sofa Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sofa," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sofa. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sofa." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sofa. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sofa." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sofa (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sofa 
 sodomise 
 sodomite 
 sodomize 
 sodomy 
 soever 
 sofa 
 sofa-bed 
 soffit 
 Sofia 
 soft 
 softball 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix