URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/defend
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:04:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Defend - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Defend - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of defend 

 defend (v.) 

 mid-13c., defenden , "to shield from attack, guard against assault or injury," from Old French defendre (12c.) "defend, resist," and directly from Latin defendere "ward off, protect, guard, allege in defense," from de "from, away" (see de- ) + -fendere "to strike, hit, push," attested only in compounds (such as offendere "to strike against; encounter;" infensus "aggressive, hostile"), from PIE root *gwhend- "to strike, kill" (source also of Hittite kue(n)zi "to kill," Sanskrit ghnanti "to kill; Greek theino "to slay, to kill;" Armenian jnem "to strike;" Lithuanian ginti "to protect, defend;" Old Irish gonaid "wounds, kills;" Welsh gwan "to thrust, hit;" Old Breton goanaff "to punish, sting").

 It is attested from c. 1300 as "fight in defense of" (someone or something). From mid-14c. as "defend with words, speak in support of, vindicate, uphold, maintain." In Middle English it also could mean "forbid, prohibit; restrain, prevent." In the Mercian hymns, Latin defendet is glossed by Old English gescildeð . Related: Defended ; defending .

 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to defend 

 defendant (n.) 

 c. 1400, in the legal sense "a party sued in a court of law," from Anglo-French, Old French defendant (Modern French défendant ), noun use of present participle of defendre (see defend ). Earliest use in English was as a present-participle adjective meaning "defensive, defending" (c. 1300).

 defender (n.) 

 c. 1300, defendour, "one who protects from injury a champion" (early 13c. as a surname), via Anglo-French from Old French defendeor , agent noun from defendre (see defend ). The Latin word in this sense was defensor .

 defense 
 defensible 
 defensive 
 fend 
 offend 
 undefended 
 de- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 defense 

 c. 1300, "action of guarding or shielding from attack or injury; act of defending by fighting; a fortified place of refuge," from Old French defense, from Latin defensus, past participle of defendere "ward off, protect" (see defend). It also arrived (without the final -e) from Ol

 defensible 

 c. 1300, "ready and able to fight, able to defend," from Old French defensable, from Medieval Latin defensibilis, Late Latin defensibilem, from Latin defens-, past-participle stem of defendere (see defend). Meaning "capable of being defended" is from late 14c., sense of "contribu

 defensive 

 c. 1400, "serving to defend, proper for defense; of the nature of defense," from Old French defensif (14c., Modern French défensif) and directly from Medieval Latin defensivus, from defens-, past participle stem of Latin defendere (see defend). Of persons, "alert to reject critic

 garret 

 on the roof of a house or castle," from Old French garite "watchtower, place of refuge, shelter, lookout," from garir "defend..., preserve," which is from a Germanic source (compare Old English warian "to hold, defend," Gothic warjan "forbid," Old High...German warjan "to defend"), from Proto-Germanic *warjan, from PIE root *wer- (4) "to cover."...

 Alexander 

 proper name, from Latin, from Greek Alexandros "defending men," from alexein "to ward off, keep off, turn (something) away, defend...help, strength, power, courage," alkimos "strong;" and cognate with Sanskrit raksati "protects," Old English ealgian "to defend...

 prophylactic 

 1570s, of medicines, "that tends to prevent or defend from disease," from French prophylactique (16c.) and directly as a...The noun is first recorded 1640s, "a medicine or treatment to prevent or defend against disease;" meaning "condom" is from...

 cataphract 

 , covered up," from kataphrassein "to fortify," from kata "entirely" (see cata-) + phrassein "to fence around, enclose, defend...

 fight 

 Old English feohtan "to combat, contend with weapons, strive; attack; gain by fighting, win" (intransitive; class III strong verb; past tense feaht, past participle fohten), from Proto-Germanic *fe(u)hta (source also of Old High German fehtan, German fechten, Middle Dutch and Dut

 post 

 "a timber of considerable size set upright," from Old English post "pillar, doorpost," and from Old French post "post, upright beam," both from Latin postis "door, post, doorpost," in Medieval Latin "a beam, rod, pole," which is perhaps from Vulgar Latin *por- "forth," a variant 

 spot 

 c. 1200, "moral stain;" by mid-14c. as "speck, stain left by something on a surface;" probably at least in part from a variant of Old English splott "a spot, blot, patch (of land)," and partly from or related to Middle Dutch spotte "spot, speck." Other cognates are East Frisian s

 Share defend 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/defend Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/defend">Etymology of defend by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of defend. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/defend Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of defend," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/defend. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of defend." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/defend. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of defend." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/defend (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near defend 
 defection 
 defective 
 defector 
 defeminize 
 defence 
 defend 
 defendant 
 defender 
 defenestration 
 defense 
 defenseless 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix