URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/fascism
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T13:52:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Fascism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Fascism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of fascism 

 fascism (n.) 

 1922, originally used in English in 1920 in its Italian form fascismo (see fascist ). Applied to similar groups in Germany from 1923; applied to everyone since the internet.

 A form of political behavior marked by obsessive preoccupation with community decline, humiliation or victimhood and by compensatory cults of unity, energy and purity, in which a mass-based party of committed nationalist militants, working in uneasy but effective collaboration with traditional elites, abandons democratic liberties and pursues with redemptive violence and without ethical or legal restraints goals of internal cleansing and external expansion. [Robert O. Paxton, "The Anatomy of Fascism," 2004]
 also from 1922 

 Entries linking to fascism 

 fascist (adj.) 

 1921, from Italian partito nazionale fascista , the anti-communist political movement organized 1919 under Benito Mussolini (1883-1945); from Italian fascio "group, association," literally "bundle," from Latin fasces (see fasces ).

 Fasci "groups of men organized for political purposes" had been a feature of Sicily since c. 1895, and the 20c. totalitarian sense probably came directly from this but was influenced by the historical Roman fasces , which became the party symbol. As a noun from 1922 in English, earlier in Italian plural fascisti (1921), and until 1923 in English it often appeared in its Italian form, as an Italian word.

 [Fowler: "Whether this full anglicization of the words is worth while cannot be decided till we know whether the things are to be temporary or permanent in England" -- probably an addition to the 1930 reprint, retained in 1944 U.S. edition.] Related: Fascistic .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 barnyard 

 differences, becomes a belief in the fictitiousness of differences, a conviction that it is reaction or snobbishness or Fascism...

 ideology 

 communist writing, with reference to class; from 1918 it came to be used of socialism and communism themselves (along with fascism...

 avalanche 

 "fall or slide of a mass of snow on a mountain slope," 1763, from French avalanche (17c.), from Romansch (Swiss) avalantze "descent," altered (by metathesis of -l- and -v-, probably influenced by Old French avaler "to descend, go down," avalage "descent, waterfall, avalanche") fr

 ambition 

 mid-14c., ambicioun, "eager or inordinate desire for honor or preferment," from Old French ambicion (13c.), or directly from Latin ambitionem (nominative ambitio) "a going around," especially to solicit votes, hence "a striving for favor, courting, flattery; a desire for honor, t

 palm 

 "flat of the hand, inner surface of the hand between the wrist and the fingers," c. 1300, paume, from Old French paume, palme (Modern French paume), from Latin palma "palm of the hand," also "flat end of an oar; palm tree," from PIE root *pele- (2) "flat; to spread" (source also 

 pupil 

 [student], late 14c., "orphan child, ward, person under the care of a guardian," from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from Latin pupillus (fem. pupilla) "orphan child, ward, minor," diminutive of pupus "boy" (fem. pupa "girl"), probably related to puer "child" (and thus pr

 sermon 

 c. 1200, sermoun, sarmun, "a discourse upon a text of scripture; that which is preached," from Anglo-French sermoun, Old French sermon, sermun "speech, words, discourse; church sermon, homily" (10c.) and directly from Latin sermonem (nominative sermo) "continued speech, conversat

 monument 

 late 13c., "a sepulchre," from Old French monument "grave, tomb, monument," and directly from Latin monumentum "a monument, memorial structure, statue; votive offering; tomb; memorial record," literally "something that reminds," a derivative of monere "to remind, bring to (one's)

 blasphemy 

 "impious or profane speaking of God or sacred things," early 13c., from Old French blasfemie "blasphemy," from Late Latin blasphemia, from Greek blasphēmia "a speaking ill, impious speech, slander," from blasphēmein "to speak evil of." The second element of that is phēmē "utteran

 cross 

 Old English cros "instrument of Christ's crucifixion; symbol of Christianity" (mid-10c.), probably from Old Norse or another Scandinavian source, picked up by the Norse from Old Irish cros, from Latin crux (accusative crucem, genitive crucis) "stake, cross" on which criminals wer

 Share fascism 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/fascism Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/fascism">Etymology of fascism by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of fascism. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/fascism Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of fascism," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fascism. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of fascism." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/fascism. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of fascism." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/fascism (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near fascism 
 fascinate 
 fascinating 
 fascination 
 fascine 
 fascinous 
 fascism 
 fascist 
 fascitis 
 fash 
 fashion 
 fashionable 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix