URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortgage
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:33:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Mortgage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Mortgage - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of mortgage 

 mortgage (n.) 

 late 14c., morgage , "a conveyance of property on condition as security for a loan or agreement," from Old French morgage (13c.), mort gaige , literally "dead pledge" (replaced in modern French by hypothèque ), from mort "dead" (see mortal (adj.)) + gage "pledge" (see wage (n.)).

 So called because the deal dies when the debt is paid or the payment fails. Old French mort is from Vulgar Latin *mortus "dead," from Latin mortuus , past participle of mori "to die" (from PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm," also "to die"). The -t- was restored in Modern English based on Latin.

 And it seemeth, that the cause why it is called mortgage is, for that it is doubtful whether the feoffor will pay at the day limited such sum or not: and if he doth not pay, then the land which is put in pledge upon condition for the payment of the money, is taken from him for ever, and so dead to him upon condition, &c. And if he doth pay the money, then the pledge is dead as to the tenant, &c. [Coke upon Littleton, 1664]

 also from late 14c. 

 mortgage (v.) 

 "to grant (immovable property) as security for money lent or contracted to be paid," late 15c., morgagen , from mortgage (n.). Related: Mortgaged ; mortgaging .
 also from late 15c. 

 Entries linking to mortgage 

 mortal (adj.) 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to death, mortal, of a mortal, human," from mors (genitive mortis ) "death."

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *mr-o- "to die," *mr-to- "dead," *mr-ti- "death," all from PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm" (also "to die" and forming words referring to death and to beings subject to death). The most widespread Indo-European root for "to die," it forms the common word for it except in Greek and Germanic.

 "Subject to death," hence "human, of or pertaining to humans" (early 15c.). Also from late 14c. as "implacable, to be satisfied only by death" (of hatreds, enemies, etc.). Meaning "extreme, very great" is from late 14c. A mortal sin (early 15c., opposed to venial ) is one that incurs the penalty of spiritual death.

 wage (n.) 

 c. 1300, "a payment for services rendered, reward, just deserts;" mid-14c., "salary paid to a provider of service," from Anglo-French and Old North French wage (Old French gage ) "pledge, pay, reward," from Frankish *wadja- or another Germanic source (compare Old English wedd "pledge, agreement, covenant," Gothic wadi "pledge"), from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see wed (v.)). A doublet of gage (n.). Spanish gage , Italian gaggio also are from Germanic.

 Also from mid-14c., "a pledge, guarantee, surety" (usually in plural), and (c. 1400) "a promise or pledge to meet in battle." The "payment for service" sense by late 14c. extended to allotments of money paid at regular intervals for continuous or repeated service. The Old English word was lean , related to loan and representing the usual Germanic word (Gothic laun , Dutch loon , German Lohn ).

 Traditionally in English wages were payment for manual or mechanical labor and somewhat distinguished from salary or fee . Modern French cognate gages (plural) means "wages of a domestic," one of a range of French "pay" words distinguished by class, such as traitement (university professor), paye , salaire (workman), solde (soldier), récompense , prix .

 Wage-earner "one who receives stated wages for labor" is attested from 1871.

 mortgagee 
 mortgagor 
 *mer- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hypothecate 

 1680s, "pledge (something) without giving up control of it; pawn; mortgage," from hypothecat-, past-participle stem of Medieval...Latin hypothecare, from Late Latin hypotheca "a pledge," from Greek hypothēkē "a deposit, pledge, mortgage," from hypo-...

 pledge 

 From mid-15c. as "to stand surety for, be responsible for;" late 15c. as "to mortgage."...

 foreclose 

 Specific mortgage law sense is first attested 1728....

 owe 

 Old English agan (past tense ahte) "to have, to own," from Proto-Germanic *aiganan "to possess" (source also of Old Frisian aga "have to, ought to," Old Norse eiga, Old High German eigan, Gothic aigan "to possess, have"), from PIE root *aik- "be master of, possess." The original 

 bond 

 early 13c., "anything that binds, fastens, or confines," a phonetic variant of band (n.1) and at first interchangeable with it. For vowel change, see long (adj.); also influenced by unrelated Old English bonda "householder," literally "dweller" (see bond (adj.)). It preserves mor

 daffodil 

 1540s, "asphodel," a variant of Middle English affodill "asphodel" (c. 1400), from Medieval Latin affodillus, from Latin asphodelus, from Greek asphodelos, which is of unknown origin. The initial d- is perhaps from merging of the article in Dutch de affodil, the Netherlands being

 pamphlet 

 "small, unbound treatise," late 14c., pamflet, "brief written text; poem, tract, small book," from Anglo-Latin panfletus, which probably is a popular short form of "Pamphilus, seu de Amore" ("Pamphilus, or about Love"), a short 12c. Latin love poem popular and widely copied in th

 austere 

 early 14c., of persons, manner, etc., "harsh, severe; grim, fierce," from Old French austere "strict, severe, harsh, cruel" (13c., Modern French austère) and directly from Latin austerus "dry, harsh, sour, tart," from Greek austeros "bitter, harsh," especially "making the tongue 

 portmanteau 

 1580s, "flexible traveling case or bag for clothes and other necessaries," from Middle French portemanteau "traveling bag," originally "court official who carried a prince's mantle" (1540s), from porte, imperative of porter "to carry" (see porter (n.1)) + manteau "cloak" (see man

 nature 

 late 13c., "restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth;" from Old French nature "nature, being, principle of life; character, essence," from Latin natura "course of things; natural character, constitution, quality; the universe," literally "birth," from na

 Share mortgage 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortgage Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortgage">Etymology of mortgage by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of mortgage. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortgage Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of mortgage," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortgage. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of mortgage." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortgage. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of mortgage." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/mortgage (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near mortgage 
 mortal 
 mortality 
 mortally 
 mortar 
 mortarboard 
 mortgage 
 mortgagee 
 mortgagor 
 mortician 
 mortification 
 mortified 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix