URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/reptile
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:26:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Reptile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Reptile - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of reptile 

 reptile (n.) 

 late 14c., "creeping or crawling animal; one that goes on its belly on the ground on small, short legs," from Old French reptile (early 14c.) and directly from Late Latin reptile , noun use of neuter of reptilis (adj.) "creping, crawling," from rept- , past-participle stem of repere "to crawl, creep." This is reconstructed to be from PIE root *rep- "to creep, crawl" (source also of Lithuanian rėplioti "to creep").

 Used of persons of abject, groveling, or mean character from 1749. As an adjective, c. 1600, "creeping or crawling," hence, of persons, "low, mean" (1650s). Also sometimes used 18c. of creeping plants.

 The precise scientific sense of the noun began to develop mid-18c., but the word also was used at first of animals now known as amphibians , including toads, frogs, salamanders. The separation of Reptilia (1835 as a distinct class) and Amphibia took place early 19c.; popular use lagged, and reptile still was used late 18c. with sense "An animal that creeps upon many feet" [Johnson, who calls the scorpion a reptile], sometimes excluding serpents. The Old English word for "reptile" was slincend , related to slink .

 And the terrestrial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or beasts, reptiles, which have many feet, and serpents, which have no feet at all. [Locke, "Elements of Natural Philosophy," 1689]

 An inadvertent step may crush the snail

 That crawls at ev'ning in the public path ;

 But he that has humanity, forewarn'd,

 Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.

 [Cowper, "The Task," 1785]
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to reptile 

 slink (v.) 

 Middle English slinken , from Old English slincan "to creep, crawl" (of reptiles), from Proto-Germanic *slinkan (source also of Old High German slihhan , German schleichen "slink, crawl, sneak, move slowly," Swedish slinka "to glide," Dutch slinken "to shrink, shrivel"), related to the source of sling (v.)).

 Of persons or other animals, "steal or move quietly" (frequently with off or away ), attested from late 14c. Related: Slinked ; slinker ; slinking . As a noun, "a slinking fellow," by 1824.

 irreption (n.) 

 "a creeping in," 1590s, from Late Latin irreptionem (nominative irreptio ), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin irrepere , from assimilated form of in- "in" (see in- (2)) + repere "to creep" (see reptile ).

 obreption 
 Reptilia 
 reptilian 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 obreption 

 "the obtaining or trying to obtain something by craft or deception," 1610s, from Latin obreptionem (nominative obreptio)  "a creeping or stealing on," noun of action from past-participle stem of obrepere "to creep on, creep up to," from ob "on, to" (see ob-) + repere "to cre

 plesiosaurus 

 extinct gigantic long-necked marine reptile, 1825, from Modern Latin Pleisiosaurus (1821), coined by English paleontologist...It was one of the earliest "antediluvian" reptile fossils discovered in the scientific age and was so called for being more...

 squamous 

 scale-like, covered with scales," 1540s, from Latin squamosus "covered with scales, scaly," from squama "scale" of a fish or reptile...

 saurian 

 "reptile of the order Sauria," 1817, from Modern Latin Sauria "the order of reptiles" (Brongniart, 1799), from Greek sauros...

 claw 

 "sharp, hooked, horny end of the limb of a mammal, bird, reptile, etc.," Old English clawu, earlier clea, "claw, talon, iron...

 alligator 

 1560s, "large carnivorous reptile of the Americas," lagarto, aligarto, a corruption of Spanish el lagarto (de Indias) "the...

 crocodile 

 large amphibious reptile, reptile of the order Crocodilia, 1560s, a respelling (to conform to Latin and French) of Middle...

 dog 

 "quadruped of the genus Canis," Old English docga, a late, rare word, used in at least one Middle English source in reference specifically to a powerful breed of canine; other early Middle English uses tend to be depreciatory or abusive. Its origin remains one of the great myster

 defiance 

 c. 1300, defiaunce, "a challenge to fight, invitation to combat," from Old French desfiance "challenge, declaration of war," from desfiant, present participle of desfier "to challenge, defy, provoke; renounce (a belief), repudiate (a vow, etc.)," from Vulgar Latin *disfidare "ren

 salad 

 late 14c., salade, "raw herbs cut up and variously dressed," from Old French salade (14c.) and Medieval Latin salata, both from Vulgar Latin *salata, literally "salted," short for herba salata "salted vegetables" (vegetables seasoned with brine, a popular Roman dish), from fem. p

 Share reptile 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/reptile Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/reptile">Etymology of reptile by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of reptile. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/reptile Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of reptile," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/reptile. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of reptile." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/reptile. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of reptile." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/reptile (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near reptile 
 reproduction 
 reproductive 
 reprogram 
 reproof 
 reprove 
 reptile 
 Reptilia 
 reptilian 
 republic 
 republican 
 republicanism 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix