URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/harness
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T19:37:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Harness - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Harness - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of harness 

 harness (n.) 

 c. 1300, "personal fighting equipment, body armor," also "armor or trappings of a war-horse," from Old French harnois , a noun of broad meaning: "arms, equipment; harness; male genitalia; tackle; household equipment" (12c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse *hernest "provisions for an army," from herr "army" (see harry (v.)) + nest "provisions" (see nostalgia ). Non-military sense of "fittings for a beast of burden" is from early 14c. German Harnisch "harness, armor" is the French word, borrowed into Middle High German. The Celtic words are believed to be also from French, as are Spanish arnes , Portuguese arnez , Italian arnese . Prive harness (late 14c.) was a Middle English term for "sex organs."
 also from c. 1300 

 harness (v.) 

 "to put a harness on a draught animal," c. 1300, from Old French harneschier "make ready, equip, arm," from harnois (see harness (n.)); figurative sense "to control for use as power" is from 1690s. Related: Harnessed ; harnessing .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to harness 

 harry (v.) 

 Old English hergian "make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder," the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (source also of Old Frisian urheria "lay waste, ravage, plunder," Old Norse herja "to make a raid, to plunder," Old Saxon and Old High German herion , German verheeren "to destroy, lay waste, devastate"). This is literally "to overrun with an army," from Proto-Germanic *harjan "an armed force" (source also of Old English here , Old Norse herr "crowd, great number; army, troop," Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri , Dutch heir , Old High German har , German Heer , Gothic harjis "a host, army").

 The Germanic words come from PIE root *korio- "war" also "war-band, host, army" (source also of Lithuanian karas "war, quarrel," karias "host, army;" Old Church Slavonic kara "strife;" Middle Irish cuire "troop;" Old Persian kara "host, people, army;" Greek koiranos "ruler, leader, commander"). Weakened sense of "worry, goad, harass" is from c. 1400. Related: Harried ; harrying .

 nostalgia (n.) 

 1726, "morbid longing to return to one's home or native country, severe homesickness considered as a disease," Modern Latin, coined 1688 in a dissertation on the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German heimweh "homesickness" (for which see home + woe ).

 From Greek algos "pain, grief, distress" (see -algia ) + nostos "homecoming," from neomai "to reach some place, escape, return, get home," according to Watkins from PIE *nes- "to return safely home" (cognate with Old Norse nest "food for a journey," Sanskrit nasate "approaches, joins," German genesen "to recover," Gothic ganisan "to heal," Old English genesen "to recover").

 French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754. Originally in reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or in combination with wounds or disease.

 [Dr. Scheuzer] had said that the air enclosed in the bodies of his countrymen, being in Æquilibrium with a rare and light air that surrounds them, was overloaded in lower countries with an air more dense and heavier, which compressing and obstructing the capillary vessels, makes the circulation slow and difficult, and occasions many sad symptoms. [Account of the publication of "Areographia Helvetiæ" in New Memoirs of Literature, London, March 1726] 

 By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that of sailors, convicts, African slaves. "The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch regiments while serving abroad" [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the "endemic diseases" in the "Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine" [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which defines it as "The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and friends and the scenes of their youth ...."

 It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:

 In the first two years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. ["Sanitary Memoirs of the War," U.S. Sanitary Commission, N.Y.: 1867]

 Transferred sense (the main modern one) of "wistful yearning for the past" is recorded by 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a distant place also necessarily involved a separation in time.

 unharness (v.) 

 c. 1400, unharneisen , "divest of armor," from un- (2) "opposite of" + harness (v.). Similar formation in Dutch ontharnassen "to disarm." The meaning "to free (a horse) from harness" is recorded from 1610s. Related: Unharnessed ; unharnessing .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rule 

 c. 1200, "principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed" from Old French riule, Norman reule "rule, custom, (religious) order" (in Modern French partially re-Latinized as règle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula "straight stick, bar,

 rein 

 c. 1300, reine, "strap of a bridle," attached to it on either side of the head, by which the rider or driver restrains and guides the animal, from Old French rene, resne "reins, bridle strap, laces" (Modern French rêne), probably from Vulgar Latin *retina "a bond, check," a back-

 tug 

 mid-14c., in reference to some part of a harness;" c. 1500 as "act of pulling or dragging," from tug (v.)....

 cinch 

 (1) "to gird, encircle" (source also of Sanskrit kankate "binds," kanci "girdle;" Lithuanian  kinkau, kinkyti "to harness...

 span 

 As a verb, "be matched for funning in harness," 1540s....

 lorimer 

 12c. as surname), "maker of bits for bridles and saddles, worker in small ironware," from Old French loremier "saddler, harness-maker...

 attach 

 mid-14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), "to take or seize (property or goods) by law," a legal term, from Old French atachier "fasten; arrest" (11c.), earlier estachier "to attach, fix; stake up, support" (Modern French attacher, also compare Italian attaccare), from a- "to" (see ad-

 right 

 [correct, morally correct, direct] Old English riht, of actions, "just, good, fair, in conformity with moral law; proper, fitting, according to standard; rightful, legitimate, lawful; correct in belief, orthodox;" of persons or their characters, "disposed to do what is good or ju

 tackle 

 mid-13c., takel, "apparatus, gear," especially the rigging of a ship, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German takel "the rigging of a ship," which is perhaps related to Middle Dutch taken "grasp, seize" (see take (v.)). Also compare tack (n.1), which, if not the origin, has influe

 Share harness 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/harness Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/harness">Etymology of harness by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of harness. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/harness Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of harness," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harness. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of harness." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/harness. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of harness." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/harness (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near harness 
 harmonist 
 harmonium 
 harmonization 
 harmonize 
 harmony 
 harness 
 Harold 
 harp 
 harper 
 harpist 
 harpoon 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix