URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/anesthesia
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:26:49Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Anesthesia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Anesthesia - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of anesthesia 

 anesthesia (n.) 

 1721, "loss of feeling," medical Latin, from Greek anaisthēsia "want of feeling or perception, lack of sensation (to pleasure or pain)," abstract noun from an- "without" (see an- (1)) + aisthēsis "feeling" (from PIE root *au- "to perceive"). For the abstract noun ending, see -ia .

 As "a procedure for the prevention of pain in surgical operations," attested from 1846. Aesthesia "capacity for feeling" is attested in English from 1853, perhaps a back-formation.
 also from 1721 

 Entries linking to anesthesia 

 anaesthesia (n.) 

 alternative spelling of anesthesia (q.v.). See æ (1).

 anesthesiology (n.) 

 1908, from anesthesia + -ology .

 Anesthesiology. This is the new term adopted by the University of Illinois defining "the science that treats of the means and methods of producing in man or animal various degrees of insensibility with or without hypnosis." [Medical Herald, January, 1912]

 anesthetic 
 anesthetist 
 anesthetize 
 kinesthesia 
 an- 
 *au- 
 -ia 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 anesthetic 

 1846, "insensible;" 1847, "producing temporary loss of sensation," with -ic + Latinized form of Greek anaisthētos "insensate, without feeling; senseless, tactless, stupid" (see anesthesia). The noun meaning "agent that produces anesthesia" was first used in the modern sense 1848 

 pivot 

 "pin on which a wheel or other object turns," 1610s, from French pivot, from Old French pivot "hinge pin, pivot" (12c.), also "penis," a word of uncertain origin. Pevetsheres, evidently some kind of shears, is mentioned in a will registered in York in 1398. Figurative sense of "t

 primitive 

 late 14c., primitif, "of an original cause; of a thing from which something is derived; not secondary" (a sense now associated with primary), from Old French primitif "very first, original" (14c.) and directly from Latin primitivus "first or earliest of its kind," from primitus "

 burgeon 

 early 14c., "grow, sprout, blossom," from Anglo-French burjuner, Old French borjoner "to bud, sprout," from borjon "a bud, shoot, pimple" (Modern French bourgeon), a word of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *burrionem (nominative *burrio), from Late Latin burra "flock 

 wisdom 

 Old English wisdom "knowledge, learning, experience," from wis (see wise (adj.)) + -dom. A common Germanic compound (Old Saxon, Old Frisian wisdom, Old Norse visdomr, Old High German wistuom "wisdom," German Weistum "judicial sentence serving as a precedent"). Wisdom teeth are so

 bureaucracy 

 "government by bureaus," especially "tyrannical officialdom," excessive multiplication of administrative bureaus and concentration of power in them, in reference to their tendency to interfere in private matters and be inefficient and inflexible, 1818, from French bureaucratie, c

 clothes-horse 

 also clothes horse, "upright wooden frame for hanging clothes to dry," 1788, from clothes + horse (n.) in its secondary sense "that upon which something is mounted." Figurative sense of "person whose sole function seems to be to show off clothes" is 1850. Clothes-screen, which ha

 confidence 

 c. 1400, "assurance or belief in the good will, veracity, etc. of another," from Old French confidence or directly from Latin confidentia, from confidentem (nominative confidens) "firmly trusting, bold," present participle of confidere "to have full trust or reliance," from assim

 grim 

 Old English grimm "fierce, cruel, savage; severe, dire, painful," from Proto-Germanic *grimma- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German, German grimm "grim, angry, fierce," Old Norse grimmr "stern, horrible, dire," Swedish grym "fierce, furious"), from PIE *ghremno

 paradox 

 1530s, "a statement contrary to common belief or expectation," from French paradoxe (14c.) and directly from Latin paradoxum "paradox, statement seemingly absurd yet really true," from Greek paradoxon "incredible statement or opinion," noun use of neuter of adjective paradoxos "c

 Share anesthesia 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/anesthesia Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/anesthesia">Etymology of anesthesia by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of anesthesia. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/anesthesia Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of anesthesia," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anesthesia. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of anesthesia." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/anesthesia. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of anesthesia." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/anesthesia (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near anesthesia 
 anemo- 
 anemometer 
 anemone 
 anencephalic 
 anent 
 anesthesia 
 anesthesiologist 
 anesthesiology 
 anesthetic 
 anesthetist 
 anesthetize 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix