URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/polygamy
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:41:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Polygamy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Polygamy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of polygamy 

 polygamy (n.) 

 "marriage with more than one spouse," 1590s, from Late Latin polygamia , from Late Greek polygamia "polygamy," from polygamos "often married," from polys "many" (see poly- ) + gamos "marriage" (see gamete ). The word is not etymologically restricted to marriage of one man and multiple women (technically polygyny ), but often used as if it were. Related: Polygamist; polygamize .

 In Christian countries, when a man has more wives than one, or a woman more husbands than one, at the same time, he or she is punishable for polygamy ; but if there was a separate marriage with each the first marriage would be valid notwithstanding the subsequent ones, and the later ones would be void. The offense of contracting the subsequent marriage is now termed 
 bigamy . But polygamy in the form of polygyny is allowed in some countries, especially among Mohammedans, and was held a matter of faith and duty by the Mormons. [Century Dictionary, 1895]
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to polygamy 

 gamete (n.) 

 "sexual protoplasmic body," 1880, coined 1878 by German cytologist Eduard Strasburger (1844-1912), the widespread attribution of the word's coinage to Mendel being apparently erroneous. From Greek gamete "a wife," gametes "a husband," from gamein "to take to wife, to marry," from PIE root *gem(e)- "to marry" (source also of Greek gambros "son-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law;" Sanskrit jamih "brother, sister," jama daughter-in-law;" Avestan zama-tar "son-in-law;" Latin gener "son-in-law"). See also -gamy . The seventh month of the ancient Attic calendar (corresponding to late January and early February) was Gamelion , "Month of Marriages." Related: Gametal .

 polygyny (n.) 

 1780, "condition of having many wives, marriage or cohabitation of one man with more than one woman at the same time," from Greek poly gynēs "having many wives," from polys "many" (see poly- ) + gynē "woman, wife" (from PIE root *gwen- "woman"). Related: Polygynous .

 endogamy 
 polygamous 
 poly- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 endogamy 

 "marriage within the tribe or group," 1865, from endo- on model of polygamy. Related: Endogamous (1865). Opposed to exogamy. Apparently both were coined by Scottish anthropologist John Ferguson McLennan (1827-1881) in "Primitive Marriage." To this law, the converse of caste, for

 abolish 

 with things that have been long established or deeply rooted, as an institution or a custom : as to abolish slavery or polygamy...

 wedlock 

 Old English wedlac "pledge-giving, marriage vow," from wed + -lac, noun suffix meaning "actions or proceedings, practice," attested in about a dozen Old English compounds (feohtlac "warfare"), but this is the only surviving example. Suffix altered by folk etymology through associ

 union 

 early 15c., "action of joining one thing to another," also "agreement, accord," also "state of matrimony," from Anglo-French unioun, Old French union (12c.), from Late Latin unionem (nominative unio) "oneness, unity, a uniting," also in Latin meaning "a single pearl or onion," fr

 marriage 

 c. 1300, mariage, "action of entering into wedlock;" also "state or condition of being husband and wife, matrimony, wedlock;" also "a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union;" from Old French mariage "marriage; dowry" (12c.), from Vulgar Lati

 matrimony 

 c. 1300, matrimoine, "the married state, the relation of husband and wife, wedlock; the sacrament of marriage," from Old French matremoine "matrimony, marriage" and directly from Latin mātrimōnium "wedlock, marriage" (in plural "wives"), from mātrem (nominative māter) "mother" (s

 compass 

 c. 1300, "space, area, extent, circumference," from Old French compas "circle, radius; size, extent; pair of compasses" (12c.), from compasser "to go around, measure (with a compass); divide equally," from Vulgar Latin *compassare "to pace out," from Latin com "with, together" (s

 arsenal 

 c. 1500, "dockyard, dock with naval stores," from Italian arzenale, from Arabic dar as-sina'ah "workshop," literally "house of manufacture," from dar "house" + sina'ah "art, craft, skill," from sana'a "he made." The word was applied by the Venetians to a large wharf in their city

 flux 

 late 14c., "abnormally copious flow," from Old French flus "a flowing, a rolling; a bleeding" (Modern French flux), or directly from Latin fluxus (adj.) "flowing, loose, slack," past participle of fluere "to flow" (see fluent). Originally "excessive flow" (of blood or excrement),

 exquisite 

 early 15c., "carefully selected," from Latin exquisitus "choice," literally "carefully sought out," from past participle stem of exquirere "search out thoroughly," from ex "out" (see ex-) + quaerere "to seek" (see query (v.)). Originally in English of any thing (good or bad, tort

 Share polygamy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/polygamy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/polygamy">Etymology of polygamy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of polygamy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/polygamy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of polygamy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/polygamy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of polygamy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/polygamy. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of polygamy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/polygamy (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near polygamy 
 Polydorus 
 polyester 
 polyethnic 
 polyethylene 
 polygamous 
 polygamy 
 polygenesis 
 polygenetic 
 polygenic 
 polygenous 
 polygeny 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix