URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/false
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:20:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: False - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

False - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of false 

 false (adj.) 

 late Old English, "intentionally untrue, lying," of religion, "not of the true faith, not in accord with Christian doctrines," from Old French fals , faus "false, fake; incorrect, mistaken; treacherous, deceitful" (12c., Modern French faux ), from Latin falsus "deceptive, feigned, deceitful, pretend," also "deceived, erroneous, mistaken," past participle of fallere "deceive, disappoint," which is of uncertain origin (see fail (v.)).

 From c. 1200 as "deceitful, disloyal, treacherous; not genuine;" from early 14c. as "contrary to fact or reason, erroneous, wrong." Adopted into other Germanic languages (cognates: German falsch , Dutch valsch , Old Frisian falsk , Danish falsk ), though in English alone does the active sense of "deceitful" (a secondary sense in Latin) predominate.

 False alarm recorded from 1570s. False step (1700) translates French faux pas . To bear false witness is attested from mid-13c. False prophet "one who prophecies without divine commission or by evil spirits," is attested from late 13c. The sporting contest false start is attested by 1850.
 also from 12c. 

 Entries linking to false 

 fail (v.) 

 c. 1200, failen , "be unsuccessful in accomplishing a purpose;" also "cease to exist or to function, come to an end;" early 13c. as "fail in expectation or performance," from Old French falir "be lacking, miss, not succeed; run out, come to an end; err, make a mistake; be dying; let down, disappoint" (11c., Modern French faillir ), This is from Vulgar Latin *fallire , from Latin fallere "to trip, cause to fall;" figuratively "to deceive, trick, dupe, cheat, elude; fail, be lacking or defective."

 De Vaan traces this to a PIE root meaning "to stumble" (source also of Sanskrit skhalate "to stumble, fail;" Middle Persian škarwidan "to stumble, stagger;" Greek sphallein "to bring or throw down," sphallomai "to fall;" Armenian sxalem "to stumble, fail"). If so, the Latin sense is a metaphorical shift from "stumble" to "deceive." Related: Failed ; failing .

 Replaced Old English abreoðan . It is attested from c. 1200 as "be unsuccessful in accomplishing a purpose;" also "cease to exist or to function, come to an end;" early 13c. as "fail in expectation or performance."

 From mid-13c. of food, goods, etc., "to run short in supply, be used up;" from c. 1300 of crops, seeds, land. From c. 1300 of strength, spirits, courage, etc., "suffer loss of vigor; grow feeble;" from mid-14c. of persons. From late 14c. of material objects, "break down, go to pieces."

 faux pas (n.) 

 "breach of good manners, any act that compromises one's reputation," 1670s, French, literally "false step." See false and pace (n.).

 falsehood 
 falsely 
 falseness 
 falsetto 
 falsies 
 falsify 
 falsity 
 faucet 
 faux 
 true-false 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 falsehood 

 c. 1300, falshede, "deceitfulness," also "a lie; that which is false," from false + -hood. Formed on the same pattern are Old Frisian falschede, Dutch valschheid, German Falschheit, Swedish falskhet. Former noun forms in English, now extinct, included falsage "wrongdoing" (late 1

 faucet 

 c. 1400, from Old French fausset (14c.) "breach, spigot, stopper, peg (of a barrel)," which is of unknown origin; perhaps diminutive of Latin faux, fauces "upper part of the throat, pharynx, gullet." Not in Watkins, but Barnhart, Gamillscheg, and others suggest the Old French wor

 true 

 Middle English treu, from Old English triewe (West Saxon), treowe (Mercian) "faithful, trustworthy, honest, steady in adhering to promises, friends, etc.," from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz "having or characterized by good faith" (source also of Old Frisian triuwi, Dutch getrouw, Old 

 simulation 

 mid-14c., simulacioun, "a false show, false profession," from Old French simulation "pretence" and directly from Latin simulationem...(nominative simulatio) "an imitating, feigning, false show, hypocrisy," noun of action from past-participle stem of simulare...

 idol 

 .), from Latin idolum "image (mental or physical), form," especially "apparition, ghost," but used in Church Latin for "false...A Greek word for "image," used in Jewish and early Christian writers for "image of a false god," hence also "false god."...The Germanic languages tended to form a word for it from the reverse direction, from "god" to "false god," hence "image of...a false god" (compare Old English afgod, Danish afgud, Swedish avgud, Old High German abgot, compounds with af-/ab- "away...

 pseudonym 

 "false name," especially a fictitious name assumed by an author to conceal identity, 1828, in part a back-formation from...pseudonymous, in part from German pseudonym and French pseudonyme (adj.), from Greek pseudōnymos "having a false name, under...a false name," from pseudēs "false" (see pseudo-) + onyma, Aeolic dialectal variant of onoma "name" (from PIE root *no-men...

 delusion 

 As a form of mental derangement, "false impression or belief of a fixed nature," 1550s....Technically, delusion is a belief that, though false, has been surrendered to and accepted by the whole mind as a truth;...illusion is an impression that, though false, is entertained provisionally on the recommendation of the senses or the imagination...

 mash 

 "soft mixture, mass of ingredients beaten or stirred together," late Old English *masc (in masc-wyrt "mash-wort, infused malt"), from Proto-Germanic *maisk- (source also of Swedish mäsk "grains for pigs," German Maisch "crushed grapes, infused malt," Old English meox "dung, filth

 sham 

 1670s, "a trick put upon one, a hoax, a fraud, something that deludes or disappoints expectation," a word of uncertain origin. Along with the verb ("to cheat, trick") and the adjective ("false, pretended"), the word burst into use about 1677 according to OED. Perhaps they are fro

 simulated 

 1620s, "feigned," past-participle adjective from simulate (v.). The meaning "imitative for purposes of experiment or training" is from 1966 (the agent noun simulator in the related sense dates from 1947; also see simulation). In commercial jargon, "artificial, imitation" by 1942.

 Share false 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/false Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/false">Etymology of false by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of false. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/false Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of false," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/false. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of false." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/false. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of false." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/false (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near false 
 fallible 
 falling 
 Fallopian 
 fallout 
 fallow 
 false 
 falsehood 
 falsely 
 falseness 
 falsetto 
 falsies 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix