URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/apricot
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Apricot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Apricot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of apricot 

 apricot (n.) 

 roundish, orange-colored, plum-like fruit, 1550s, abrecock , from Catalan abercoc , related to Portuguese albricoque , from Arabic al-birquq , through Byzantine Greek berikokkia which is probably from Latin (mālum) praecoquum "early-ripening (fruit)" (see precocious ). The form has been assimilated to French abricot .

 Latin 
 praecoquis early-ripe, can probably be attributed to the fact that the fruit was considered a variety of peach that ripened sooner than other peaches .... [Barnhart]

 Native to the Himalayas, it was introduced in England in 1524. The older Latin name for it was prunum Armeniacum or mālum Armeniacum , in reference to supposed origin in Armenia. As a color name, by 1906.
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to apricot 

 precocious (adj.) 

 1640s, "developed or ripe before the usual time," originally of plants, with -ous + Latin praecox (genitive praecocis ) "maturing early," from prae "before" (see pre- ) + coquere "to ripen," literally "to cook" (from PIE root *pekw- "to cook, ripen").

 Originally of flowers or fruits. Figurative use, of persons, dates, etc., "characteristic of early maturity," by 1670s. Related: Precociously ; precociousness . Obsolete princock "pert, forward, saucy boy or youth" (16c.-18c.) might be a rude, low slang folk-etymology alteration of Latin praecox .

 *pekw- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to cook, ripen." 

 It might form all or part of: apricot ; biscuit ; charcuterie ; concoct ; concoction ; cook ; cuisine ; culinary ; decoct ; decoction ; drupe ; dyspepsia ; dyspeptic ; eupeptic ; kiln ; kitchen ; peptic ; peptide ; peptone ; precocious ; pumpkin ; ricotta ; terra-cotta .

 It might also be the source ofy: Sanskrit pakvah "cooked, ripe;" Avestan -paka- "cooked;" Greek peptein "to cook, ripen, digest," pepon "ripe;" Latin coquere "to cook, prepare food, ripen, digest, turn over in the mind," Oscan popina "kitchen;" Lithuanian kepti "to bake, roast;" Old Church Slavonic pecenu "roasted;" Welsh poeth "cooked, baked, hot."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 peach 

 c. 1400 peche, peoche, "fleshy fruit of the peach tree" (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French pesche "peach, peach tree" (Old North French peske, Modern French pêche), and directly from Medieval Latin pesca, from Late Latin pessica, variant of persica "peach, peach tree," fro

 drupe 

 "a stone-fruit," one with a fleshy or soft outer part and a hard nut or stone at the center (as a plum, cherry, apricot,...

 Irish 

 In later use often in mocking or pejorative phrases, such as Irish apricot "potato," Irish daisy "common dandelion."...

 cheap 

 "low in price, that may be bought at small cost," c. 1500, ultimately from Old English noun ceap "traffic, a purchase," from ceapian (v.) "to trade, buy and sell," probably from early Germanic borrowings of Latin caupo "petty tradesman, huckster, peddler," cauponari "to haggle" (

 pink 

 1570s, common name of Dianthus, a garden plant of various colors; a word of unknown origin. It is perhaps from pink (v.) via the notion of "perforated" (scalloped) petals. Or perhaps it is from Dutch pink "small, narrow," itself obscure (compare pinkie), via the term pinck oogen 

 tree 

 Old English treo, treow "tree" (also "timber, wood, beam, log, stake"), from Proto-Germanic *trewam (source also of Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu "tree"), from PIE *drew-o-, suffixed variant form of root *deru- "be firm, solid, steadfast," with speci

 salmon 

 early 13c., samoun, the North Atlantic salmon, from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem (nominative salmo) "a salmon," probably originally "leaper," from salire "to leap" (see salient (adj.)), though some dismiss this as folk etymolo

 gossamer 

 c. 1300, "filmy substance (actually spider threads) found in fields of stubble in late fall," apparently from gos "goose" (see goose (n.)) + sumer "summer" (see summer (n.)). Blount (1656) has it as gossymeare or gossomor "the white and cobweb-like exhalations, which fly abroad i

 noble 

 c. 1200, "illustrious, distinguished, of high rank or birth," from Old French noble "of noble bearing or birth," from Latin nobilis "well-known, famous, renowned; excellent, superior, splendid; high-born, of superior birth," earlier *gnobilis, literally "knowable," from gnoscere 

 rogue 

 1560s, "idle vagrant, sturdy beggar, one of the vagabond class," a word of shadowy origin, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an agent noun in Engl

 Share apricot 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/apricot Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/apricot">Etymology of apricot by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of apricot. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/apricot Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of apricot," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/apricot. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of apricot." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/apricot. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of apricot." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/apricot (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near apricot 
 appurtenance 
 appurtenances 
 appurtenant 
 apraxia 
 apricate 
 apricot 
 April 
 April fool 
 apron 
 apropos 
 apse 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix