URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/amber
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:57:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Amber - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Amber - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of amber 

 amber (n.) 

 mid-14c., ambre grice "ambergris; perfume made from ambergris," from the phrase in Old French (13c.) and Medieval Latin, from Arabic 'anbar "ambergris, morbid secretion of sperm-whale intestines used in perfumes and cookery" (see ambergris ), which was introduced in the West at the time of the Crusades. Arabic -nb- often is pronounced "-mb-."

 In Europe, the word amber was extended to fossil resins from the Baltic (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin; c. 1400 in English), and this has become the main sense as the use of ambergris has waned. Perhaps the perceived connection is that both were found washed up on seashores. Or perhaps it is a different word entirely, of unknown origin. Formerly they were distinguished as white or yellow amber for the Baltic fossil resin and ambergris "gray amber;" French distinguished the two substances as ambre gris and ambre jaune .

 Remarkable for its static electricity properties, Baltic amber was known to the Romans as electrum (compare electric ). Amber as an adjective in English is from c. 1500; as a color name 1735. In the Old Testament it translates Hebrew chashmal , a shining metal.

 Middle English also knew it as laumbre (14c.-15c.), from Old French l'ambre , taking the French article as part of the word.

 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to amber 

 ambergris (n.) 

 early 15c., from Old French ambre gris "gray amber," "a wax-like substance of ashy colour, found floating in tropical seas, a morbid secretion from the intestines of the sperm-whale. Used in perfumery, and formerly in cookery" [OED], via Medieval Latin from Arabic 'anbar (see amber ).

 Its origin was known to Constantinus Africanus (obit c. 1087), but it was a mystery in Samuel Johnson's day, and he records nine different theories; "What sort of thing is Ambergrease?" was a type of a puzzling question beyond conjecture. King Charles II's favorite dish was said to be eggs and ambergris [Macauley, "History of England"].

 PUT on your silks ; and piece by piece

 Give them the scent of Amber-Greece :

 [Herrick, "To His Mistresses"] 

 Praise is like ambergris; a little whiff of it, by snatches, is very agreeable; but when a man holds a whole lump of it to his nose, it is a stink and strikes you down. [Pope, c. 1720]

 French gris  is from Frankish *gris or some other Germanic source (cognates: Dutch grijs , Old High German gris ; see gray (adj.)).

 electric (adj.) 

 1640s, first used in English by physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), apparently coined as Modern Latin electricus (literally "resembling amber") by English physicist William Gilbert (1540-1603) in treatise "De Magnete" (1600), from Latin electrum "amber," from Greek ēlektron "amber" (Homer, Hesiod, Herodotus), also "pale gold" (a compound of 1 part silver to 4 of gold); which is of unknown origin.

 Vim illam electricam nobis placet appellare [Gilbert]

 Originally the word described substances which, like amber, attract other substances when rubbed. Meaning "charged with electricity" is from 1670s; the physical force so called because it first was generated by rubbing amber. In many modern instances, the word is short for electrical . Figurative sense is attested by 1793. Electric light is from 1767. Electric toothbrush first recorded 1936; electric blanket in 1930. Electric typewriter is from 1958. Electric guitar is from 1938; electric organ coined as the name of a hypothetical future instrument in 1885.

 amarillo 
 pomander 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pomander 

 late 15c., pomendambre, "mix of aromatic herbs in a bag or perforated apple-shaped shell, carried or worn around the neck as a preservative against infection," from Old French pomme d'embre (13c.), from pome "apple" (from Latin pomum; see Pomona) + ambre "amber" (see amber). By m

 gold 

 "precious metal noted for its color, luster, malleability, and freedom from rust or tarnish," Old English gold, from Proto-Germanic *gulthan "gold" (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German gold, German Gold, Middle Dutch gout, Dutch goud, Old Norse gull, Danish gul

 electrum 

 (in Old English elehtre), from Latin electrum "alloy of gold and silver," also "amber" (see electric)....In Greek, usually of amber but also of pure gold. The Romans used it of amber but also of the alloy....The sense of "amber" also occasionally is found in English....

 glass 

 The PIE root also is the ancestor of widespread words for gray, blue, green, and yellow, such as Old English glær "amber,..." Latin glaesum "amber" (which might be from Germanic), Old Irish glass "green, blue, gray," Welsh glas "blue."...

 Electra 

 mother, from Greek Ēlektra, literally "shining, bright," related to ēlektōr "the beaming sun" and perhaps to ēlektron "amber...

 brimstone 

 [Wycliff's rendition (1382) of Genesis xix.24] The Old Norse cognate compound brennusteinn meant "amber," as does German...

 Berenice 

 The constellation Berenice's Hair (Coma Berenices) is from the story of the pilfered amber locks of the wife of Ptolemy Euergetes...

 yellow 

 Middle English yelwe, from Old English geolu, geolwe, "yellow," from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish gul "yellow"), from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to sh

 diaphragm 

 late 14c., diafragma, in anatomy, "muscular membrane which separates the thorax from the abdominal cavity in mammals," from Late Latin diaphragma, from Greek diaphragma "partition, barrier, muscle which divides the thorax from the abdomen," from diaphrassein "to barricade," from 

 blog 

 "online journal," 1998, short for weblog (which is attested from 1993 but in the sense "file containing a detailed record of each request received by a web server"), from (World Wide) Web (n.) + log (n.2). Joe Bloggs (c. 1969) was British slang for "any hypothetical person" (comp

 Share amber 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/amber Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/amber">Etymology of amber by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of amber. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/amber Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of amber," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amber. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of amber." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/amber. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of amber." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/amber (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near amber 
 Amazonian 
 ambage 
 ambagious 
 ambassador 
 ambassadorial 
 amber 
 ambergris 
 *ambhi- 
 ambi- 
 ambiance 
 ambidexterity 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix