URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/asphalt
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:24:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Asphalt - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Asphalt - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of asphalt 

 asphalt (n.) 

 early 14c., "hard, resinous mineral pitch found originally in Biblical lands," from Late Latin asphaltum , from Greek asphaltos "asphalt, bitumen," often said to be from Greek a- "not" + *sphaltos "able to be thrown down," taken as verbal adjective of sphallein "to throw down," according to Beekes "under the assumption that it denoted the material that protects walls from tumbling down," but he finds this proposed etymology "weak." Perhaps from Semitic [Klein, citing Lewy, 1895] or another non-Greek source.

 The meaning "paving composition of tar and gravel" dates from 1847 and its popular use in this sense established the modern form of the English word, displacing in most senses asphaltum , asphaltos . As a verb meaning "to cover with asphalt," from 1872. Related: Asphaltic .
 also from early 14c. 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mummy 

 Medieval Latin mumia, which is perhaps from Greek moumia or directly from Arabic mumiyah "embalmed body," from Persian mumiya "asphalt...The sense evolution is from the old belief that Egyptian mummies were embalmed with asphalt, which was used medicinally in...Ancient mummies were harvested for asphalt they were thought to contain, and later merchants mummified executed criminals...Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi, traveling in Egypt circa A.D. 1300, reported buying three mummified heads filled with asphalt for...

 naphtha 

 In ancient writers it refers to a more fluid and volatile variety of natural asphalt or bitumen....

 jungle 

 Asphalt jungle (1949) is from William R....

 pizza 

 [Ayto] A pizza is manufactured, as far as I can ascertain, by garnishing a slab of reinforced asphalt paving with mucilage...

 pavement 

 mid-13c., "paved or tiled surface of ground," from Old French pavement "roadway, pathway; paving stone" (12c.) and directly from Latin pavimentum "hard floor, level surface beaten firm," from pavire "to beat, ram, tread down," from PIE root *pau- (2) "to cut, strike, stamp." From

 mineral 

 late 14c., "substance obtained by mining," from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin minerale "something mined," noun use of neuter of mineralis "pertaining to mines," from minera "a mine" (see mine (n.1)). Meaning "material substance that is neither animal nor veg

 pave 

 early 14c., paven, "to cover (a street) with blocks of stone, tiles, or similar hard material set regularly and firmly in place," from Old French paver "to pave" (12c.), perhaps a back-formation from Old French pavement or else from Vulgar Latin *pavare, from Latin pavire "to bea

 pitch 

 "thick, tenacious, resinous substance obtained from tar or turpentine, wood tar," late 12c., pich, piche, from Old English pic "pitch," from a Germanic borrowing (compare Old Saxon and Old Frisian pik, Middle Dutch pik, Dutch pek, Old High German pek, German Pech, Old Norse bik) 

 quorum 

 early 15c., in law, "the senior justices of the peace," whose presence was necessary to constitute a court, from Latin quorum "of whom," genitive plural (masc. and neuter; fem. quarum) of qui "who" (from PIE root *kwo-, stem of relative and interrogative pronouns). The traditiona

 flamboyant 

 1832, originally in reference to a 15c.-16c. architectural style with wavy, flame-like curves, from French flamboyant "flaming, wavy," present participle of flamboyer "to flame," from Old French flamboiier "to flame, flare, blaze, glow, shine" (12c.), from flambe "a flame, flame 

 Share asphalt 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/asphalt Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/asphalt">Etymology of asphalt by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of asphalt. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/asphalt Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of asphalt," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/asphalt. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of asphalt." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/asphalt. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of asphalt." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/asphalt (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near asphalt 
 Asperger's Syndrome 
 asperges 
 asperity 
 asperse 
 aspersion 
 asphalt 
 aspheterism 
 asphodel 
 asphyxia 
 asphyxiate 
 asphyxiation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix