URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/year
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:28:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Year - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Year - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of year 

 year (n.) 

 "a full round of seasons, the interval between equinoxes, the time occupied by the sun in passage through the zodiac," Middle English yer , from Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) "year," from Proto-Germanic *jēr "year," reconstructed to be from PIE root *yer- "year, season," probably [Watkins] originally "that which makes [a complete cycle]," and from verbal root meaning "to do, make."

 Also by Middle English as "any space of about 365 days or 12 calendrical months, without regard to starting point. Years as "period of life" is by early 13c.

 Germanic cognates include Old Saxon, Old High German jar , Old Norse ar , Danish aar , Old Frisian ger , Dutch jaar , German Jahr , Gothic jer "year." IE cognates outside Germanic include Avestan yare (nominative singular) "year;" Greek hōra "year, season, any part of a year," also "any part of a day, hour;" Old Church Slavonic jaru , Bohemian jaro "spring;" Latin hornus "of this year;" Old Persian dušiyaram "famine," literally "bad year."

 Entries linking to year 

 G 

 seventh letter of the alphabet, invented by the Romans; a modified gamma introduced c. 250 B.C.E. to restore a dedicated symbol for the "g" sound. For fuller history, see C .

 Before the vowels -e- , -i- , and -y- , Old English initial g- changed its sound and is represented in Modern English by consonantal y- ( year , yard , yellow , young , yes , etc.). In get and give , however, the initial g- seems to have been preserved by Scandinavian influence. Also see gu- .

 As a movie rating in the U.S., 1966, standing for general (adj.). In physics, as an abbreviation of gravity , by 1785.

 hour (n.) 

 c. 1200, "divine office prescribed for each of the seven canonical hours; the daily service at the canonical hours;" c. 1300, "time of day appointed for prayer, one of the seven canonical hours," from Old French ore , hore "canonical hour; one-twelfth of a day" (sunrise to sunset), from Latin hora "an hour;" poetically "time of year, season," from Greek hōra a word used to indicate any limited time within a year, month, or day (from PIE *yor-a- , from root *yer- "year, season;" see year ).

 The Church sense is oldest in English. The meaning "one of the 24 equal parts of a natural solar day (time from one sunrise to the next), equal hour; definite time of day or night reckoned in equal hours," and that of "one of the 12 equal parts of an artificial day (sunrise to sunset) or night, varying in duration according to the season; definite time of day or night reckoned in unequal hours" are from late 14c.

 In the Middle Ages the planets were held to rule over the unequal hours. As late as 16c. distinction sometimes was made in English between temporary (unequal) hours and sidereal (equal) ones. The meaning "time of a particular happening; the time for a given activity" (as in hour of death ) is mid-14c.

 The h- has persisted in this word despite not being pronounced since Roman times. Replaced Old English tid , literally "time" (see tide (n.)) and stund "period of time, point of time, hour," from Proto-Germanic *stundo (compare German Stunde "hour"), which is of uncertain origin. German Uhr likewise is from French.

 Greek hora could mean "a season; 'the season' (spring or summer)." In classical times it sometimes meant "a part of the day," such as morning, evening, noon, night. The Greek astronomers apparently borrowed the notion of dividing the day into twelve parts (mentioned in Herodotus) from the Babylonians. Night continued to be divided into four watches (see watch (n.)); but because the amount of daylight changed throughout the year, the hours were not fixed or of equal length.

 As a measure of distance ("the distance that can be covered in an hour") it is recorded from 1785. At all hours "at all times" is from early 15c. For small hours (those with low numbers) see wee (adj.).

 leap year 
 Lehrjahre 
 light-year 
 yearbook 
 yearling 
 yearlong 
 yearly 
 year-round 
 yesteryear 
 yore 
 See All Related Words (12) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 class 

 c. 1600, "group of students," in U.S. especially "number of pupils in a school or college of the same grade," from French classe (14c.), from Latin classis "a class, a division; army, fleet," especially "any one of the six orders into which Servius Tullius divided the Roman peopl

 firn 

 raw material of glaciers," 1839, literally "last year's snow, névé," from German Firn, from Swiss dialectal firn "of last year...: Lithuanian pernai "last year" (adv.), Greek perysi "a year ago, last year," Sanskrit parut "of last year;" also German...Firnewein "wine of last year")....Middle English retained fern "long ago, formerly, of old," fern-days "days of old, former year, a year past."...

 annual 

 late 14c., "appointed by the year;" c. 1400, "occurring or done once a year," from Old French annuel "yearly" (12c.) or directly...from Medieval Latin annualis "yearly," corresponding to Latin annalis as adjective form of annus "year."...This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Italic *atno- "year" (compare Oscan akno- "year, holiday, time of offering"), from...The root also has Germanic derivatives meaning "a year," such as Gothic aþnam (dative plural) "year."...

 pullet 

 A cockerel is a male bird under one year old, a cock over one year old....A hen is a female over one year old and a pullet under one year old. [U.S....

 sabbatical 

  The noun meaning "a year's absence granted to researchers" (originally one year in seven, to university professors)...is from 1934, short for sabbatical year, etc., which was recorded by 1886 (the thing itself is attested from 1880, at Harvard...), a term perhaps suggested by the sabbatical year (1590s) in Mosaic law, the seventh year, in which land was to remain untilled...

 veteran 

 years; of a former time," as a plural noun, vetores, "men of old, forefathers," from PIE *wet-es-, from root *wet- (2) "year..." (source also of Sanskrit vatsa- "year," Greek etos "year," Hittite witish "year," Old Church Slavonic vetuchu "old," Old...

 perennial 

 1640s, of plants or leaves, "evergreen" (a sense now obsolete), formed in English from Latin perennis "lasting through the year...(or years)," from per "through" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "through") + annus "year" (see annual (adj.))....through more than two years" is attested from 1670s; of springs, etc., "lasting or continuing without cessation through a year...

 month 

 "one-twelfth part of a year; one of the twelve parts into which the calendar year is arbitrarily divided," Old English monað, from Proto-Germanic *menoth- (source also of Old Saxon manoth, Old Frisian monath, Middle Dutch manet, Dutch maand, Old High German manod, German Monat, O

 decade 

 mid-15c., "ten parts" (of anything; originally in reference to the divisions of Livy's history), from Old French décade (14c.), from Late Latin decadem (nominative decas), from Greek dekas (genitive dekados) "group of ten," from deka "ten" (from PIE root *dekm- "ten"). Meaning "p

 period 

 early 15c., periode, "a course or extent of time; a cycle of recurrence of a disease," from Old French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin periodus "recurring portion, cycle," from Latin periodus "a complete sentence," also "cycle of the Greek games," from Greek perio

 Share year 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/year Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/year">Etymology of year by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of year. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/year Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of year," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/year. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of year." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/year. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of year." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/year (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near year 
 *ye- 
 yea 
 yeah 
 yean 
 yeanling 
 year 
 yearbook 
 yearling 
 yearlong 
 yearly 
 yearn 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix