URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/galley
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:43:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Galley - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Galley - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of galley 

 galley (n.) 

 13c., "seagoing vessel having both sails and oars," from Old French galie , galee "boat, warship, galley," from Medieval Latin galea or Catalan galea , from Late Greek galea , of unknown origin. The word has made its way into most Western European languages. Originally "low, flat-built seagoing vessel of one deck," once a common type in the Mediterranean. Meaning "cooking range or cooking room on a ship" dates from 1750.

 The printing sense of galley , "oblong tray that holds the type once set," is from 1650s, from French galée in the same sense, in reference to the shape of the tray. As a short form of galley-proof it is attested from 1890.
 also from 13c. 

 Entries linking to galley 

 galleon (n.) 

 kind of large ship, 1520s, from French galion "armed ship of burden," and directly from Spanish galeón "galleon, armed merchant ship," augmentative of galea , from Byzantine Greek galea "galley" (see galley ) + augmentative suffix -on . Developed 15c.-16c., it was shorter, broader, and with a higher stern superstructure than the galley. In English use, especially of Spanish royal treasure-ships or the government warships that escorted private merchant ships in the South American trade.

 GALLEON. The accepted term for the type of ship which the Spaniards used in 1588; that is, an armed merchantman of exceptional quality, combining the strength of the mediaeval trader with some of the finer lines and fighting features of the GALLEY. [Sir Geoffrey Callender, "Sea Passages," 1943]

 Italian agumented form of galea , galeaza , led to a different 16c. ship-name in English, galliass (1540s).

 galley-slave (n.) 

 1560s, from galley (n.) in the "ship" sense + slave (n.). The ships were often rowed by slaves or convicts.

 galleywest 
 galliot 
 gallipot 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 galleywest 

 indicating where something or someone is knocked, "into an extremely distressed or disabled condition," American English slang, by 1835; considered by OED to be a corruption of western England dialectal collyweston, name of a village in Northamptonshire ("Colin's West Farmstead")

 slush 

 Slush fund is first attested 1839, from an earlier sense of slush "refuse fat from the cook's galley of a ship" (1756); the...The galley slush also was used as grease, hence slush (v.) "grease (a mast) with slush."...

 bank 

 As "bench for rowers in an ancient galley," 1590s....

 remora 

 Pliny writes that Antony's galley was delayed by one at Actium, and popular fables of the fish and its power to hold in place...

 kitchen 

 "room in which food is cooked, part of a building fitted out for cooking," c. 1200, from Old English cycene "kitchen," from Proto-Germanic *kokina (source also of Middle Dutch cökene, Old High German chuhhina, German Küche, Danish kjøkken), probably borrowed from Vulgar Latin *co

 vessel 

 c. 1300, "container," from Old French vessel "container, receptacle, barrel; ship" (12c., Modern French vaisseau) from Late Latin vascellum "small vase or urn," also "a ship," alteration of Latin vasculum, diminutive of vas "vessel." Sense of "ship, boat" is found in English from

 ship 

 Middle English ship, "seagoing vessel," especially a large one, from Old English scip "ship, boat, vessel of considerable size adapted to navigation," from Proto-Germanic *skipa- (source also of Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Gothic skip, Danish skib, Swedish skepp, Middle Du

 make-up 

 also makeup, "manner in which something is put together," 1821, from the verbal phrase (see make (v.) + up (adv.)). To make up as "build, collect into one form by bringing together" is from late 14c., also "prepare." It is attested from late 15c. as "supply as an equivalent," fro

 gravity 

 c. 1500, "weight, dignity, seriousness, solemnity of deportment or character, importance," from Old French gravité "seriousness, thoughtfulness" (13c.) and directly from Latin gravitatem (nominative gravitas) "weight, heaviness, pressure," from gravis "heavy" (from PIE root *gwer

 indulgence 

 mid-14c., in the Church sense, "a freeing from temporal punishment for sin, remission from punishment for sin that remains due after absolution," from Old French indulgence or directly from Latin indulgentia "complaisance, a yielding; fondness, tenderness, affection; remission," 

 Share galley 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/galley Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/galley">Etymology of galley by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of galley. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/galley Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of galley," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/galley. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of galley." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/galley. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of galley." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/galley (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near galley 
 gallantry 
 gall-bladder 
 galleon 
 galleria 
 gallery 
 galley 
 galley-slave 
 galleywest 
 Gallic 
 Gallicism 
 gallimaufry 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close