URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Henry
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:10:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Henry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Henry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Henry 

 Henry 

 masc. proper name, from French Henri , from Late Latin Henricus , from German Heinrich , from Old High German Heimerich , literally "the ruler of the house," from heim "home" (see home (n.)) + rihhi "ruler" (from PIE root *reg- "move in a straight line," with derivatives meaning "to direct in a straight line," thus "to lead, rule"). One of the most popular Norman names after the Conquest. Related: Henrician .

 Entries linking to Henry 

 home (n.) 

 Middle English hom , from Old English ham , home "dwelling place, house, abode, fixed residence; estate; village; region, country," from Proto-Germanic *haimaz "home," which is reconstructed to be from a suffixed form of PIE root *tkei- "to settle, dwell, be home."

 Figuratively as the seat or location (of faith, love, etc.) from late Old English. As an adverb in Old English; as an adjective from 1550s. Early plural sometimes was hamen , homen .

 Germanic cognates include Old Frisian hem "home, village," Old Norse heimr "residence; village; world," heima "home," Danish hjem , Middle Dutch heem , German Heim "home," Gothic haims "village." The old Germanic sense of "village" is preserved in English place names in -ham , German -heim , etc., and in hamlet .

 'Home' in the full range and feeling of [Modern English] home is a conception that belongs distinctively to the word home and some of its Gmc. cognates and is not covered by any single word in most of the IE languages. [Buck]

 At home "in one's house" is from Old English; by late 14c. as "in a congenial environment," hence "at one's ease" (1510s). The slang phrase make (oneself) at home "become comfortable in a place one does not live" dates from 1892.

 Home guard "local volunteer defense force" is by 1836. To keep the home fires burning is a song title from 1914; home-fire as symbolic of family life is by 1892 (compare hearth ).

 Home movie "film of one's own domestic circle and activities" is from 1919. Home computer , in reference to one designed for recreational or educational use at home, is attested from 1967. To be nothing to write home about "unremarkable" is from 1907. In Middle English the long home was "the grave."

 Home economics as a school course is attested by 1899; the phrase itself by 1879 as "household management," which is the simple sense of economy , the phrase is thus etymologically redundant.

 Home as the goal in a sport or game is by 1778. Home base in baseball is attested by 1856; home plate by 1867. Home team in sports is by 1869; home field "grounds belonging to the local team" is by 1802 (the 1800 citation in OED 2nd ed. print is a date typo, as it refers to baseball in Spokane Falls). Home-field advantage is attested by 1914 in reference to U.S. football teams winning more often at home.

 Harris 

 surname, attested from c. 1400 ( Harrys ), from " Harry ," the popular pronunciation of Henry . As a type of tweed (1892), it is from the name of the southern section of the island of Lewis with Harris in the Outer Hebrides; originally it referred to fabric produced by the inhabitants there, later a proprietary name. That place name represents Gaelic na-h-earaidh "that which is higher," in comparison to the lower Lewis. Harrisburg , capital of Pennsylvania, is named for ferryman John Harris (1727-1791), son of the original European settler.

 harry 
 Heinie 
 Henrietta 
 *reg- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 harry 

 Old English hergian "make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder," the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (source also of Old Frisian urheria "lay waste, ravage, plunder," Old Norse herja "to make a raid, to plunder," 

 H 

 eighth letter of the alphabet; it comes from Phoenician, via Greek and Latin. In Phoenician it originally had a rough guttural sound like German Reich or Scottish loch. In Greek at first it had the value of Modern English -h-, and with this value it passed into the Latin alphabet

 Angevin 

 in reference to the English royal house of the 12th and early 13th centuries (Henry II, Richard I, and John) descended from...Geoffrey, count of Anjou, and Matilda, daughter of Henry I, 1650s, literally "pertaining to the French province of Anjou...

 Jamesian 

 in reference to William James (1842-1910), U.S. philosopher and exponent of pragmatism; 1905 in reference to his brother Henry...it but seldom, yet it is all unforgettable. […] No man who has not lived on both sides of the Atlantic can well appraise Henry...[Ezra Pound, from “Henry James,” Little Review, August 1918]...

 John Hancock 

 colloquial for "signature," 1903 (sometimes, through some unexplainable error, John Henry), from the Boston merchant and...Yorkshire as a pet form of Henry or John....

 sirloin 

 folk-etymology this is because the cut of beef was "knighted" by an English king for its superiority, a tale variously told of Henry...Fuller, "Church-History of Britain," who writes parenthetically that it was "so knighted, saith tradition, by this King Henry...," meaning Henry VIII)....

 VIP 

 [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]...

 moonlight 

 "hold a second job, especially at night," 1957 (implied in the verbal noun moonlighting), from moonlighter "one who takes a second job after hours" (1954), from the notion of working by the light of the moon; see moonlight (n.). Earlier the verb had been used to mean "commit crim

 comedy 

 late 14c., "narrative with a happy ending; any composition intended for amusement," from Old French comedie (14c.), "a poem" (not in the theatrical sense) and directly from Latin comoedia, from Greek kōmōidia "a comedy, amusing spectacle," probably [Beekes] from kōmōidos "actor o

 mushroom 

 a word applied at first to almost any of the larger fungi but later to the agaricoid fungi and especially the edible varieties, mid-15c., muscheron, musseroun (attested 1327 as a surname, John Mussheron), from Anglo-French musherun, Old French meisseron (11c., Modern French mouss

 Share Henry 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Henry Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Henry">Etymology of Henry by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Henry. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Henry Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Henry," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Henry. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Henry." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Henry. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Henry." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Henry (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Henry 
 henna 
 Hennessey 
 henotheism 
 henpecked 
 Henrietta 
 Henry 
 heortology 
 hep 
 hepar 
 heparin 
 hepatic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix