URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/yester-
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:57:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Yester- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix

Yester- - Etymology & Meaning of the Prefix 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of yester- 

 yester- 

 "next before the present," from Old English geostran "yesterday," from Proto-Germanic *gester- (source also of Old High German gestaron , German gestern "yesterday," Old Norse gær "tomorrow, yesterday," Gothic gistradagis "tomorrow"). Compare yesterday .

 Originally "the other day" (reckoned from "today," either backward or forward), according to Watkins from PIE root *dhgh(y)es- "yesterday" (source also of Sanskrit hyah , Avestan zyo , Persian di , Greek khthes , Latin heri , Old Irish indhe , Welsh doe "yesterday;" Latin hesternus "of yesterday").

 As also in yestereven "on the evening of the day before the present," also yestere'en ; yestereve ; yestermorn , yestermorning ; yesternight ; yesteryear .

 Entries linking to yester- 

 yesterday (n., adv.) 

 Middle English yesterdai , "the day last past; during the day preceding the present," from Old English geostran dæg ; see yester- + day .

 Other Germanic languages tend to use their version of yester- alone for this (German  gestern , etc.). The only known parallel is in Gothic ( gistradagis ). The transferred sense of "a short time ago" is by late 14c. To want or need (something) yesterday "right away" is by 1974.

 yesternight (n., adv.) 

 "during the night before the present day," Old English gystran niht ; see yester- + night (n.). As a noun, "the night last past," 1510s.

 yesteryear (n.) 

 coined 1870 by Dante Gabriel Rossetti from yester- + year to translate French antan (from Vulgar Latin *anteannum "the year before") in a refrain by François Villon: Mais ou sont les neiges d'antan? which Rossetti rendered "But where are the snows of yesteryear?"

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 doe 

 "female of the deer" (the male is a buck), from Old English da "a female deer," which is of unknown origin, perhaps a Celtic loan-word (compare Cornish da "fallow deer," Old Irish dam "ox," Welsh dafad "sheep"). The native word is hind (n.). Similar words in continental Germanic 

 swallow 

 "ingest through the throat" (transitive), Middle English swolwen, from Old English swelgan "swallow, imbibe, absorb" (class III strong verb; past tense swealg, past participle swolgen), from Proto-Germanic *swelgan/*swelhan (source also of Old Saxon farswelgan, Old Norse svelgja 

 algebra 

 "formal mathematics; the analysis of equations; the art of reasoning about quantitative relations by the aid of a compact and highly systematized notation," 1550s, from Medieval Latin algebra, from Arabic "al-mukhtasar fi hisab al-jabr wa al-muqabala" ("the compendium on calculat

 picnic 

 1748 (in Chesterfield's "Letters"), but the thing itself apparently was rare before c. 1800 as an English institution [OED]; it originally meant "a fashionable social affair (not necessarily out of doors) in which every partaker contributed something to the general table;" from F

 Europe 

 from Latin Europa "Europe," from Greek Europe, which is of uncertain origin; as a geographic name first recorded in the Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier): "Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring per

 revival 

 1650s, "act of reviving after decline or discontinuance;" specifically from 1660s as, "the bringing back to the stage of a play which has not been presented for a considerable time;" from revive + -al (2). The sense of "a general and extraordinary religious awakening in a communi

 merry 

 Middle English mirie, from Old English myrge "pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet, exciting feelings of enjoyment and gladness" (said of grass, trees, the world, music, song); also as an adverb, "pleasantly, melodiously," from Proto-Germanic *murgijaz, which probably originally 

 bail 

 "bond money, security given to obtain the release of a prisoner," late 15c., a sense that apparently developed from that of "temporary release (of an arrested person) from jail" (into the custody of another, who gives security for future appearance at trial), which is recorded fr

 innocent 

 mid-14c., "doing no evil; free from sin, guilt, or moral wrong," from Old French inocent "harmless; not guilty; pure" (12c.), from Latin innocentem (nominative innocens) "not guilty, blameless; harmless; disinterested," from in- "not" (see in- (1)) + nocentem (nominative nocens),

 handicap 

 1650s, from hand in cap, a game whereby two bettors would engage a neutral umpire to determine the odds in an unequal contest. The bettors would put their hands holding forfeit money into a hat or cap. The umpire would announce the odds and the bettors would withdraw their hands 

 Share yester- 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/yester- Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/yester-">Etymology of yester- by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of yester-. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/yester- Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of yester-," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/yester-. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of yester-." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/yester-. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of yester-." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/yester- (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near yester- 
 Yersinia 
 yes 
 yeshiva 
 yes-man 
 yessir 
 yester- 
 yesterday 
 yesternight 
 yesteryear 
 yet 
 yeti 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix