URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/often
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:26:09Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Often - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Often - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of often 

 often (adv.) 

 "repeatedly, again and again, many times, under many circumstances," mid-13c., an extended form of oft , in Middle English typically before vowels and h- , probably by influence of its opposite, seldom (Middle English selden ). In common use from 16c., replacing oft . Pronunciation "offen" recorded from 15c. Related: Oftener; oftenest .
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to often 

 oft (adv.) 

 Old English oft "repeatedly, again and again, many times; frequently; under many circumstances," from Proto-Germanic *ufta- "frequently" (source also of Old Frisian ofta , Danish ofte , Old High German ofto , German oft , Old Norse opt , Gothic ufta "often"), a word of unknown origin, perhaps [Watkins] from a suffixed form of PIE root *upo "under."

 Archaic or only poetic except in compounds (such as oft-told ) and replaced by its derivative often . It also was an adjective in Middle English, "frequent, repeated." Related: Ofter; oftest .

 seldom (adv.) 

 "rarely, not often, infrequently," late Old English and early Middle English seldum , an alteration of seldan "infrequently, rarely," from Proto-Germanic *selda- "strange, rare" (source also of Old Norse sjaldan , Old Frisian selden , Dutch zelden , Old High German seltan , German selten ), a word of uncertain etymology. Perhaps ultimately from the base of self (q.v.).

 The form shifted apparently on analogy of adverbial dative plurals in -um (as in whilom "at one time," from Old English hwilum , from the source of while ). The same development also created litlum from little , miclum from mickle . Also compare random , ransom . The forms in -n decreased from 14c. and faded out in 16c.

 Old English seldan had comparative seldor , superlative seldost ; in early Middle English, as seldan changed form and lost its connection with these, selde was back-formed as a positive. Shakespeare uses seld-shown "rarely exhibited." Some compounds using the old form survived through Middle English, such as selcouth "rarely or little-known, unusual, strange, wonderful," from Old English selcuð , seld-cuð , from seldan + cuð (see couth ). 

  German seltsam "strange, odd," Dutch zeldzaam are cognates of seldom , but with the second element conformed to their cognates of -some . Related: Seldomness .

 Seldom-times "rarely, hardly ever" is from mid-15c. (earlier was seld-when , Old English seldhwanne "rarely," which lasted until 16c.). Seldom-seen "rarely encountered" is from mid-15c.; older was seld-seen (Middle English seld-sen , from Old English seldsiene ), which lasted long enough to appear in Marlowe ( seildsene , 1590s).

 oftentimes 
 *upo 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 much 

 c. 1200, "great in quantity or extent" (also "great in size, big, large," a sense now obsolete), a worn-down form (by loss of unaccented last syllable) of Middle English muchel "large, tall; many, in a large amount; great, formidable," from Old English micel "great in amount or e

 insensate 

 Insensate means "not capable of feeling sensation," often "inanimate;" insensible means "lacking the power to feel with the...senses," hence, often, "unconscious;" insensitive means "having little or no reaction to what is perceived by one's senses...," often "tactless."...

 facetious 

 Formerly often in a good sense, "witty, amusing," but later implying a desire to be amusing that is often intrusive or ill-timed...

 rugae 

 "Since words for 'wrinkle' and 'crease' are often derived from 'to be rugged', from which also 'to belch' is often derived...

 quotient 

 number by another, number of times one quantity is contained in another," mid-15c., quocient, from Latin quotiens "how often...; as often as," pronominal adverb of time, from quot "how many?"...

 Irish 

 Before 19c. often meaning "contradictory."...In later use often in mocking or pejorative phrases, such as Irish apricot "potato," Irish daisy "common dandelion."...

 babu 

 In Bengal and elsewhere, among Anglo-Indians, it is often used with a slight savour of disparagement, as characterizing a...superficially cultivated, but too often effeminate, Bengali....

 great 

 Old English great "big, tall, thick, stout, massive; coarse," from West Germanic *grauta- "coarse, thick" (source also of Old Saxon grot, Old Frisian grat, Dutch groot, German groß "great"). If the original sense was "coarse," it is perhaps from PIE root *ghreu- "to rub, grind," 

 deal 

 "a part or portion," Middle English del, from from Old English dæl "a part of a whole, a share;" with qualification (great, etc.), "an extent, degree, quantity, amount," from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (source also of Old Norse deild, Old Frisian del "part; juridical district," Dutch

 retrieve 

 early 15c., retreven, "find or discover again," originally in reference to dogs finding lost game, from retruev-, stem of Old French retreuver (Modern French retrouver) "find again, recover, meet again, recognize," from re- "again" (see re-) + trouver "to find," probably from Vul

 Share often 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/often Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/often">Etymology of often by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of often. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/often Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of often," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/often. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of often." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/often. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of often." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/often (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near often 
 off-street 
 off-target 
 offward 
 off-white 
 oft 
 often 
 oftentimes 
 ogee 
 ogham 
 Oglala 
 ogle 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix