URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/alchemy
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:36:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Alchemy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Alchemy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of alchemy 

 alchemy (n.) 

 "medieval chemistry; the supposed science of transmutation of base metals into silver or gold" (involving also the quest for the universal solvent, quintessence, etc.), mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia , from Arabic al-kimiya , from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against "the old writings of the Egyptians"), all meaning "alchemy," and of uncertain origin.

 Perhaps from an old name for Egypt ( Khemia , literally "land of black earth," found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos "that which is poured out," from khein "to pour," from PIE root *gheu- "to pour" [Watkins, but Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The word seems to have elements of both origins.

 Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation, that Gr. 
 khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]

 The al- is the Arabic definite article, "the." The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from Alexandrians and entered Europe via Arabic Spain. Alchemy was the "chemistry" of the Middle Ages and early modern times, involving both occult and natural philosophy and practical chemistry and metallurgy. After c. 1600 the strictly scientific sense went with chemistry , and alchemy was left with the sense "pursuit of the transmutation of baser metals into gold, search for the universal solvent and the panacea."

 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to alchemy 

 chemistry (n.) 

 c. 1600, "alchemy," from chemist + -ry ; also see chemical (adj.). The meaning "natural physical process" is from 1640s; the sense of "scientific study of the composition of material things and the changes they undergo" is by 1788. Chemistry in the European mind disengaged itself from alchemy in the mid-1600s; The Academy del Cimento was established in Italy in 1657, the Royal Society in London in 1660, and the Academy of Sciences in Paris in 1666.

 The figurative sense of "instinctual attraction or affinity" is also attested by c. 1600, from the alchemical sense.

 alchemical (adj.) 

 "relating to or produced by alchemy," 1580s; see alchemy + -ical . Related: Alchemistical (1550s); alchemically .

 alchemist 
 alkahest 
 chemical 
 chemist 
 *gheu- 
 al- 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hermetic 

 1630s "dealing with occult science or alchemy," from Latin hermeticus, from Greek Hermes, god of science and art (among other...Hermes Trismegistos "Thrice-Great Hermes," who supposedly invented the process of making a glass tube airtight (a process in alchemy...

 refrigeration 

 late 15c., refrigeracion, "act of cooling or freezing," originally in alchemy, from Latin refrigerationem (nominative refrigeratio...

 quintessence 

 early 15c., quint-essence, in ancient philosophy and medieval alchemy, "a pure essence latent in all things, and the substance...Its extraction was one of the chief goals of alchemy....

 rotation 

 Used earlier in alchemy, "transmutation of the four elements into one another" (late 15c.)....

 tertium quid 

 A loan-translation of Greek triton ti (Plato), used in alchemy for "unidentified element present in a combination of two...

 aqua 

 The Latin word was used in late Middle English in combinations in old chemistry and alchemy in the sense of "decoction, solution...

 circulation 

 mid-15c., circulacioun, in alchemy, "process of changing something from one element into another," from Latin circulationem...

 pseudo-science 

 also pseudoscience, "a pretended or mistaken science," 1796 (the earliest reference is to alchemy), from pseudo- + science. The term pseudo-science is hybrid, and therefore objectionable. Pseudognosy would be better etymology, but the unlearned might be apt to association with i

 style 

 early 14c., stile, "writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative, treatise;" also "characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression," and "way of life, manner, behavior, conduct." This is from Old French stile, estile "style, f

 average 

 late 15c., "any small charge over freight cost, payable by owners of goods to the master of a ship for his care of the goods," also "financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit," from French avarie "damage to ship," and Italian avaria. A word from 12c. Mediterranea

 Share alchemy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/alchemy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/alchemy">Etymology of alchemy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of alchemy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/alchemy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of alchemy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alchemy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of alchemy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/alchemy. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of alchemy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/alchemy (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near alchemy 
 Albuquerque 
 Alcatraz 
 Alcestis 
 alchemical 
 alchemist 
 alchemy 
 alcohol 
 alcoholic 
 alcoholism 
 Alcoran 
 alcove 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix