URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hammer
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:16:07Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hammer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hammer - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hammer 

 hammer (n.) 

 Old English hamor "hammer," from Proto-Germanic *hamaraz (source also of Old Saxon hamur , Middle Dutch, Dutch hamer , Old High German hamar , German Hammer ). The Old Norse cognate hamarr meant "stone, crag" (it's common in English place names), and suggests an original sense of the Germanic words as "tool with a stone head," which would describe the first hammers. The Germanic words thus could be from a PIE *ka-mer- , with reversal of initial sounds, from PIE *akmen "stone, sharp stone used as a tool" (source also of Old Church Slavonic kamy , Russian kameni "stone"), from root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce."

 As a part of a firearm, 1580s; as a part of a piano, 1774; as a small bone of the ear, 1610s. Figurative use of "aggressive and destructive foe" is late 14c., from similar use of French martel , Latin malleus . To go at it hammer and tongs "with great violence and vigor" (1708) is an image from blacksmithing (the tongs hold the metal and the hammer beats it). Hammer and sickle as an emblem of Soviet communism attested from 1921, symbolizing industrial and agricultural labor.

 hammer (v.) 

 late 14c., "deal blows with a hammer or axe;" mid-15c., "to produce (something) by blows with a hammer," from hammer (n.). Also sometimes in Middle English the verb to describe how Christ was crucified. Figurative meaning "work (something) out laboriously" recorded from 1580s. Meaning "beat or drive with or as if with a hammer" is from 1640s; that of "to defeat heavily" is from 1948. Old English had hamorian "to beat out, forge." Related: Hammered ; hammering .

 Crist, as he was ruthfully hamerd apon the croce, Songe to his fadire of heven.

 ["The Mirror of Man's Salvation," 15c.]
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to hammer 

 hammered (adj.) 

 1530s, past-participle adjective from hammer (v.). As a slang synonym for "drunk," attested by 1986.

 hammerhead (adj.) 

 also hammer-head , 1560s, "head of a hammer," from hammer (n.) + head (n.). From 1796 (American English) in reference to a kind of shark, so called for its broad, transverse head. The animal is referred to as hammer-headed shark from 1752 and hammer-fish from 1745. The older name for it was balance-fish ; there was a full specimen and a head of another under that name in the Royal Society Museum by 1681:

 He hath his Name not unaptly from the ſhape of his Head, very different from that of all other Fiſhes, being ſpread out horizontally, like the Beam of a Balance; his eyes ſtanding at the two extremes, as the iron Hooks do at the end of the Beam. He grows sometimes to the length of four or five yards: but this is a young one. [Nehemiah Grew, M.D., "Catalogue & Deſcription Of the Natural and Artificial Rarities Belonging to the Royal Society And preſerved at Greſham Colledge. Whereunto is Subjoyned the Comparative Anatomy of Stomachs and Guts. By the ſame author" London, 1681 ]

 Compare French requin marteau, Italian pesce martello, etc. The Greeks named it for the cross-bar of a yoke ( zygon ) and called it zygania . "According to Xenocrates, and to Philotinus ap. Galen vi. 727, it is tough and indigestible, but may be eaten pickled" [Thompson].

 .

 jack-hammer 
 ninnyhammer 
 sledgehammer 
 tack-hammer 
 *ak- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mallet 

 "small wooden hammer," chiefly used for driving another tool, late 14c., from Old French maillet "mallet, small wooden hammer, door-knocker," diminutive of mail, from Latin malleus "a hammer, mallet," from Proto-Italic *molalo-, *molklo- "hammer," from PIE *molkh-tlo- "crushing i

 forge 

 late 14c., "a smithy," from Old French forge "forge, smithy" (12c.), earlier faverge, from Latin fabrica "workshop, smith's shop," hence also "a trade, an industry;" also "a skillful production, a crafty device," from faber (genitive fabri) "workman in hard materials, smith" (see

 pound 

 [fundamental unit of weight] Old English pund "pound" (in weight or money), also "pint," from Proto-Germanic *punda- "pound" as a measure of weight (source of Gothic pund, Old High German phunt, German Pfund, Middle Dutch pont, Old Frisian and Old Norse pund), an early borrowing 

 sledge 

 "heavy hammer," formerly the largest hammer used in forges or by smiths, typically requiring two hands to wield, Middle English...slegge, from Old English slecg "hammer, mallet," from Proto-Germanic *slagjo- (source also of Old Norse sleggja, Middle...

 machete 

 1590s (in pseudo-Spanish form macheto), from Spanish machete "a chopping knife," probably a diminutive of macho "sledge hammer...An alternative explanation traces macho to Latin marculus "a small hammer," diminutive of marcus "hammer," from a base parallel...

 toil 

 from Old French toeillier "drag about, make dirty" (12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare "crush with a small hammer...," from tudicula "mill for crushing olives, instrument for crushing," from Latin tudes "hammer," from PIE *tud-, variant...

 pulsation 

 pulsatio) "a beating or striking," noun of action from past-participle stem of pulsare "to beat, strike, push against' hammer...

 head 

 Old English heafod "top of the body," also "upper end of a slope," also "chief person, leader, ruler; capital city," from Proto-Germanic *haubid (source also of Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofuð, Old Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Ha

 abet 

 late 14c., "urge on, incite" (implied in abetting), from Old French abeter "to bait, to harass with dogs," literally "to cause to bite," from a- "to" (see ad-) + beter "to bait." This verb is probably from Frankish or some other Germanic source (perhaps Low Franconian betan "inci

 beat 

 Old English beatan "inflict blows on, strike repeatedly, thrash" (class VII strong verb; past tense beot, past participle beaten), from Proto-Germanic *bautan (source also of Old Norse bauta, Old High German bozan "to beat"), from PIE root *bhau- "to strike." Past tense form beat

 Share hammer 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hammer Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hammer">Etymology of hammer by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hammer. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hammer Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hammer," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hammer. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hammer." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hammer. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hammer." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hammer (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hammer 
 hamburger 
 Hamiltonian 
 Hamite 
 Hamitic 
 hamlet 
 hammer 
 hammered 
 hammerhead 
 hammock 
 Hammond 
 hamper 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix