URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/argue
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:12:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Argue - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Argue - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of argue 

 argue (v.) 

 c. 1300, "to make reasoned statements to prove or refute a proposition," from Old French arguer "maintain an opinion or view; harry, reproach, accuse, blame" (12c.), ultimately from Latin arguere "make clear, make known, prove, declare, demonstrate" (from a suffixed form of PIE root *arg- "to shine; white"). The transmission to French might be via arguere in a Medieval Latin sense of "to argue," or from Latin argutare "to prattle, prate," frequentative of arguere .

 De Vaan says arguere is probably "a denominative verb 'to make bright, enlighten' to an adj. *argu- 'bright' as continued in argutus and outside Italic." He cites a closely similar formation in Hittite arkuuae- "to make a plea." The meaning "to oppose, dispute, contend in argument" is from late 14c. Related: Argued ; arguing .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to argue 

 argle (v.) 

 1580s "to argue obstinately, wrangle," "prob. a popular perversion of argue , or confusion of that word with haggle " [OED]. Reduplicated form argle-bargle is from 1822 (sometimes argy-bargy , 1857); As a noun, "wrangling" from 1861.

 arguable (adj.) 

 "capable of being argued," 1610s, from argue + -able .

 arguendo 
 arguer 
 argufy 
 argument 
 *arg- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 argument 

 early 14c., "statements and reasoning in support of a proposition or causing belief in a doubtful matter," from Old French arguement "reasoning, opinion; accusation, charge" (13c.), from Latin argumentum "a logical argument; evidence, ground, support, proof," from arguere "make c

 reason 

 c. 1200, resoun, "the intellectual faculty that adopts actions to ends," also "statement in an argument, statement of explanation or justification," from Anglo-French resoun, Old French raison "course; matter; subject; language, speech; thought, opinion," from Latin rationem (nom

 indicate 

 1650s, "to point out," back-formation from indication (q.v.) or else from Latin indicatus, past participle of indicare "to point out, show," from in- "into, in, on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + dicare "proclaim" (from PIE root *deik- "to show," also "pronounce solemnly," and 

 dispute 

 "dispute, fight over, contend for, discuss" and directly from Latin disputare "weigh, examine, discuss, argue, explain,"...The Latin word was used in Vulgate in sense of "to argue, contend with words."...In English, transitive sense of "argue against, attempt to disprove, deny" is from 1510s....

 peroration 

 perorationem (nominative peroratio) "the ending of a speech or argument of a case," from past-participle stem of perorare "argue...

 jangle 

 , jangeln, "to talk excessively, chatter, talk idly" (intransitive), from Old French jangler "to chatter, gossip, bawl, argue...

 debate 

 .; that of "argue for or against in public" is from 1520s. Related: Debated; debating....

 conserve 

 "to keep safe, preserve from loss or decay," late 14c., from Old French conserver (9c.), from Latin conservare "to keep, preserve, keep intact, guard," from assimilated form of com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + servare "keep watch, maintain" (from PIE root *ser

 converse 

 mid-14c., "to move about, live, dwell; live or behave in a certain way" (senses now obsolete), from Old French and French converser "to talk, open communication between," also "to live, dwell, inhabit, reside" (12c.), and directly from Latin conversari "to live, dwell, live with,

 fence 

 early 14c., "action of defending, resistance; means of protection, fortification," shortening of defens (see defense). The same pattern also yielded fend, fender; and obsolete fensive "defensive" (late 16c.). Spelling alternated between -c- and -s- in Middle English. Sense of "en

 Share argue 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/argue Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/argue">Etymology of argue by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of argue. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/argue Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of argue," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/argue. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of argue." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/argue. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of argue." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/argue (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near argue 
 Argonaut 
 argosy 
 argot 
 arguable 
 arguably 
 argue 
 arguendo 
 arguer 
 argufy 
 argument 
 argumentation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix