URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/swine
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:02Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Swine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Swine - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of swine 

 swine (n.) 

 Old English swin "domestic pig, hog, sow; wild boar" (commonly used in a plural sense, of such animals collectively), from Proto-Germanic *sweina- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian Middle Low German, Old High German swin , Middle Dutch swijn , Dutch zwijn , German Schwein , Old Norse, Swedish, Danish svin ), neuter adjective (with suffix *-ino- ). This is from PIE *su- "pig" (see sow (n.)).

 The native word, it has been largely ousted by pig (n.1). Applied to persons from late 14c., "mean or degraded, sensual and coarse." The phrase pearls before swine (mid-14c.) is from Matthew vii.6; an early English formation of it was:

 Ne ge ne wurpen eowre meregrotu toforan eowrum swynon. [c. 1000] 

 The Latin word in the Gospel verse was confused in French with marguerite "daisy" (the "pearl" of the field), and in Dutch the expression became "roses before swine." Swine-drunk is from 1590s (Nashe). Swine-flu is attested from 1921. Earlier terms for infectious pig diseases include swine-plague (1891); swine-pox was originally "chicken pox" (1520s); it is attested from 1764 as a disease of swine.

 Entries linking to swine 

 pig (n.1) 

 Middle English pigge "a young pig" (mid-13c., late 12c. as a surname), probably from Old English *picg , found in compounds, but, like dog , its further etymology unknown. The older general word for adults was swine , if female, sow , if male, boar . Apparently related to Low German bigge , Dutch big ("but the phonology is difficult" -- OED).

 By early 14c. pig was used of a swine or hog regardless of age or sex. Applied to persons, usually in contempt, since 1540s; the derogatory meaning "police officer" has been in underworld slang at least since 1811.

 The pigs frisked my panney, and nailed my screws; the officers searched my house, and seized my picklock keys. ["Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence," London, 1811]

 Another Old English word for the animal was fearh , which is related to furh  "furrow," from PIE *perk- "dig, furrow" (source also of Latin porcus "pig," see pork ). "This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical attributes or activities" [Lass].

 Synonyms grunter (1640s), porker (1650s) are from sailors' and fishermen's euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of the Gadarene swine, who drowned. The image of a pig in a poke is attested from late 14c. (see poke (n.1)). Flying pigs as a type of something unreal is from 1610s.

 sow (n.) 

 Middle English soue , from Old English sugu , su "female of the swine, adult female hog," from Proto-Germanic *su- (source also of Old Saxon, Old High German su , German Sau , Dutch zeug , Old Norse syr ).

 This is held to be from PIE root *su- (source also of Sanskrit sukarah "wild boar, swine;" Avestan hu "wild boar;" Greek hys "swine;" Latin sus "swine," swinus "pertaining to swine;" Old Church Slavonic svinija "swine;" Lettish sivens "young pig;" Welsh hucc , Irish suig "swine; Old Irish socc "snout, plowshare"). The root is possibly imitative of pig noise, a notion reinforced by the fact that Sanskrit sukharah means "maker of (the sound) 'su.' "

 Related to swine . As a term of abuse for a woman, attested from c. 1500. Sowbug "hog-louse, pill-bug" is from 1750; sow in reference to any terrestrial isopod that can roll itself into a ball is from 15c. Also sow-lice (1650s).

 keelson 
 pearl 
 plural 
 swineherd 
 swinery 
 swinish 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share swine 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/swine Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/swine">Etymology of swine by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of swine. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/swine Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of swine," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/swine. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of swine." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/swine. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of swine." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/swine (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near swine 
 swimming 
 swimmingly 
 swimsuit 
 swindle 
 swindler 
 swine 
 swineherd 
 swinery 
 swing 
 swing voter 
 swinger 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix