URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/griffin
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:17Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Griffin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Griffin - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of griffin 

 griffin (n.) 

 c. 1200 (as a surname), from Old French grifon "a bird of prey," also "fabulous bird of Greek mythology" (with head and wings of an eagle, body and hind quarters of a lion, believed to inhabit Scythia and guard its gold), named for its hooked beak, from Late Latin gryphus , misspelling of grypus , variant of gryps (genitive grypos ) "griffin," from Greek gryps (genitive grypos ) "a griffin or dragon," literally "curved, hook-nosed" (opposed to simos ).

 Klein suggests a Semitic source, "through the medium of the Hittites," and cites Hebrew kerubh "a winged angel," Akkadian karibu , epithet of the bull-colossus (see cherub ). The same or an identical word was used in mid-19c. Louisiana to mean "mulatto" (especially one one-quarter or two-fifths white) and in British India from 1793 to mean "newly arrived European," probably via notion of "strange hybrid animal."
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to griffin 

 cherub (n.) 

 late 14c. as an order of angels, from Late Latin cherub , from Greek kheroub , from Hebrew kerubh (plural kerubhim ) "winged angel," which according to Klein is perhaps related to Akkadian karubu "to bless," karibu "one who blesses," an epithet of the bull-colossus. Old English had cerubin , from the Greek plural. But there are other theories:

 The cherubim, a common feature of ancient Near Eastern mythology, are not to be confused with the round-cheeked darlings of Renaissance iconography. The root of the terms either means "hybrid" or, by an inversion of consonants, "mount," "steed," and they are winged beasts, probably of awesome aspect, on which the sky god of the old Canaanite myths and of the poetry of Psalms goes riding through the air. [Robert Alter, "The Five Books of Moses," 2004, commentary on Genesis iii.24]

 The meaning "beautiful child" is from 1705. The plural in this sense is cherubs .

 griffon (n.) 

 alternative spelling in certain senses of griffin . Also a name given to the Byzantine Greeks, perhaps suggested by some of the collateral forms of Greek .

 gryphon 
 hippogriff 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hippogriff 

 also hippogryph, 1650s, from French hippogriffe (16c.), from Italian ippogrifo, from Greek hippos "horse" (from PIE root *ekwo- "horse") + Italian grifo, from Late Latin gryphus "griffin" (see griffin). A creature part griffin, but with body and hind parts in the form of a horse.

 pandemic 

 of diseases, "incident to a whole people or region," 1660s, from Late Latin pandemus, from Greek pandemos "pertaining to all people; public, common," from pan- "all" (see pan-) + dēmos "people" (see demotic). Modeled on epidemic; OED reports that it is "Distinguished from epidemi

 course 

 c. 1300, "onward movement, motion forward, a running in a prescribed direction or over a prescribed distance; path or distance prescribed for a race, a race-course" from Old French cors "course; run, running; flow of a river" (12c.), from Latin cursus "a running; a journey; direc

 forsake 

 Old English forsacan "object to, oppose, refuse, deny; give up, renounce" (past tense forsoc, past participle forsacen), from for- "completely" + sacan "to struggle, dispute, wrangle; accuse, blame" (see sake (n.1)). Related: Forsaking. Similar formation in Old Saxon farsakan, Du

 conquer 

 c. 1200, cunquearen, "to achieve" (a task), from Old French conquerre "conquer, defeat, vanquish," from Vulgar Latin *conquaerere (for Latin conquirere) "to search for, procure by effort, win," from assimilated form of Latin com-, here perhaps an intensive prefix (see com-), + qu

 pluck 

 Middle English plukken, "pull (something) off or out from a surface" (especially hair or feathers, but also teeth), from late Old English ploccian, pluccian "pull off, cull," from West Germanic *plokken (source also of Middle Low German plucken, Middle Dutch plocken, Dutch plukke

 ketchup 

 1680s, also spelled catsup which form first appeared in Jonathan Swift's 1730 poem A Panegyrick on the D--n.  This spelling is still in use in U.S., influenced by cat and sup. In some of the earliest uses described as an East Indian sauce made with fruits and spices, with sp

 realm 

 c. 1300, reaume, "kingdom, domain under a sovereign, royal jurisdiction," from Old French reaume, later realme, variants (in part by influence of Old French reial "regal," from Latin  regalis) of roiaume "kingdom." This is possibly from a Gallo-Romance *regiminem, "formed as

 masquerade 

 1590s, "assembly of persons wearing masks and usually other disguises," from French mascarade or Spanish mascarada "masked party or dance," from Italian mascarata "a ball at which masks are worn," variant of mascherata "masquerade," from maschera (see mask (n.)). Extended sense o

 rendezvous 

 1590s, "place appointed for assembling of troops," from French rendez-vous, noun use of rendez vous "present yourselves," from the wording of orders, from rendez, second person plural imperative of rendre "to present" (see render (v.)) + vous "you" (from Latin vos, from PIE *wos-

 Share griffin 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/griffin Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/griffin">Etymology of griffin by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of griffin. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/griffin Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of griffin," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/griffin. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of griffin." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/griffin. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of griffin." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/griffin (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near griffin 
 griever 
 grieving 
 grievous 
 grievously 
 grievousness 
 griffin 
 Griffith 
 griffon 
 grift 
 grifter 
 grill 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix