URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/crust
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:21:43Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Crust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Crust - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of crust 

 crust (n.) 

 early 14c., "hard outer part of bread," from Old French crouste (13c., Modern French croûte ) and directly from Latin crusta "rind, crust, shell, bark," from PIE *krus-to- "that which has been hardened," suffixed form of root *kreus- "to begin to freeze, form a crust." From mid-15c. as "any hard, external portion of comparative thinness;" meaning "outer shell of the earth" is from 1550s.
 also from early 14c. 

 crust (v.) 

 late 14c., "to thicken or contract into a hard covering" (intransitive); see crust (n.). From 1540s in transitive sense of "cover with a crust or hard exterior portion." Related: Crusted ; crusting .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to crust 

 crustation (n.) 

 "an incrustation; an act of crusting over," 1650s, noun of action or state from crust (v.).

 crusty (adj.) 

 c. 1400, "scabby, like a crust, hard," from crust (n.) + -y (2). Figurative use, of persons, "short-tempered, surly, peevish" is from 1560s.

 *kreus- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to begin to freeze, form a crust."

 It might form all or part of: crouton ; crust ; Crustacea ; crustacean ; cryo- ; cryogenic ; crystal ; crystalline ; crystallize ; custard ; encrust ; Kristallnacht .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit krud- "make hard, thicken;" Avestan xruzdra- "hard;" Greek krystallos "ice, crystal," kryos "icy cold, frost;" Latin crusta "rind, crust, shell, bark;" Lettish kruwesis "frozen mud;" Old High German hrosa "ice, crust;" Old English hruse "earth;" Old Norse hroðr "scurf."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 gall 

 "bile, liver secretion," Old English galla (Anglian), gealla (West Saxon) "gall, bile," from Proto-Germanic *gallon "bile" (source also of Old Norse gall "gall, bile; sour drink," Old Saxon galle, Old High German galla, German Galle), from PIE root *ghel- (2) "to shine," with der

 rind 

 Old English rinde "bark of a tree or other plant," also figurative; also "a crust, firm outer coating or covering;" later...Proto-Germanic *rind- (source also of Old Saxon rinda, Middle Dutch and Dutch rinde "bark of a tree," Old High German rinda "crust..., bark," German Rinde "crust, crust of bread"), which is perhaps related to Old English rendan (source of rend (v.)); Boutkan...

 upper 

 Upper crust is attested from mid-15c. in reference to the top crust of a loaf of bread, 1836 in reference to society....

 plutonic 

 "pertaining to or involving intense heat deep in the earth's crust," 1796, coined by Irish scientist Richard Kirwin (1733...reference to early 19c. geological theory (championed by Hutton) that attributed most of the present features of the earth's crust...

 geode 

 Perhaps so called in reference to the rough crust in which the crystals are hidden. Related: Geodic....

 rend 

 rendan (source also of Old Frisian renda "to cut, break," Middle Low German rende "anything broken," German Rinde "bark, crust...

 cobbler 

 "deep-dish fruit pie with thick, scone-like crust," 1859, American English, perhaps related to 14c. cobeler "wooden bowl...

 tartar 

 "bitartrate of potash, sediment of potassium tartarate" (a deposit left during fermentation), late 14c., from Old French tartre and directly from Medieval Latin tartarum, from late Greek tartaron "tartar encrusting the sides of wine casks," a word perhaps of Semitic origin, but i

 dry 

 Middle English drie "without moisture, comparatively free from water or fluid," from Old English dryge, from Proto-Germanic *draugiz (source also of Middle Low German dröge, Middle Dutch druge, Dutch droog, Old High German trucchon, German trocken, Old Norse draugr), from Germani

 layer 

 late 14c., "one who or that lays" (especially stones, "a mason"), agent noun from lay (v.). Passive sense of "a thickness of some material laid over a surface" is first recorded 1610s, but because the earliest English use was in cookery this is perhaps from French liue "binding,"

 Share crust 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/crust Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/crust">Etymology of crust by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of crust. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/crust Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of crust," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crust. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of crust." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crust. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of crust." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/crust (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near crust 
 crunk 
 crusade 
 crusader 
 cruse 
 crush 
 crust 
 Crustacea 
 crustacean 
 crustation 
 crusty 
 crutch 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix