URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/coast
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:20:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Coast - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Coast - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of coast 

 coast (n.) 

 early 14c., "margin of the land;" earlier "rib as a part of the body" (early 12c.), from Old French coste "rib, side, flank; slope, incline;" later "coast, shore" (12c., Modern French côte ), from Latin costa "a rib," perhaps related to a root word for "bone" (compare Old Church Slavonic kosti "bone," and PIE root *ost- ), but de Vaan dismisses this and calls it "an isolated word without etymology."

 Latin costa developed a secondary sense in Medieval Latin of "the shore," via notion of the "side" of the land, as well as "side of a hill," and this passed into Romanic (Italian costa "coast, side," Spanish cuesta "slope," costa "coast"), but only in the Germanic languages that borrowed it is it fully specialized in this sense (Dutch kust , Swedish kust , German Küste , Danish kyst ).

 French also used this word for "hillside, slope," which led to the English verb meaning "a slide or sled down a snowy or icy hillside," first attested 1775 in American English. Expression the coast is clear (16c.) is an image of landing on a shore unguarded by enemies; to clear the coast (1520s) was to make it suitable for landing.
 also from early 14c. 

 coast (v.) 

 late 14c., "to skirt, to go around the sides, to go along the border" of something (as a ship does the coastline), from Anglo-French costien , from the French source of coast (n.).

 The meaning "sled downhill," first attested 1834 in American English, is a separate borrowing or a new development from the noun. In bicycle-riding, "descend a hill with the feet off the pedals," from 1879. Of motor vehicles, "to move without thrust from the engine," from 1896; figurative use, of persons, "not to exert oneself," by 1934. Related: Coasted ; coasting .

 "Coasting" consists in throwing the legs up over the handles and allowing the bicycle to rush of its own impetus down hill. It can only be done with safety where the road is perfectly smooth, hard, and free from obstructions; but, under such conditions, bicycle coasting affords one of the most glorious and exhilarating of sensations, and, next to ballooning, its motion most nearly resembles the flight of a bird. [Harper's Weekly, Dec. 20, 1879]

 The reckless coasting down the long hills on the route was scarcely more defensible. Speeds of 25 to 30 miles an hour were reached in some instances. The common road is not the proper place for such exhibitions, especially in populous centres. The risk is altogether too great, both for occupants of the vehicle and for other frequenters of the highway. [account of an automobile race on the streets of New York in The Horseless Age, June 1896] 
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to coast 

 accost (v.) 

 1570s, "come side-by-side or face-to-face with," for any reason, from French accoster "move up to, come alongside" (Old French acoster ), from Late Latin accostare "come up to the side," from assimilated form of Latin ad "to" (see ad- ) + costa "a rib, side" (see coast (n.)). Now usually in the sense "approach and speak to" (1610s). Also picked up as the verb for a prostitute's solicitation of a customer (1812). Related: Accosted ; accosting .

 Infamous houses, he states, are in all parts of the metropolis, but most numerous in small streets, leading from public thoroughfares. "Some of them adjoin churches, chapels, and even the courts of law. There is one locality in which vicious women accost persons as they issue from the door of a chapel on the Sabbath. In another situation, the officiating clergyman while in the pulpit, is in a position to witness the proceedings in a contiguous brothel." [Michael Ryan, M.D., "Prostitution in London," 1839]

 coast guard (n.) 

 also coast-guard , 1827, a guard stationed on a coast, originally to prevent smuggling, later serving as a general police force for the coast; see coast (n.) + guard (n.).

 coastal 
 coaster 
 coastline 
 costa 
 costal 
 costard 
 cutlet 
 *ost- 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 coaster 

 1570s, "one who sails along coasts," especially one who trades from port to port in the same country, agent noun from coast (v.) in its sense "to go around the sides or border" of something. Applied to vessels for such sailing from 1680s. The meaning "tabletop drink mat" to prote

 costard 

 "large variety of apple," late 14c., coster; late 13c. in Anglo-Latin, perhaps from Anglo-French or Old French coste "rib" (from Latin costa "a rib;" see coast (n.)), if the notion is "a large apple with prominent 'ribs,' " i.e. one having a shape more like a green pepper than a 

 slide 

 Middle English sliden, "glide, move smoothly and easily over a surface," also "to fall, lose one's balance through slipping," from Old English slidan (intransitive, past tense slad, past participle sliden) "to glide, slip, fall, fall down;" figuratively "fail, lapse morally, err;

 Riviera 

 In extended use it refers to the whole coast from Marseilles in France to La Spezia in Italy, which became popular 19c. as...ironically) in reference to areas of other countries, as in American Riviera (Florida, 1887); English Riviera (Devonshire coast...

 croft 

 "small piece of enclosed ground for agricultural purposes, a very small farm," especially of those on the western coast and...Crofter "tenant who holds a small field, one who occupies a croft," especially "small farmer on the western coast and islands...

 anabasis 

 "a military advance," 1706, from Greek anabasis "military expedition," literally "a going up (from the coast)," especially...in reference to the advance of Cyrus the Younger and his Greek mercenaries from near the Aegean coast into Asia, and the...

 littoral 

 the seashore," 1650s, from Latin littoralis "of or belonging to the seashore," from litus (genitive litoris) "seashore, coast...The noun meaning "part of a country lying along the coast" is from 1828, from Italian littorale, originally an adjective,...

 motion 

 late 14c., mocioun, "process of moving; change of place, continuous variation of position;" also "suggestion, proposal or proposition formally made," from Old French mocion "movement, motion; change, alteration" (13c., Modern French motion) and directly from Latin motionem (nomin

 movement 

 late 14c., mevement, "change of position; passage from place to place," from Old French movement "movement, exercise; start, instigation" (Modern French mouvement), from Medieval Latin movimentum, from Latin movere "to move, set in motion" (from PIE root *meue- "to push away"). I

 panorama 

 1796, "a painting on a revolving cylindrical surface," representing scenes too extended to be beheld all at once, coined c. 1789 by inventor, Irish artist Robert Barker, literally "a complete view," from pan- "all" + Greek horama "sight, spectacle, that which is seen," from horan

 Share coast 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/coast Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/coast">Etymology of coast by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of coast. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/coast Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of coast," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/coast. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of coast." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/coast. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of coast." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/coast (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near coast 
 coal-tar 
 coaming 
 coarse 
 coarsen 
 coarticulation 
 coast 
 coast guard 
 coastal 
 coaster 
 coastline 
 coat 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix