URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/candy
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:05:52Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Candy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Candy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of candy 

 candy (n.) 

 late 13c., "crystallized sugar," from Old French çucre candi "sugar candy," ultimately from Arabic qandi , from Persian qand "cane sugar," probably from Sanskrit khanda "piece (of sugar)," perhaps from Dravidian (compare Tamil kantu "candy," kattu "to harden, condense").

 The sense gradually broadened (especially in U.S.) to mean by late 19c. "any confection having sugar as its basis." In Britain these are sweets , and candy tends to be restricted to sweets made only from boiled sugar and striped in bright colors. A candy-pull (1865) was a gathering of young people for making (by pulling into the right consistency) and eating molasses candy.
 also from late 13c. 

 candy (v.) 

 "preserve or encrust with sugar," 1530s, from candy (n.). Related: Candied ; candying .
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to candy 

 candied (adj.) 

 "preserved or encrusted with sugar or anything resembling it," c. 1600, past-participle adjective from candy (v.).

 candyass 

 also candy-ass , "timid, cowardly," also "a contemptible, timid person," 1961, from candy (n.) + ass (n.2). Perhaps originally U.S. military.

 candy-striper 
 rock-candy 
 sugar-candy 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 taffy 

 coarse candy made from sugar or molasses boiled down and cooled, 1817, related to toffee, but of uncertain origin; perhaps...On this theory, the candy would have been made from the syrup skimmed off the liquor during distillation....

 lollipop 

 1784, lolly-pops "soft candy, coarse sweetmeat made of treacle and sugar, usually with butter and flour added," a word "of...Meaning "hard candy on a stick" is from 1920s....

 Mars 

 The Mars candy bar was first manufactured in 1932 by Forrest Mars Sr. of the candy-making family....

 gum 

 As the name of a hardened, sweetened gelatine mixture as a candy, 1827....

 caramel 

 The word was being used by 1884 of a dark-colored creamy candy and by 1909 as a color-name....

 motto 

 Motto-kiss "candy wrapped in fancy paper having a motto or scrap of poetry enclosed with it" is from 1858....

 marzipan 

 1901 (in modern use; earlier march payne, late 15c., from French or Dutch), from German Marzipan, from Italian marzapane "candy...

 sweet 

 Old English swete, Mercian swoete, "pleasing to the senses, mind or feelings; having a pleasant disposition," from Proto-Germanic *swotja- (source also of Old Saxon swoti, Old Frisian swet, Swedish söt, Danish sød, Middle Dutch soete, Dutch zoet, Old High German swuozi, German sü

 licorice 

 type of leguminous plant, the dried roots of which were anciently used as a medicine and as a sweet, also liquorice, c. 1200, licoriz, from Anglo-French lycoryc, Old French licorece (also recolice), from Late Latin liquiritia, alteration of Latin glychyrrhiza, from Greek glykyrrh

 mint 

 aromatic herb, plant of the genus Mentha, Old English minte (8c.), from West Germanic *minta (source also of Old Saxon minta, Middle Dutch mente, Old High German minza, German Minze), a borrowing from Latin menta, mentha "mint," itself from Greek minthē, personified as a nymph tr

 Share candy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/candy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/candy">Etymology of candy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of candy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/candy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of candy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/candy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of candy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/candy. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of candy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/candy (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near candy 
 candlestick 
 candle-waster 
 can-do 
 candor 
 candour 
 candy 
 candyass 
 candy-striper 
 cane 
 canebrake 
 Canfield 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix