URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lute
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:38:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lute - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lute - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lute 

 lute (n.) 

 stringed musical instrument, late 13c., from Old French lut , leut (Modern French luth ), from Old Provençal laut , a misdivision of Arabic al-'ud , the Arabian lute, literally "the wood" (source of Medieval Latin lutana , Spanish laud , Portuguese alaude , Italian liuto ), where al is the definite article.

 Dutch luit , German Laute , Danish luth are from Romanic. A player is a luter (Middle English), a lutist (1620s) or a lutanist (c. 1600, from Medieval Latin lutanista ).
 also from late 13c. 

 Entries linking to lute 

 lute-string (n.) 

 1520s, from lute (n.) + string (n.).

 luthier (n.) 

 "lute-maker," 1879, from French luthier , from luth (see lute ).

 N 
 oud 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 mandolin 

 "lute-like musical instrument with four to six single or double metallic strings stretched over an almond-shaped body and...from Italian mandolino, diminutive of mandola, a larger kind of mandolin, altered from Late Latin pandura "three-stringed lute...

 lutose 

 Hence also English lute (n.) as a type of tenacious clay or cement used to stop holes, seal joints, etc....Lute also was a verb in English....

 tablature 

 type of musical notation for lute or stringed instrument, 1570s, from French tablature (1550s), from Italian tavolatura (...

 pick 

 The meaning "plectrum for a guitar, lute, etc." is from 1895. As a type of basketball block, from 1951....

 tambourine 

 French tambourin "long narrow drum used in Provence," diminutive of tambour "drum," altered by influence of Arabic tunbur "lute...

 banjo 

 The word has been influenced by colloquial pronunciation of bandore (1560s in English), a 16c. lute-like stringed instrument...

 tuning 

 was the original inventor of the tuning-fork, an instrument which he constantly carried about him, and used to tune his lute...

 laud 

 "praise highly, sing the praises of," late 14c., from Old French lauder "to praise, extol," from Latin laudare "to praise, commend, honor, extol, eulogize," from laus (genitive laudis) "praise, fame, glory." Probably from an echoic PIE root *leu- and cognate with Old English leoð

 folk 

 Old English folc "common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army," from Proto-Germanic *fulka- (source also of Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk, Old High German folc, German Volk "people"). Perhaps originally "host of warri

 goosebumps 

 also goose-bumps, "peculiar tingling of the skin produced by cold, fear, etc.; the sensation described as 'cold water down the back'" [Farmer], 1859, from goose (n.) + bump (n.). So called because the rough condition of the skin during the sensation resembles the skin of a plucke

 Share lute 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lute Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lute">Etymology of lute by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lute. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lute Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lute," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lute. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lute." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lute. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lute." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lute (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lute 
 lustre 
 lustrous 
 lustrum 
 lusty 
 lusus naturae 
 lute 
 luteal 
 luteous 
 lute-string 
 Lutetian 
 lutetium 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix