URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/asthma
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:58:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Asthma - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Asthma - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of asthma 

 asthma (n.) 

 "respiratory disorder characterized by paroxysms of labored breathing and a feeling of contraction in the chest," late 14c., asma , asma , from Latin asthma , from Greek asthma "shortness of breath, a panting," from azein "breathe hard," probably related to anemos "wind" (from PIE root *ane- "to breathe;" see animus ). The -th- was restored in English 16c.
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to asthma 

 animus (n.) 

 1820, "temper" (usually in a hostile sense), from Latin animus "rational soul, mind, life, mental powers, consciousness, sensibility; courage, desire," related to anima "living being, soul, mind, disposition, passion, courage, anger, spirit, feeling," from PIE root *ane- "to breathe."

 It has no plural. As a term in Jungian psychology for the masculine component of a feminine personality, it dates from 1923 (compare anima ). For sense development in Latin, compare Old Norse andi "breath, breathing; current of air; aspiration in speech;" also "soul, spirit, spiritual being."

 asthmatic (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or afflicted with asthma," 1540s, from Latin asthmaticus , from Greek asthmatikos , from asthma "shortness of breath" (see asthma ). The noun meaning "person with asthma" is recorded from 1610s.

 th 

 digraph representing a sound found chiefly in words of Old English, Old Norse or Greek origin, but unpronounceable by Normans and many other Europeans. In reconstructed PIE origins, the Greek -th- and the Germanic -th- descend from different sound roots.

 In Greek, -th- at first represented a true aspirate (T + H, as in English outhouse , shithead , etc.). But by 2c. B.C.E. the Greek letter theta was in universal use and had the modern "-th-" sound.

 Latin had neither the letter nor the sound, and the Romans represented Greek theta by -TH- , which they generally pronounced, at least in Late Latin, as simple "-t-" (passed down to Romanic languages, as in Spanish termal "thermal," teoria "theory," teatro "theater").

 In Germanic languages it represents a sound common at the start of words or after stressed vowels. To indicate it in alphabetic writing, Old English and Old Norse used the characters ð "eth" (a modified form of -d- ) and þ "thorn," which had been a rune. Old English, unlike Old Norse, seems never to have standardized which of the two letters represented which of the two forms of the sound ("hard" and "soft").

 The digraph -th- sometimes appears in early Old English writing, on the Latin model, and it returned in Middle English with the French scribes, driving out eth by c. 1250, but thorn persisted, especially in demonstratives ( þat , þe , þis , etc.), even as other words were being spelled with -th- .

 The advent of printing dealt its death-blow, however, as the first types were imported from continental founders, who had no thorn. For a time y was used in its place (especially in Scotland), because it had a similar shape, hence ye for the in pseudo-historical typographical affectation Ye Olde _____ (it never was pronounced "ye," only printed that way; see ye (article)).

 After the Renaissance, English writers saw that some words inherited from French or Latin with a t- had been th- in the original Greek. The -th- was restored in amethyst , asthma , pythoness , orthography , theme , throne , etc.); it failed in acolyte . Over-correction in English created unetymological forms such as Thames and author . Caxton (late 15c.) has thau for tau , and compare Chaucer's Sir Thopas ( topaz ). The earliest form of Torah in English was Thora (1570s). Yet some words borrowed from Romanic languages preserve, on the Roman model, the Greek -th- spelling but the simple Latin "t" pronunciation ( Thomas , thyme ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 attack 

 c. 1600, "assault, assail, begin hostilities against," from French attaquer (16c.), from Florentine Italian attaccare (battaglia) "join (battle)," thus the word is a doublet of attach, which was used 15c.-17c. also in the sense now reserved to attack. The meaning "endeavor to bri

 tartar 

 "bitartrate of potash, sediment of potassium tartarate" (a deposit left during fermentation), late 14c., from Old French tartre and directly from Medieval Latin tartarum, from late Greek tartaron "tartar encrusting the sides of wine casks," a word perhaps of Semitic origin, but i

 abandon 

 late 14c., "to give up (something) absolutely, relinquish control, give over utterly;" also reflexively, "surrender (oneself), yield (oneself) utterly" (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandonner "surrender, release; give freely, permit," also reflexive, "devote 

 Rubicon 

 in the figurative phrase cross (or pass) the Rubicon "take a decisive step," 1620s, a reference to a small stream to the Adriatic on the coast of northern Italy which in ancient times formed part of the southern boundary of Cisalpine Gaul. It was crossed by Caesar, Jan. 10, 49 B.

 record 

 c. 1200, recorden, "to repeat, reiterate, recite; rehearse, get by heart" (senses now obsolete), from Old French recorder "tell, relate, repeat, recite, report, make known" (12c.) and directly from Latin recordari "remember, call to mind, think over, be mindful of," from re-, her

 reparation 

 late 14c., reparacioun, "repair, act of mending" (a sense now rare or obsolete), also "amends, compensation, recompense, satisfaction for injury, what is done to repair a wrong," from Old French reparacion and directly from Late Latin reparationem (nominative reparatio) "act of r

 artillery 

 late 14c., "warlike munitions," especially ballistic engines, from Anglo-French artillerie, Old French artillerie (14c.), from artillier "to provide with engines of war" (13c.), which probably is from Medieval Latin articulum "art, skill," a diminutive of Latin ars (genitive arti

 scorn 

 late 12c., scorn, skarn, "feeling or attitude of contempt; contemptuous treatment, mocking abuse," a shortening of Old French escarn "mockery, derision, contempt," a common Romanic word (Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin (source also of Old High German skern "

 cast 

 c. 1200, "throw, throw violently, fling, hurl," from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse kasta "to throw" (cognate with Swedish kasta, Danish kaste, North Frisian kastin), a word of uncertain origin. The meaning "to form in a mold" is late 15c. In the sense of "to throw" it r

 pine 

 "coniferous tree, tree of the genus Pinus," Old English pin (in compounds), from Old French pin and directly from Latin pinus "pine, pine-tree, fir-tree," which is perhaps from a PIE *pi-nu-, from root *peie- "to be fat, swell" (see fat (adj.)). If so, the tree's name would be a 

 Share asthma 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/asthma Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/asthma">Etymology of asthma by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of asthma. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/asthma Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of asthma," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/asthma. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of asthma." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/asthma. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of asthma." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/asthma (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near asthma 
 astern 
 asteroid 
 asthenia 
 asthenic 
 asthenosphere 
 asthma 
 asthmatic 
 astigmatic 
 astigmatism 
 astir 
 astonish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix