URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/puncture
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:02:36Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Puncture - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Puncture - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of puncture 

 puncture (n.) 

 late 14c., "small perforation or wound" made by or as if by a pointed instrument, from Late Latin punctura "a pricking," from Latin punctus , past participle of pungere "to prick, pierce" (from suffixed form of PIE root *peuk- "to prick"). The sense of "act of perforating or piercing" is from mid-15c.
 also from late 14c. 

 puncture (v.) 

 "to pierce with a sharp point of any kind," 1690s, from puncture (n.). Related: Punctured ; puncturing .
 also from 1690s 

 Entries linking to puncture 

 acupuncture (n.) 

 1680s, "pricking with a needle" as a surgical operation to ease pain, from Latin acus "a needle" (from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce") + puncture . The verb is recorded by 1972.

 *peuk- 

 also *peug- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to prick."

 It might form all or part of: appoint ; appointment ; bung ; compunction ; contrapuntal ; expugn ; expunge ; impugn ; interpunction ; oppugn ; pink ; poignant ; point ; pointe ; pointillism ; poniard ; pounce ; pugilism ; pugilist ; pugnacious ; pugnacity ; punch (n.1) "pointed tool for making holes or embossing;" punch (n.3) "a quick blow with the fist;" punch (v.) "to hit with the fist;" puncheon (n.2) "pointed tool for punching or piercing;" punctilio ; punctilious ; punctual ; punctuate ; punctuation ; puncture ; pungent ; punty ; pygmy ; repugn ; repugnance ; repugnant .

 It might also be the source of: Greek pyx "with clenched fist," pygme "fist, boxing," pyktes "boxer;" Latin pugnare "to fight," especially with the fists, pungere "to pierce, prick."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sting 

 Old English stincg, steng "act of stinging, puncture, thrust, snakebite, sting of a scorpion," from the root of sting (v....The meaning "sharp-pointed organ (in certain insects, etc.) capable of inflicting a painful puncture wound" is from late...

 tattoo 

 Cook), from a Polynesian noun (such as Tahitian and Samoan tatau, Marquesan tatu "puncture, mark made on skin")....

 pink 

 c. 1200, pungde "to pierce, puncture, stab with a pointed weapon," later (early 14c.)...

 stick 

 Middle English stiken, from Old English stician "to pierce or puncture, to stab with a weapon; transfix; goad," also "to..."to stick; pointed" (source also of Latin instigare "to goad," instinguere "to incite, impel;" Greek stizein "to prick, puncture...

 stigma 

 a hot iron," from Latin stigma (plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) "mark of a pointed instrument, puncture...

 pike 

 "weapon with a long shaft and a pointed metal head," 1510s, from French pique "a spear; pikeman," from piquer "to pick, puncture...

 stitch 

 Middle English stiche, from Old English stice "a prick, puncture, sting, stab" (senses now obsolete), from Proto-Germanic...

 deprecate 

 1620s, "to pray against or for deliverance from, pray the removal or deliverance from," from Latin deprecatus, past participle of deprecari "to pray (something) away," from de "away" (see de-) + precari "to pray" (from PIE root *prek- "to ask, entreat"). Meaning "to express disap

 recipe 

 1580s, "medical prescription, a formula for the composing of a remedy written by a physician," from French récipé (15c.), from Latin recipe "take!" (this or that ingredient), second person imperative singular of recipere "to hold, contain" (see receive). It was the word written b

 pierce 

 c. 1300 (c. 1200 as a surname), percen, "make a hole in; force one's way through; thrust through with or as with a sharp or pointed instrument," from Anglo-French perser, Old French percier "pierce, transfix, drive through" (12c., Modern French percer), probably from Vulgar Latin

 Share puncture 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/puncture Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/puncture">Etymology of puncture by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of puncture. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/puncture Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of puncture," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/puncture. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of puncture." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/puncture. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of puncture." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/puncture (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near puncture 
 punctilious 
 punctual 
 punctuality 
 punctuate 
 punctuation 
 puncture 
 pundit 
 pungency 
 pungent 
 Punic 
 punish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix