URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/remorse
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:33:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Remorse - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Remorse - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of remorse 

 remorse (n.) 

 "intense and painful self-condemnation and penitence due to consciousness of guilt; the pain of a guilty conscience," late 14c., from Old French remors (Modern French remords ) and directly from Medieval Latin remorsum "a biting back or in return," noun use of neuter past participle of Latin remordere "to vex, torment disturb," literally "to bite back, bite again" (but seldom used in the literal sense), from re- "back, again" (see re- ) + mordēre "to bite," which is perhaps from an extended form of PIE root *mer- "to rub away, harm."

 The sense evolution was via the Medieval Latin phrase remorsus conscientiæ (Chaucer's remors of conscience , also translated into Middle English as ayenbite of inwit ). Middle English also had a verb, remord "to strike with remorse, touch with compassion, prick one's conscience" (late 14c.), from Latin remordere . Richard Brome's "Merry Beggars" (1641) delighted that they had 

 No bargains or accounts to make,

 No land or lease to let or take:

 Or if we had, should that remore us

 When all the world's our own before us[?] 
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to remorse 

 remorseful (adj.) 

 "characterized by remorse, burdened with a painful sense of guilt and penitence due to consciousness of guilt," 1590s, from remorse + -ful . Related: Remorsefully ; remorsefulness .

 remorseless (adj.) 

 "unpitying, cruel," 1590s, from remorse + -less . Related: Remorselessly ; remorselessness .

 *mer- 
 re- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 compunction 

 mid-14c., "remorse, contrition (for wrongdoing, as a means of attaining forgiveness of one;s sins)," from Old French compunction (12c., Modern French componction), from Late Latin compunctionem (nominative compunctio) "remorse; a stinging or pricking" (of the conscience), noun of

 twinge 

 Figurative sense (with reference to shame, remorse, etc.) is recorded from 1620s....

 ruth 

 misery, sorrow, grief;" also "pity, compassion, sorrow for the misery of another" (often in have ruth, take ruth); also "remorse...

 contrition 

 given offense, deep sorrow for sin or guilt with the purpose of not sinning again," from Old French contriciun "contrition, remorse...

 angst 

 1944, from a specialized use in psychology of German Angst "neurotic fear, anxiety, guilt, remorse," from Old High German...

 perplexity 

 In luck or out the toil has left its mark: That old perplexity an empty purse, Or the day's vanity, the night's remorse...

 inwit 

 Joyce's use of it in "Ulysses" (1922) echoes the title of the 14c. work "Ayenbite of Inwyt" ("Remorse of Conscience,...

 penance 

 c. 1300, penaunce, "religious discipline or self-mortification as a token of repentance and as atonement for some sin; sorrow for sin shown by outward acts under authority and regulation of the Church," from Anglo-French penaunce, Old French peneance (12c.), from Latin pænitentia

 sorrow 

 Middle English sorwe, from Old English sorg "grief, regret, trouble, care, pain, anxiety," from Proto-Germanic *sorg- (source also of Old Saxon sorga, Old Norse sorg, Middle Dutch sorghe, Dutch zorg, Old High German soraga, German sorge, Gothic saurga), perhaps from PIE *swergh- 

 repentance 

 c. 1300, repentaunce, "state of being penitent, sorrow and contrition for sin or wrongdoing resulting in vigorous abandonment of it in one's life," from Old French repentance "penitence" (12c.), from present-participle stem of repentir (see repent). Repentance goes beyond feelin

 Share remorse 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/remorse Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/remorse">Etymology of remorse by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of remorse. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/remorse Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of remorse," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/remorse. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of remorse." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/remorse. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of remorse." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/remorse (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near remorse 
 remonetize 
 remonstrance 
 remonstrate 
 remonstration 
 remora 
 remorse 
 remorseful 
 remorseless 
 remote 
 remoulade 
 remount 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix