URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/paradise
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Paradise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Paradise - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of paradise 

 paradise (n.) 

 late Old English, "the garden of Eden," from Old French paradis "paradise, garden of Eden" (11c.), from Late Latin paradisus "a park, an orchard; the garden of Eden, the abode of the blessed," from Greek paradeisos "a park; paradise, the garden of Eden," from an Iranian source similar to Avestan pairidaeza "enclosure, park" (Modern Persian and Arabic firdaus "garden, paradise"), a compound of pairi- "around" (from PIE root *per- (1) "forward," hence "in front of, near, against, around") + diz "to make, to form" a wall (from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build"). The first element is cognate with Greek peri "around, about" (see per ).

 The Greek word was used by Xenophon and others for an orchard or royal hunting park in Persia, and it was taken in Septuagint to mean "the garden of Eden," and in New Testament translations of Luke xxiii.43 to mean "the Christian heaven, place where the souls of the righteous departed await resurrection" (a sense attested in English from c. 1200; extended from c. 1400 to the Muslim heaven).

 The extended meaning "place of extreme beauty; blissful state like or comparable to Paradise" is from c. 1300. The Gates of Paradise (late 14c.) originally was the Virgin.

 And that this place may thoroughly be thought 

 True paradise, I have the serpent brought. 

 [Donne] 

 Entries linking to paradise 

 paradisiacal (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or relating to paradise or a place or state resembling it," 1630s, from Latin paradisiacus (from Greek paradeisiakos , from paradeisos ; see paradise ) + -al (1).

 paradise rivals NECTAR in the number of experiments that the desire for a satisfactory adjective has occasioned. But, whereas 
 nectar is in the end well enough provided, no-one uses any adjective from 
 paradise without feeling that surely some other would have been less inadequate. The variants are 
 paradisaic*(al*), paradisal, paradisean, paradisiac(al), paradisial*, paradisian*, paradisic(al), of which the asterisked ones are badly formed. 
 Paradisal is perhaps the least intolerable, & that perhaps because it retains the sound of the last syllable of 
 paradise ; but the wise man takes refuge with 
 heavenly, Edenlike , or other substitute. [Fowler] 

 *dheigh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to form, build."

 It might form all or part of: configure ; dairy ; dey (n.1) "female servant, housekeeper, maid;" disfigure ; dough ; effigy ; faineant ; faint ; feign ; feint ; fictile ; fiction ; fictitious ; figment ; figure ; figurine ; lady ; paradise ; prefigure ; thixotropy ; transfigure .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit dehah "body," literally "that which is formed," dih- "to besmear;" Greek teikhos "wall;" Latin fingere "to form, fashion," figura "a shape, form, figure;" Old Irish digen "firm, solid," originally "kneaded into a compact mass;" Gothic deigan "to smear," Old English dag , Gothic daigs "dough."

 *per- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root forming prepositions, etc., meaning "forward," and, by extension, "in front of, before, first, chief, toward, near, against," etc.

 It might form all or part of: afford ; approach ; appropriate ; approve ; approximate ; barbican ; before ; deprive ; expropriate ; far ; first ; for ; for- ; fore ; fore- ; forefather ; foremost ; former (adj.); forth ; frame ; frau ; fret ; Freya ; fro ; froward ; from ; furnish ; furniture ; further ; galore ; hysteron-proteron ; impervious ; improbity ; impromptu ; improve ; palfrey ; par (prep.); para- (1) "alongside, beyond; altered; contrary; irregular, abnormal;" paradise ; pardon ; paramount ; paramour ; parvenu ; pellucid ; per ; per- ; percent ; percussion ; perennial ; perestroika ; perfect ; perfidy ; perform ; perfume ; perfunctory ; perhaps ; peri- ; perish ; perjury ; permanent ; permeate ; permit ; pernicious ; perpendicular ; perpetual ; perplex ; persecute ; persevere ; perspective ; perspire ; persuasion ; pertain ; peruse ; pervade ; pervert ; pierce ; portray ; postprandial ; prae- ; Prakrit ; pre- ; premier ; presbyter ; Presbyterian ; preterite ; pride ; priest ; primal ; primary ; primate ; primavera ; prime ; primeval ; primitive ; primo ; primogenitor ; primogeniture ; primordial ; primus ; prince ; principal ; principle ; prior ; pristine ; private ; privilege ; privy ; pro (n.2) "a consideration or argument in favor;" pro- ; probably ; probe ; probity ; problem ; proceed ; proclaim ; prodigal ; produce ; profane ; profess ; profile ; profit ; profound ; profuse ; project ; promise ; prompt ; prone ; proof ; proper ; property ; propinquity ; prophet ; prose ; prostate ; prosthesis ; protagonist ; Protean ; protect ; protein ; Proterozoic ; protest ; proto- ; protocol ; proton ; protoplasm ; Protozoa ; proud ; prove ; proverb ; provide ; provoke ; prow ; prowess ; proximate ; Purana ; purchase ; purdah ; reciprocal ; rapprochement ; reproach ; reprove ; veneer .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit pari "around, about, through," parah "farther, remote, ulterior," pura "formerly, before," pra- "before, forward, forth;" Avestan pairi- "around," paro "before;" Hittite para "outside of," Greek peri "around, about, near, beyond," pera "across, beyond," paros "before," para "from beside, beyond," pro "before;" Latin pro "before, for, on behalf of, instead of," porro "forward," prae "before," per "through;" Old Church Slavonic pra-dedu "great-grandfather;" Russian pere- "through;" Lithuanian per "through;" Old Irish ire "farther," roar "enough;" Gothic faura "before," Old English fore (prep.) "before, in front of," (adv.) "before, previously," fram "forward, from," feor "to a great distance, long ago;" German vor "before, in front of;" Old Irish air- Gothic fair- , German ver- , Old English fer- , intensive prefixes.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 nirvana 

 also Nirvana, Nirwana, 1836, in Buddhism, "the condition of a Buddha," from Sanskrit nirvana-s "extinction, disappearance" (of the individual soul into the universal), literally "to blow out, a blowing out" ("not transitively, but as a fire ceases to draw" [Ananda Kentish Coomara

 heaven 

 Old English heofon "home of God," earlier "the visible sky, firmament," probably from Proto-Germanic *hibin-, a dissimilation of *himin- (source also of Low German heben, Old Norse himinn, Gothic himins, Old Frisian himul, Dutch hemel, German Himmel "heaven, sky"), which is of un

 pandemonium 

 1667, Pandæmonium, in "Paradise Lost" the name of the palace built in the middle of Hell, "the high capital of Satan and...

 assessor 

 Milton uses it in the literal Latin sense in "Paradise Lost," calling Christ the Assessor of God's throne....

 hyperborean 

 piety and happiness; their land being "beyond" (hence, out of reach of) the North Wind, it was thought to be a blissful paradise...

 Ophiuchus 

 Milton's "Ophiuchus huge in th' Arctick Sky" ("Paradise Lost") is a rare (minor) lapse for a poet who generally knew his...

 socialist 

 Prison is a Socialist's Paradise, where equality prevails, everything is supplied and competition is eliminated....

 rapt 

 late 14c., "carried away in an ecstatic trance," from Latin raptus, past participle of rapere "seize, carry off" (see rape (v.)). A figurative sense, the notion is of being "carried up into Heaven" (bodily or in a dream), as in a saint's vision. The Latin literal sense of "carrie

 part 

 mid-13c., "division, portion of a whole, element or constituent (of something)," from Old French part "share, portion; character; power, dominion; side, way, path," from Latin partem (nominative pars) "a part, piece, a share, a division; a party or faction; a part of the body; a 

 trap 

 "contrivance for catching unawares," late Old English træppe, treppe "snare, trap," from Proto-Germanic *trep- (source also of Middle Dutch trappe "trap, snare"), related to Germanic words for "stair, step, tread" (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe "st

 Share paradise 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/paradise Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/paradise">Etymology of paradise by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of paradise. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/paradise Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of paradise," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/paradise. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of paradise." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/paradise. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of paradise." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/paradise (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near paradise 
 parachronism 
 parachute 
 paraclete 
 parade 
 paradigm 
 paradise 
 paradisiacal 
 parados 
 paradox 
 paradoxical 
 paradoxology 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix