URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chasm
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T21:00:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chasm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chasm - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chasm 

 chasm (n.) 

 1590s, "deep crack in the earth," from Latin chasma , from Greek khasma "yawning hollow, gulf," related to khaskein "to yawn," and thus to chaos . In English in 17c. often spelled chasma . Figurative use, in reference to a great interruption or wide breach of any kind, is from 1640s. Related: Chasmy (1786); chasmal (1842, Poe); chasmic (1885). The bloody chasm (1868) was an old rhetorical phrase for the American Civil War.
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to chasm 

 chaos (n.) 

 late 14c., "gaping void; empty, immeasurable space," from Old French chaos (14c.) or directly from Latin chaos , from Greek khaos "abyss, that which gapes wide open, that which is vast and empty" (from *khnwos , from PIE root *ghieh- "to yawn, gape, be wide open").

 The meaning "utter confusion" (c. 1600) is an extended sense from theological use of chaos in the Vulgate version of "Genesis" (1530s in English) for "the void at the beginning of creation, the confused, formless, elementary state of the universe." The Greek for "disorder" was tarakh ē , but the use of chaos here was rooted in Hesiod ( "Theogony" ), who describes khaos as the primeval emptiness of the Universe, and in Ovid ( "Metamorphoses" ), who opposes Khaos to Kosmos , "the ordered Universe." Sometimes it was personified as a god, begetter of Erebus and Nyx ("Night").

 Meaning "orderless confusion" in human affairs is from c. 1600. Chaos theory in the modern mathematical sense is attested from c. 1977.

 *ghieh- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to yawn, gape, be wide open." 

 It might form all or part of: chaos ; chasm ; dehiscence ; gap ; gasp ; gawp ; hiatus ; yawn .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit vijihite "to gape, be ajar;" Greek khainein , Latin hiare "to yawn, gape;" Old Church Slavonic zinoti "to open (one's mouth);" Russian razinut' , Serbo-Croatian zinuti , Lithuanian žioju, žioti , Czech zivati "to yawn;" Old English ginian, gionian "open the mouth wide, yawn, gape," Old Norse gina "to yawn," Dutch geeuwen , Old High German ginen "to be wide open," German gähnen "to yawn."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 abysm 

 "bottomless gulf, greatest depths," c. 1300, from Old French abisme "chasm, abyss, depths of ocean, Hell" (12c., Modern French...

 rift 

 From late 14c. as "a cleft, fissure, or chasm in the earth;" by c. 1400 as "a crack, split, or similar opening" in anything...

 gap 

 early 14c., "an opening in a wall or hedge; a break, a breach," mid-13c. in place names, from Old Norse gap "chasm, empty...

 middlebrow 

 [T]here is an alarmingly wide chasm, I might almost say a vacuum, between the high-brow, who considers reading either as...

 slippery 

 Do you not see that the chasm is opening wider?"...

 gulf 

 late 14c., "profound depth," from Old French golf "a gulf, whirlpool," from Italian golfo "a gulf, a bay," from Late Latin colfos, from Greek kolpos "bay, gulf of the sea," earlier "trough between waves, fold of a loose garment," originally "bosom," the common notion being "curve

 abyss 

 late 14c. in Latin form abyssus, "depths of the earth or sea; primordial chaos;" early 14c. as abime "depths of the earth or sea; bottomless pit, Hell" (via Old French; see abysm). Both are from Late Latin abyssus "bottomless pit," from Greek abyssos (limnē) "bottomless (pool)," 

 opening 

 Old English openung "act of making open" (a door, mouth, etc.), "disclosure, manifestation," verbal noun from present participle of open (v.). Meaning "vacant space, hole, aperture, doorway" is attested from c. 1200. Meaning "act of opening (a place, to the public)" is from late 

 suffrage 

 late 14c., "prayer," especially "intercessory prayers or pleas on behalf of another," from Old French sofrage "plea, intercession" (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin suffragium, from Latin suffragium "support, ballot, vote cast in an assembly; right of voting; a voting table

 canteen 

 1744 (in a recollection from c. 1710), "store in a military camp," from French cantine "sutler's shop" (17c.), from Italian cantina "wine cellar, vault," diminutive of canto "a side, corner, angle." Thus it is perhaps another descendant of the many meanings that were attached to 

 Share chasm 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chasm Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chasm">Etymology of chasm by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chasm. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chasm Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chasm," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chasm. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chasm." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chasm. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chasm." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chasm (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chasm 
 chary 
 Charybdis 
 chase 
 chaser 
 chasing 
 chasm 
 chasse 
 chassepot 
 chasseur 
 chassis 
 chaste 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix