URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazette
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:20:51Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gazette - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gazette - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gazette 

 gazette (n.) 

 "newspaper," c. 1600, from French gazette (16c.), from Italian gazzetta , Venetian dialectal gazeta "newspaper," also the name of a small copper coin, literally "little magpie," from gazza ; applied to the monthly newspaper ( gazeta de la novità ) published in Venice by the government, either from its price or its association with the bird (typical of false chatter), or both. First used in English 1665 for the paper issued at Oxford, whither the court had fled from the plague.

 The coin may have been so called for its marking; Gamillscheg writes the word is from French gai (see jay ). The general story of the origin of the word is broadly accepted, but there are many variations in the details:

 We are indebted to the Italians for the idea of newspapers. The title of their 
 gazettas was, perhaps, derived from 
 gazzera , a magpie or chatterer; or, more probably, from a farthing coin, peculiar to the city of Venice, called 
 gazetta , which was the common price of the newspapers. Another etymologist is for deriving it from the Latin 
 gaza , which would colloquially lengthen into 
 gazetta , and signify a little treasury of news. The Spanish derive it from the Latin 
 gaza , and likewise their 
 gazatero , and our 
 gazetteer , for a writer of the 
 gazette and, what is peculiar to themselves, 
 gazetista , for a lover of the gazette. [Isaac Disraeli, "Curiosities of Literature," 1835]

 Gazzetta It., Sp. 
 gazeta , Fr. E. 
 gazette ; prop. the name of a Venetian coin (from 
 gaza ), so in Old English. Others derive 
 gazette from 
 gazza a magpie, which, it is alleged, was the emblem figured on the paper; but it does not appear on any of the oldest Venetian specimens preserved at Florence. The first newspapers appeared at Venice about the middle of the 16th century during the war with Soliman II, in the form of a written sheet, for the privilege of reading which a 
 gazzetta (= a 
 crazia ) was paid. Hence the name was transferred to the news-sheet. [T.C. Donkin, "Etymological Dictionary of the Romance Languages" (based on Diez), 1864]

 GAZETTE. A paper of public intelligence and news of divers countries, first printed at Venice, about the year 1620, and so called (some say) because 
 una gazetta , a small piece of Venetian coin, was given to buy or read it. Others derive the name from 
 gazza , Italian for magpie, 
 i.e. chatterer.—
 Trusler . A gazette was printed in France in 1631; and one in Germany in 1715. [Haydn's "Dictionary of Dates," 1857]
 also from c. 1600 

 gazette (v.) 

 "to announce in the Gazette," 1670s; see gazette (n.). The three official journals were published in Britain from c. 1665, twice weekly, and contained lists of appointments, promotions, public notices, etc. Hence, to be gazetted was "to be named to a command, etc."
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to gazette 

 jay (n.) 

 the common European jay ( Garrulus glandarinus ), early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old North French gai , Old French jai "magpie, jay" (12c., Modern French geai ), from Late Latin gaius "a jay," probably echoic of the bird's harsh warning cry and supposedly influenced by Latin Gaius , a common Roman proper name.

 For other bird names from proper names, compare martin and parrot . Applied to the North American blue jay ( Cyanocitta cristata ) from 1709; it is unrelated to the Old World jay but has touches of vivid blue, is noisy and restless, and also has a harsh call. Applied to humans, "impertinent chatterer, loud, flashy dresser" from 1520s. Jolly as a jay was a Middle English expression for "very happy, joyful."

 gazetteer (n.) 

 1610s, "journalist," from gazette (n.) + -eer . Meaning "geographical dictionary" is from 1704, from Laurence Eachard's 1693 geographical handbook for journalists, "The Gazetteer's, or Newsman's, Interpreter," second edition simply titled "The Gazetteer."

 newspaper (n.) 

 "a sheet containing intelligence or reports of passing events, issued at short but regular intervals," 1660s, newes paper , though the thing itself is older (see gazette ); from news (n.) + paper (n.).

 [T]he newspaper that drops on your doorstep is a partial, hasty, incomplete, inevitably somewhat flawed and inaccurate rendering of some of the things we have heard about in the past twenty-four hours — distorted, despite our best efforts to eliminate gross bias, by the very process of compression that makes it possible for you to lift it from the doorstep and read it in about an hour. If we labeled the product accurately, then we could immediately add: But it's the best we could do under the circumstances, and we will be back tomorrow with a corrected and updated version. [David Broder, Pulitzer Prize acceptance speech, 1973]

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 dogie 

 [The Breeder's Gazette, March 5, 1885]...

 honky-tonk 

 In the Fort Worth, Texas, "Gazette" in 1889 it seems to be the name of a particular theater, and the Marshall, Texas, "Messenger...

 steam-whistle 

 [United States Gazette, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1836]...

 joker 

 James's Gazette," 1894]...

 rest-cure 

 [Chicago Medical Gazette, Jan. 20, 1880]...

 chic 

 The meaning "Parisian elegance and stylishness combined with originality" is by 1882 (Pall Mall Gazette, Sept. 6, 1888, uses...

 Pullman 

 [Western Railroad Gazette, Chicago, quoted in Appleton's Illustrated Railway and Steam Navigation Guide, New York, June,...

 print 

 c. 1300, prente, "impression, mark made by impression upon a surface" (as by a stamp or seal), from Old French preinte "impression," noun use of fem. past participle of preindre "to press, crush," altered from prembre, from Latin premere "to press, hold fast, cover, crowd, compre

 paper 

 mid-14c., "material consisting of a compacted web or felting of vegetable fibers, commonly as a thin, flexible sheet for writing, printing, etc.," from Anglo-French paper, Old French papier "paper, document," and directly from Latin papyrus "paper, paper made of papyrus stalks," 

 publish 

 mid-14c., publishen, "make publicly known, reveal, divulge, announce;" an alteration (by influence of banish, finish, etc.) of publicen (early 14c.), which is from the extended stem of Old French publier "make public, spread abroad, communicate," from Latin publicare "make public

 Share gazette 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazette Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazette">Etymology of gazette by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gazette. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazette Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gazette," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazette. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gazette." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazette. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gazette." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gazette (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gazette 
 Gaylord 
 Gaza 
 gaze 
 gazebo 
 gazelle 
 gazette 
 gazetteer 
 gazillion 
 gazpacho 
 gear 
 gecko 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix