URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoopoe
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:22:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hoopoe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hoopoe - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hoopoe 

 hoopoe (n.) 

 1660s, from Latin upupa , imitative of its cry (compare Greek epops "hoopoe," Polish dudek , Russian udodu ).

 If anybody smears himself with the blood of this bird on his way to bed, he will have nightmares about suffocating devils. [Cambridge bestiary, 12c.]
 also from 1660s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pink 

 1570s, common name of Dianthus, a garden plant of various colors; a word of unknown origin. It is perhaps from pink (v.) via the notion of "perforated" (scalloped) petals. Or perhaps it is from Dutch pink "small, narrow," itself obscure (compare pinkie), via the term pinck oogen 

 fantastic 

 late 14c., "existing only in imagination, produced by (mental) fantasy," from Old French fantastique (14c.), from Medieval Latin fantasticus, from Late Latin phantasticus "imaginary," from Greek phantastikos "able to imagine," from phantazein "make visible" (middle voice phantaze

 legend 

 early 14c., "narrative dealing with a happening or an event," from Old French legende (12c., Modern French légende) and directly from Medieval Latin legenda "legend, story," especially lives of saints, which were formerly read at matins and in refectories of religious houses, lit

 pipsqueak 

 also pip-squeak, contemptuous name for an insignificant person, 1910, from the trivial noise a young or weak creature makes. In World War I it was the soldier's slang name for a small German shell "which makes both a pip and a squeak when it comes over the trenches" [Farrow, "Dic

 intelligence 

 late 14c., "the highest faculty of the mind, capacity for comprehending general truths;" c. 1400, "faculty of understanding, comprehension," from Old French intelligence (12c.) and directly from Latin intelligentia, intellegentia "understanding, knowledge, power of discerning; ar

 perineum 

 also perinaeum, "the region of the body between the anus and the genital organs," early 15c., from Medieval Latin perinaeon, Late Latin perineum, from Greek perinaion, perinaios, in medical writing, "space between the anus and the scrotum," also, in plural, "male genitals," said 

 garden 

 late 13c. (late 12c. in surnames), from Old North French gardin "(kitchen) garden; orchard; palace grounds" (Old French jardin, 13c., Modern French jardin), from Vulgar Latin *hortus gardinus "enclosed garden," via Frankish *gardo or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germani

 octopus 

 1758, genus name of a type of eight-armed cephalopod mollusks, from Latinized form of Greek oktōpous, literally "eight-foot," from oktō "eight" (see eight) + pous "foot," from PIE root *ped- "foot." The more usual Greek word seems to have been polypous (also pōlyps), from polys "

 blunt 

 c. 1200, blunt, blont, "dull, obtuse" (of persons), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra "to shut one's eyes" (see blunder (v.)). Or from Old English blinnan (past participle blon) "to stop, cease, come to an end." Of tools or weapons, "not sharp, wit

 fast 

 Old English fæst "firmly fixed, steadfast, constant; secure; enclosed, watertight; strong, fortified," probably from Proto-Germanic *fastu- "firm, fast" (source also of Old Frisian fest, Old Norse fastr, Dutch vast, German fest), from PIE root *past- "firm, solid" (source of Sans

 Share hoopoe 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoopoe Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoopoe">Etymology of hoopoe by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hoopoe. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoopoe Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hoopoe," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoopoe. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hoopoe." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoopoe. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hoopoe." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hoopoe (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hoopoe 
 hooky 
 hooligan 
 hooliganism 
 hoop 
 hoopla 
 hoopoe 
 hooray 
 hoosegow 
 Hoosier 
 hoot 
 hootenanny 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix