URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/jowl
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:52:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Jowl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Jowl - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of jowl 

 jowl (n.1) 

 "jaw, jawbone," especially the underjaw, a late 16c. alteration of Middle English chawl (late 14c.), earlier chafle (c. 1200), from late Old English ceafl "jaw; cheek; jawbone; cheekbone," from Proto-Germanic *kefalaz (source of Middle High German kiver , German kiefer , Old Norse kjoptr "jaw," Danish kæft , Flemish kavel , Dutch kevel "gum"), from PIE *gep(h)- "jaw, mouth" (cognates: Old Irish gop , Irish gob "beak, mouth").

 The spelling with j- , attested from c. 1400, is perhaps from influence of the synonymous Old French joue , which also was in Middle English (see jaw (n.)). This word and jowl (n.2) have influenced one another in form and sense. Middle English also had a jolle (late 14c.) meaning "the head," especially that of a fish, which might be from either or both nouns.
 also from late 16c. 

 jowl (n.2) 

 "fold of flesh under the jaw," 1590s, alteration of Middle English cholle "fold of flesh hanging from the neck or jaw, double chin" (c. 1300), which is perhaps from or related to Old English ceole "throat" (from PIE root *gwele- (3) "to swallow;" see gullet ), but the phonetic development would be abnormal. Also see jowl (n.1).
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to jowl 

 gullet (n.) 

 "passage from the mouth of an animal to the stomach," c. 1300 (as a surname), from Old French golet "neck (of a bottle); gutter; bay, creek," diminutive of gole "throat, neck" (Modern French gueule ), from Latin gula "throat," also "appetite," which is related to gluttire "to gulp down, devour," glutto "a glutton." De Vaan writes, "We seem to be dealing with an onomatopoeic formation of the form *gul- / *glu- ." Compare Old English ceole "throat;" Old Church Slavonic glutu "gullet," Russian glot "draught, gulp;" Old Irish gelim "I devour."

 jaw (n.) 

 late 14c., jowe , joue , "the bones of the mouth," "A word of difficult etymology" [OED]. Probably from Old French joue "cheek," originally jode , from Gallo-Romance *gauta or directly from Gaulish *gabata , but there are phonetic problems; or perhaps a variant of Germanic words related to chew (v.); compare also the two nouns jowl . Replaced Old English ceace , ceafl . Jaws as "holding and gripping part of an appliance" is from mid-15c.; figuratively, of time, death, defeat, etc., from 1560s.

 ajar 
 chafer 
 chaff 
 cheek 
 jowly 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ajar 

 "slightly open, neither open nor shut," 1718, also on a jar, on the jar, perhaps from Scottish dialectal a char "turned a little way," earlier on char (mid-15c.) "on the turn (of a door or gate)," from Middle English char "a turn," from Old English cier "a turn" (see chore). For 

 cheek 

 "either of the two fleshy sides of the face below the eyes," Old English ceace, cece "jaw, jawbone," in late Old English also "the fleshy wall of the mouth," of uncertain origin, from Proto-Germanic *kaukon (source also of Middle Low German kake "jaw, jawbone," Middle Dutch kake 

 mandible 

 late 14c., "jaw, jawbone," from Late Latin mandibula "jaw," from Latin mandere "to chew," which is perhaps from PIE root *mendh- "to chew" (source also of Greek mastax "the mouth, that with which one chews; morsel, that which is chewed," masasthai "to chew," mastikhan "to gnash t

 feature 

 early 14c., "make, form, fashion" (obsolete), from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture "deed, action; fashion, shape, form; countenance," from Latin factura "a formation, a working," from past participle stem of facere "make, do, perform" (from PIE root *dhe- "to set, pu

 lineament 

 early 15c., liniament, "distinctive feature of the body, outline," from Latin lineamentum "contour, outline; a feature," literally "a line, stroke, mark," from lineare "to reduce to a straight line" (here apparently in an unrecorded sense "trace lines"), from linea "string, threa

 cafe 

 "coffee-house, restaurant," 1802, from French café "coffee, coffeehouse," from Italian caffe "coffee" (see coffee). The beverage was introduced in Venice by 1615 and in France by 1650s by merchants and travelers who had been to Turkey and Egypt. The first public European café mig

 face 

 c. 1300, "the human face, a face; facial appearance or expression; likeness, image," from Old French face "face, countenance, look, appearance" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *facia (source also of Italian faccia), from Latin facies "appearance, form, figure," and secondarily "visage,

 lower 

 c. 1600, "descend, sink, grow less or lower" (intransitive), from lower (adj.), comparative of low (adj.). Transitive meaning "let down, cause to descend" attested from 1650s. Related: Lowered; lowering. In the transitive sense "to cause to descend" the older verb was low (Middle

 bone 

 Middle English bon, from Old English ban "bone, tusk, hard animal tissue forming the substance of the skeleton; one of the parts which make up the skeleton," from Proto-Germanic *bainan (source also of Old Frisian and Old Saxon ben, Old Norse bein, Danish ben, German Bein). Absen

 Share jowl 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/jowl Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/jowl">Etymology of jowl by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of jowl. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/jowl Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of jowl," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jowl. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of jowl." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/jowl. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of jowl." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/jowl (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near jowl 
 Jove 
 jovial 
 joviality 
 Jovian 
 Jovicentric 
 jowl 
 jowly 
 joy 
 Joyce 
 joyful 
 joyless 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix