URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/symposium
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:55:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Symposium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Symposium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of symposium 

 symposium (n.) 

 "convivial meeting for drinking, conversation, and intellectual stimulation," 1711, from Latin symposium "drinking party, symposium," from Greek symposion "drinking party, convivial gathering of the educated" (related to sympot ē s "drinking companion"), from assimilated form of syn- "together" (see syn- ) + posis "a drinking," from a stem of Aeolic ponen "to drink" (from PIE root *po(i)- "to drink")

 The symposium usually followed a dinner, for the Greeks did not drink at meals. Its enjoyment was heightened by intellectual or agreeable conversation, by the introduction of music or dancers, and by other amusements. [Century Dictionary] 

 Reflecting the Greek fondness for mixing wine and intellectual discussion, the modern sense is especially from the word being used as a title for one of Plato's dialogues. 

 Earlier in English as "account of a gathering or party" (1580s, the title of Plato's work). The sense of "a meeting on some subject" is from 1784. The Greek plural is symposia , an attendee is a symposiast , and the leader of one is a symposiarch (c. 1600 in English). Related: Symposiac (adj.); symposial ; sympotical .
 also from 1711 

 Entries linking to symposium 

 *po(i)- 

 *pō(i)- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to drink."

 It might form all or part of: beer ; bever ; beverage ; bib ; bibitory ; bibulous ; hibachi ; imbibe ; imbrue ; pinocytosis ; pirogi ; poison ; potable ; potation ; potion ; symposium .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit pati "drinks," panam "beverage;" Greek pinein "to drink," poton "that which one drinks," potos "drinking bout;" Latin potare "to drink," potio "a potion, a drinking," also "poisonous draught, magic potion;" Old Church Slavonic piti "to drink," pivo "beverage."

 syn- 

 word-forming element of Greek origin (corresponding to Latin con- ) meaning "together with, jointly; alike; at the same time," also sometimes completive or intensive, from Greek syn (prep.) "with, together with, along with, in the company of," from PIE *ksun- "with" (source also of Russian so- "with, together," from Old Russian su(n)- ).

 The Greek prefix was assimilated to -l- , reduced to sy- before -s- and -z- , and altered to sym- before -b- , -m- and -p- . Very productive from c. 1860 in forming words for modern sciences. Since 1970s also with a sense of "synthetic."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 uranian 

 "homosexual," 1893, from the reference to Aphrodite in Plato's "Symposium;" Urania "Heavenly" (Greek Ourania; see Uranus)...

 Platonic 

 Amor platonicus) which the word usually carries nowadays, is a Renaissance notion; it is based on Plato's writings in "Symposium...

 conference 

 1550s, "act of consulting together," from French confrence (15c.), from Medieval Latin conferentia, from Latin conferens, present participle of conferre "to bring together; deliberate, talk over," literally "to bring together," from assimilated form of com "together" (see con-) +

 versatile 

 c. 1600, "inconstant," from Latin versatilis "turning, revolving, moving, capable of turning with ease to varied subjects or tasks," from past participle stem of versare "keep turning, be engaged in something, turn over in the mind," frequentative of vertere "to turn" (from PIE r

 pastor 

 late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), "shepherd, one who has care of a flock or herd" (a sense now obsolete), also figurative, "spiritual guide, shepherd of souls, a Christian minister or clergyman," from Old French pastor, pastur "herdsman, shepherd" (12c.) and directly from Latin 

 week 

 Old English wucu, wice, etc., from Proto-Germanic *wikō(n)- (source also of Old Norse vika, Old Frisian wike, Middle Dutch weke, Old High German wecha, German woche), probably originally with the sense of "a turning" or "succession" (compare Gothic wikon "in the course of," Old N

 fiscal 

 1560s, "pertaining to public revenue," from French fiscal, from Late Latin fiscalis "of or belonging to the state treasury," from Latin fiscus "state treasury," originally "money bag, purse, basket made of twigs (in which money was kept)," which is of unknown origin. The etymolog

 sinister 

 early 15c., sinistre, "prompted by malice or ill-will; false, dishonest, intending to mislead," with suggestion, report, etc., from Old French senestre, sinistre "contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left" (14c.), from Latin sinister "left, on the left side" (opposite of dexter),

 favor 

 c. 1300, "attractiveness, beauty, charm" (archaic), from Old French favor "a favor; approval, praise; applause; partiality" (13c., Modern French faveur), from Latin favorem (nominative favor) "good will, inclination, partiality, support," coined by Cicero from stem of favere "to 

 beauty 

 early 14c., bealte, "physical attractiveness," also "goodness, courtesy," from Anglo-French beute, Old French biauté "beauty, seductiveness, beautiful person" (12c., Modern French beauté), earlier beltet, from Vulgar Latin *bellitatem (nominative bellitas) "state of being pleasin

 Share symposium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/symposium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/symposium">Etymology of symposium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of symposium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/symposium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of symposium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/symposium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of symposium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/symposium. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of symposium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/symposium (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near symposium 
 symphonist 
 symphonize 
 symphony 
 symphysis 
 symplectic 
 symposium 
 symptom 
 symptomatic 
 symptomatology 
 symptomology 
 syn- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix