URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyacinth
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:19:31Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hyacinth - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hyacinth - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hyacinth 

 hyacinth (n.) 

 1550s, "the plant hyacinth;" re-Greeked from jacinth (late 14c.) "hyacinth; blue cornflower," which earlier was the name of a precious stone blue (rarely red) in color (c. 1200), from Old French jacinte and Medieval Latin jacintus , ultimately from Greek hyakinthos , which is probably ultimately from a non-Indo-European Mediterranean language.

 Used in ancient Greece of a blue gem, perhaps sapphire, and of a purple or deep red flower, but exactly which one is unknown (gladiolus, iris, and larkspur have been suggested). It is fabled to have sprung from the blood of Hyakinthos , Laconian youth beloved by Apollo and accidentally slain by him. The flower is said to have the letters "AI" or "AIAI" (Greek cry of grief) on its petals. The modern use in reference to a particular flowering plant genus is from 1570s. Related: Hyacinthine .
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to hyacinth 

 jacinth (n.) 

 c. 1200, iacinct , a blue gem (occasionally a red one), from Old French jacinte , iacinte "hyacinth; jacinth," or directly from Late Latin iacintus (see hyacinth ).

 In modern use, a reddish-orange gem. The word is hyacinth with the h- lost and the initial -i- made consonantal (forms in j- begin to be attested late 14c.; see J ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 patsy 

 "fall guy, victim of a deception," by 1903, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Italian pazzo "madman" (see patch (n.2)), or south Italian dialectal paccio "fool." Another theory traces it to Patsy Bolivar, character created by Billy B. Van in an 1890s vaudeville skit 

 culture 

 mid-15c., "the tilling of land, act of preparing the earth for crops," from Latin cultura "a cultivating, agriculture," figuratively "care, culture, an honoring," from past participle stem of colere "to tend, guard; to till, cultivate" (see colony). Meaning "the cultivation or re

 bluff 

 1839, "to deceive (opponents), especially by betting heavily and with a confident air on a worthless hand to make them 'fold,'" an American English poker term, perhaps from Dutch bluffen "to brag, boast," or verbluffen "to baffle, mislead." The general sense "use a show of confid

 dauphin 

 title of the eldest son of the king of France (in use from 1349-1830), early 15c., from Old French dauphin, literally "dolphin" (see dolphin). Originally it was the title attached to "the Dauphin of Viennois," whose province (in the French Alps north of Provence) came to be known

 lede 

 by 1965, alternative spelling of lead (n.2) in the newspaper journalism sense, to distinguish this specialized sense from other possible meanings of the written word, perhaps especially the molten lead (n.1) used in 20c. typesetting machines...."a people, nation, race; the subjec

 inspiration 

 c. 1300, "immediate influence of God or a god," especially that under which the holy books were written, from Old French inspiracion "inhaling, breathing in; inspiration" (13c.), from Late Latin inspirationem (nominative inspiratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of La

 potential 

 late 14c., "possible" (as opposed to actual), "capable of being or becoming," from Old French potenciel and directly from Medieval Latin potentialis "potential," from Latin potentia "power, might, force;" figuratively "political power, authority, influence," from potens "powerful

 sand 

 "water-worn detritus finer than gravel; fine particles of rocks (largely crystalline rocks, especially quartz); the material of the beach, desert, or sea-bed;" Old English sand, from Proto-Germanic *sandam (source also of Old Norse sandr, Old Frisian sond, Middle Dutch sant, Dutc

 treadmill 

 invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill (n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s. As a corrective punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the pris

 pledge 

 mid-14c., plegge, "surety, bail," from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) "hostage, security, bail," also Anglo-Latin plegium, both probably from Frankish *plegan "to guarantee," from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning "have responsibility for" (source also of Old Saxon pl

 Share hyacinth 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyacinth Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyacinth">Etymology of hyacinth by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hyacinth. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyacinth Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hyacinth," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyacinth. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hyacinth." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyacinth. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hyacinth." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hyacinth (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hyacinth 
 huswife 
 hut 
 hutch 
 Hutterite 
 huzza 
 hyacinth 
 Hyades 
 hyaena 
 hyaline 
 hyalo- 
 hybrid 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix