URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/diet
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:54:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Diet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Diet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of diet 

 diet (n.1) 

 c. 1200, "regular food," from Old French diete (13c.) "diet, pittance, fare," from Medieval Latin dieta "parliamentary assembly," also "a day's work; daily food allowance, food," from Latin diaeta "prescribed way of life," from Greek diaita , originally "way of life, regimen, dwelling," related to diaitasthai "lead one's life," and from diaitan , originally "separate, select" (food and drink). This apparently is a frequentative of *diainysthai "take apart," from dia "apart" (see dia- ) + ainysthai "take," which according to Watkins is from PIE root *ai- (1) "to give, allot."

 From late 14c. as "customary way of eating," also "food considered in relation to its quantity and effects," and "a course of food regulated by a physician or by medical rules," often a restriction of food or certain foods; hence to put (someone) on a diet (mid-15c.).

 The adjective in the sense of "slimming, having reduced calories" ( Diet Coke , etc.) is attested by 1963, originally in American English. 
 also from c. 1200 

 diet (n.2) 

 "assembly of delegates, etc., held from day to day for legislative, political, or other business," mid-15c., from Medieval Latin dieta , variant of diaeta "daily office (of the Church), daily duty, assembly, meeting of counselors," from Greek diaita "regimen" (see diet (n.1)), but associated with Latin dies "day" (from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine"). Since c. 1600 used by English and French writers of the legislative assemblies of Germany and Austria.
 also from mid-15c. 

 diet (v.) 

 late 14c., "to regulate one's diet for the sake of health," from Old French dieter , from diete "fare" (see diet (n.1)); meaning "to regulate oneself as to food" (especially against fatness) is from 1650s. Related: Dieted ; dieting . An obsolete word for this is banting .
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to diet 

 banting (n.) 

 system for weight loss through diet control, named for William Banting (1797-1878), the English undertaker who invented it, tested it himself, and promoted it in his 1863 booklet "Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Public." Although the word is a surname, it was treated as a verbal noun in -ing . ("She is banting"). It consisted of eating lean meats and abstaining from fats, starches, and sugars.

 dietal (adj.) 

 "pertaining to a diet in the 'assembly' sense," 1845; see diet (n.2) + -al (1).

 dietary 
 dietetic 
 dietician 
 dieting 
 etiology 
 dia- 
 *dyeu- 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 vegan 

 Should we adopt this, our diet will soon become known as a VEGAN diet, and we should aspire to the rank of VEGANS....

 attenuation 

 early 15c., of persons, "emaciation;" of diet, "reduction," from Latin attenuationem (nominative attenuatio) "a lessening...

 regime 

 Earlier "course of diet, exercise" (late 15c.), a sense now pertaining to regimen (q.v.)....

 wean 

 word might be one of these with the prefix worn off, or it might be wenian in a specialized sense of "accustom to a new diet...

 hippophagy 

 In Paris horse-flesh has long been surreptitiously dealt in as a cheap article of diet, and its sale, under strict official...

 regimen 

 c. 1400, medical, "course of diet, exercise, etc. for sake of health; regulation of such matters as influence health," mid...

 sauerkraut 

 [James Hart, "Klinike, or the diet of the diseased," 1633] In U.S. slang, figurative use for "a German" dates from 1858...

 fare 

 Old English fær "journey, road, passage, expedition," from strong neuter of faran "to journey" (see fare (v.)); merged with faru "journey, expedition, companions, baggage," strong fem. of faran. Original sense is obsolete, except in compounds (wayfarer, sea-faring, etc.) Meaning 

 fear 

 Middle English fere, from Old English fær "calamity, sudden danger, peril, sudden attack," from Proto-Germanic *feraz "danger" (source also of Old Saxon far "ambush," Old Norse far "harm, distress, deception," Dutch gevaar, German Gefahr "danger"), from PIE *pēr-, a lengthened fo

 pap 

 "soft food for infants, gruel, porridge," late 14c., from Old French pape "watered gruel" and Medieval Latin papo, both from Latin pappa, a widespread word in children's language for "food" (compare Middle High German and Dutch pap, German Pappe, Spanish, Portuguese papa, Italian

 Share diet 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/diet Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/diet">Etymology of diet by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of diet. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/diet Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of diet," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diet. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of diet." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diet. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of diet." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/diet (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near diet 
 die-hard 
 dieresis 
 Dies Irae 
 dies non 
 diesel 
 diet 
 dietal 
 dietary 
 dietetic 
 dietetics 
 dietician 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix