URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sophomore
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:34:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sophomore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sophomore - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sophomore 

 sophomore (n.) 

 1680s, "student in the second year of university study," literally "arguer," altered from sophumer (1650s), from sophume , an archaic variant form of sophism , ultimately from Greek sophistēs "a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever in matters of daily life."

 The modern form probably is by folk etymology derivation from Greek sophos "wise" + mōros "foolish, dull" (see moron ), "as if in allusion to the exaggerated opinion which students at this age are apt to have of their wisdom" [Century Dictionary]. The 17c. -er is perhaps based on philosopher , sorcerer , sophister , etc.

 The original reference of the "arguer" name might be to the dialectic exercises that formed a large part of education in the middle years. At Oxford and Cambridge, a sophister (from sophist with spurious -er as in philosopher ) was a second- or third-year student (what American colleges since mid-18c. would call a junior might be a senior sophister ).

 also from 1680s 

 Entries linking to sophomore 

 moron (n.) 

 1910, medical Latin, "one of the highest class of feeble-minded persons," from Greek (Attic) mōron , neuter of mōros "foolish, dull, sluggish, stupid," a word of uncertain origin. The former connection with Sanskrit murah "idiotic" (see moratorium ) is in doubt. Latin morus "foolish" is a loan-word from Greek.

 Adopted by the American Association for the Study of the Feeble-minded with a technical definition "adult with a mental age between 8 and 12;" used as an insult in print by 1918 and subsequently dropped from technical use. Linnæus had introduced morisis "idiocy."

 The feeble-minded may be divided into: (1) Those who are totally arrested before the age of three so that they show the attainment of a two-year-old child or less; these are the idiots. (2) Those so retarded that they become permanently arrested between the ages of three and seven; these are imbeciles. (3) Those so retarded that they become arrested between the ages of seven and twelve; these were formerly called feeble-minded, the same term that is applied to the whole group. We are now proposing to call them morons, this word being the Greek for "fool." The English word "fool" as formerly used describes exactly this grade of child—one who is deficient in judgment or sense. [Henry H. Goddard, in "Journal of Proceedings and Addresses" of the National Education Association of the United States, July 1910]

 philosopher (n.) 

 early 14c., philosophre , "scholar, learned person, wise person; one devoted to the search for universal truth, a student of metaphysical and moral sciences," replacing Old English philosophe , from Latin philosophus "philosopher," from Greek philosophos "philosopher, sage, one who speculates on the nature of things and truth," literally "lover of wisdom," from philos "loving" (see philo- ) + sophos "wise; a sage" (see sophist ). The form with -er is from an Anglo-French or Old French variant of philosophe with an agent-noun ending. Fem. forms were philosophress (1630s), philosophess (1660s).

 Pythagoras was the first who called himself 
 philosophos , instead of 
 sophos , 'wise man,' since this latter term was suggestive of immodesty. [Klein]

 Philosopher in the Middle Ages also could be "alchemist, magician, diviner," hence Philosophers' stone (late 14c., translating Medieval Latin lapis philosophorum , early 12c.), a reputed solid substance supposed by alchemists to change baser metals into gold or silver; also identified with the elixir and thus given the attribute of prolonging life indefinitely and curing wounds and disease. In French pierre philosophale , in German der Stein der Weisen .

 sophism 
 soph 
 sophomoric 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sophism 

 mid-14c., sophime, "subtle but fallacious argument devised for purposes of deceit or to exercise one's ingenuity," from Old French sophime, sofisme "a fallacy, false argument" (Modern French sophisme) and directly from Latin sophisma, from Greek sophisma "clever device, skillful 

 Yankee Doodle 

 The current version seems to have been written in 1776 by Edward Bangs, a Harvard sophomore who also was a Minuteman....

 posh 

 by 1914 (1903 as push), a word of uncertain origin, but there is no evidence for the common derivation from an acronym of port outward, starboard home, supposedly the shipboard accommodations of wealthy British traveling to India on the P & O Lines (to keep their cabins out o

 shop 

 c. 1300, "booth or shed for trade or work," perhaps from Old English scoppa, a rare word of uncertain meaning, apparently related to scypen "cowshed," from Proto-Germanic *skoppan "small additional structure" (source also of Old High German scopf "building without walls, porch," 

 avail 

 c. 1300, availen, "to help (someone), assist; benefit, be profitable to; be for the advantage of; have force or efficacy, serve for a purpose," apparently an Anglo-French compound of Old French a- "to" (see ad-) + vaill-, present stem of valoir "be worth," from Latin valere "be s

 target 

 c. 1300, "light shield," typically small and round, diminutive of late Old English targe and directly from Old French targete "light shield" (12c.), from Frankish or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *targ- (source also of Old High German zarga "edging, border," Ger

 maroon 

 "very dark red or crimson color," 1791 (marone), from French couleur marron, the color of a marron "chestnut," the large sweet chestnut of southern Europe (maroon in that sense was used in English from 1590s), from the dialect of Lyons, ultimately from a word in a pre-Roman langu

 prosper 

 mid-14c., prosperen, "be successful, thrive, advance in any good thing," from Old French prosperer (14c.) and directly from Latin prosperare "cause to succeed, render happy," from prosperus "favorable, fortunate, prosperous" (source also of Spanish and Italian prospero). This is 

 Maranatha 

 late 14c., "at the coming of the Lord," a Bible word, from Greek maranatha, a Greek form of an untranslated Aramaic (Semitic) word in I Corinthians xvi.22, where it follows Greek anathema (with which it has no grammatical connection), and therefore has been taken as part of a phr

 atone 

 1590s, "be in harmony, agree, be in accordance," from adverbial phrase atonen (c. 1300) "in accord," literally "at one," a contraction of at and one. It retains the older pronunciation of one. The meaning "make up (for errors or deficiencies)" is from 1660s; that of "make reparat

 Share sophomore 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sophomore Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sophomore">Etymology of sophomore by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sophomore. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sophomore Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sophomore," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sophomore. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sophomore." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sophomore. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sophomore." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sophomore (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sophomore 
 sophisticate 
 sophisticated 
 sophistication 
 sophistry 
 Sophocles 
 sophomore 
 sophomoric 
 Sophronia 
 sophrosyne 
 -sophy 
 sopor 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix