URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/kiosk
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:59:13Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Kiosk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Kiosk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of kiosk 

 kiosk (n.) 

 1620s, "kind of open pavilion" (made of light wood, etc., often supported by pillars), from French kiosque (17c.), which is (along with German and Polish kiosk ) from Turkish koshk , kiöshk "pavilion, summer house," from Persian kushk "palace, villa; pavilion, portico." They were introduced in Western Europe 17c. as ornaments in gardens and parks. Later of street newsstands (1865), on some resemblance of shape, a sense perhaps originally in French. Modern sense has been influenced by British telephone kiosk (1928).
 also from 1620s 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 booth 

 c. 1200, mid-12c. in place-names, "temporary structure of boards, etc.," especially a stall for the sale of goods or food or entertainment, at a fair, etc., from Old Danish boþ "temporary dwelling," from East Norse *boa "to dwell," from Proto-Germanic *bowan-, from PIE root *bheu

 cubicle 

 mid-15c., "bedroom, bedchamber," from Latin cubiculum "bedroom," from cubare "to lie down," which is perhaps from a PIE *kub-, with cognates in Middle Welsh kyscu, Middle Cornish koska, Middle Breton cousquet "to sleep," but de Vaan regards the PIE origin of the Latin word as "un

 stall 

 [place in a stable for animals] Middle English stalle, from Old English steall "standing place, any fixed place or position, state; place where cattle are kept, stable; fishing ground," from Proto-Germanic *stalli- (source also of Old Norse stallr "pedestal for idols, altar; crib

 closet 

 late 14c., "a small private room for study or prayer," from Old French closet "small enclosure, private room," diminutive of clos "enclosure," from Latin clausum "closed space, enclosure, confinement," from neuter past participle of claudere "to shut" (see close (v.)). In Matthew

 telephone 

 1835, "system for conveying words over distance by musical notes" (devised in 1828 by French composer Jean-François Sudré (1787-1862); each tone played over several octaves represented a letter of the alphabet), from French téléphone (c. 1830), from télé- "far" (see tele-) + phōn

 pilgrim 

 c. 1200, pilegrim, "a person traveling to a holy place (as a penance or to discharge some vow or religious obligation, or seeking some miracle or spiritual benefit)," also "a traveler" generally, "a wayfarer," from Old French pelerin, peregrin "pilgrim, crusader; foreigner, stran

 fascinate 

 1590s, "bewitch, enchant," from French fasciner (14c.), from Latin fascinatus, past participle of fascinare "bewitch, enchant, fascinate," from fascinus "a charm, enchantment, spell, witchcraft," which is of uncertain origin. Earliest used of witches and of serpents, who were sai

 race 

 [act of running] late Old English, also rase, "a narrative, an account;" c. 1300, "an act of swift running, a hurried attack," also "a course of life or conduct, a swift current;" from Old Norse rās "a running, a rush (of water)," cognate with Old English ræs "a running, a rush, 

 addiction 

 c. 1600, "tendency, inclination, penchant" (a less severe sense now obsolete); 1640s as "state of being (self)-addicted" to a habit, pursuit, etc., from Latin addictionem (nominative addictio) "an awarding, a delivering up," noun of action from past-participle stem of addicere "t

 war 

 late Old English wyrre, werre "large-scale military conflict," from Old North French werre "war" (Old French guerre "difficulty, dispute; hostility; fight, combat, war;" Modern French guerre), from Frankish *werra, from Proto-Germanic *werz-a- (source also of Old Saxon werran, Ol

 Share kiosk 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/kiosk Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/kiosk">Etymology of kiosk by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of kiosk. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/kiosk Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of kiosk," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kiosk. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of kiosk." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/kiosk. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of kiosk." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/kiosk (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near kiosk 
 kinkajou 
 kinky 
 kino- 
 kinship 
 kinsman 
 kiosk 
 Kiowa 
 Kiplingesque 
 kipper 
 kir 
 Kiribati 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix