URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/trip
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T18:12:27Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Trip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Trip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of trip 

 trip (v.) 

 late 14c., trippen , "move lightly and nimbly on the feet; skip, dance briskly, caper," from Old French triper "jump around, dance around, strike with the feet" (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch trippen "to skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample," Low German trippeln , Frisian tripje , Dutch trappen , Old English treppan "to tread, trample").

 The group is reconstructed to be from the source of trap (n.1) and related to other Germanic words for "stair, step, tread" (compare  tread  (v.)). Related: Tripped ; tripping .

 The senses of "to stumble so as to lose one's balance" (intransitive), "strike with the foot and cause to stumble" (transitive) are from mid-15c. in English. The figurative meaning "make a false movement, err, go wrong" is from c. 1500; transitive, "overthrow by catching in a fault or blunder, 1550s.

 The meaning "to release" (a catch, lever, etc.) is recorded from 1897 (in reference to a camera); trip-wire is attested from 1868.

 The old sense of "dance, caper, move nimbly" was common in the Elizabethan dramatists ("Trip it, gipsies, trip it fine") and is preserved in the archaism trip the light fantastic (toe) for "to dance," based on a couplet from Milton:

 Come and trip it, as you go, 

 On the light fantastic toe ;  

 ["L'Allegro"] 

 The short version, omitting toe , is attested by 1847. He has a similar phrasing in the invitation to the dance in "Comus":

 Come, knit hands, and beat the ground 

 In a light fantastic round. 

 By 1966 as "experience hallucinations from a drug." A Robert Tripknave turns up in a document from 1315.
 also from late 14c. 

 trip (n.) 

 "act or action of tripping" (transitive), early 14c., from trip (v.); the sense of "a short journey or voyage" is from mid-15c.; the exact connection to the earlier sense is uncertain. The meaning "psychedelic drug experience" is attested from 1959 as a noun; the verb in this sense is from 1966, from the noun.
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to trip 

 trap (n.1) 

 "contrivance for catching unawares," Middle English trappe , from late Old English træppe , treppe "snare, trap" (for taking game or other animals), from Proto-Germanic *trep- (source also of Middle Dutch trappe "trap, snare"), related to Germanic words for "stair, step, tread" (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe , treppe , German Treppe "step, stair," English tread (v.)).

 This is probably (Watkins) literally "that on or into which one steps," from PIE *dreb- , an extended form of a root *der- (1), base of words meaning "to run, walk, step." The English word also is probably akin to Old French trape , Spanish trampa "trap, pit, snare," but the exact relationship is uncertain.

 Figurative use is by c. 1200 in theology. The sense of "deceitful practice, device or contrivance to betray one unawares" is recorded from c. 1400.

 The meaning "U-shaped section of a drain pipe," to prevent passage of air or gases through the pipe, is from 1833. The slang meaning "mouth" is attested by 1776.

 It is attested from 1590s as the name of the pivoted wooden instrument used to throw in the game of trap-ball (short for trap-stick ; trap-sticks as a figure of thin legs is by 1714). By 1812 it was extended to any device for sudden throwing or releasing by means of a spring, etc. Hence trap-shooting (by 1892).

 In some specialized senses it has converged with provincial trap words for "stairs" from Low German and Scandinavian (see trap (n.2)). Also compare rattletrap .

 tread (v.) 

 Middle English treden (past tense trad , past participle troden ), from Old English tredan "go by feet, walk; step on, trample; traverse, pass through or over" (class V strong verb; past tense træd , past participle treden ), from Proto-Germanic *tred- (source also of Old Saxon tredan , Old Frisian treda , Middle Dutch treden , Old High German tretan , German treten , Gothic trudan , Old Norse troða ). This is said by Watkins to be from PIE *der- (1) "assumed base of roots meaning 'to run, walk, step.' " Related: Trod ; treaded ; treading .

 Especially "crush with the feet, thresh grain, press grapes" (late 14c.). In reference to a male bird, especially a domestic cock, "to copulate, cover (a female)," early 14c.; hence treader , treading-fowl , treadfowl , "vigorously sexual male bird," also used of men. 

 To tread a measure "dance" is from 1590s. To tread water in swimming, "move the feet and hands regularly up and down while keeping the body in an erect position in order to keep the head above the water," is attested by 1764. To tread the stage "perform in a drama" is by 1690s (as tread the boards by 1858). To tread (one's) shoe amiss , said of a woman, was an old euphemism for "be unchaste" (late 14c.).

 ego 
 tripper 
 trippy 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 travel 

 late 14c., "to journey," from travailen (1300) "to make a journey," originally "to toil, labor" (see travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of "go on a difficult journey," but it also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced 

 jaunt 

 1670s in modern sense of "short pleasure trip," earlier "tiresome journey" (1590s), from jaunt (v.)...."tire (a horse) by riding back and forth on it, ride hard," 1560s, of unknown origin, "the word being confused with other words of similar or related meanings" [Century Dictiona

 stumble 

 c. 1300, stomblen, "to trip or miss one's footing" (physically or morally), probably from Old Norse (compare dialectal Norwegian stumla, Swedish stambla "to stumble"), and probably from a variant of Proto-Germanic *stam-, source of Old English stamerian "to stammer," German stumm

 supplant 

 early 14c., "to trip up, overthrow, defeat, dispossess," from Old French suplanter, sosplanter "to trip up, overthrow, drive...out, usurp," or directly from Latin supplantare "trip up, overthrow," from assimilated form of sub "under" (see sub-) +...

 tilt 

 English *tyltan "to be unsteady," from tealt "unsteady," from Proto-Germanic *taltaz (source also of Old Norse tyllast "to trip...

 junket 

 meaning by 1520s to "feast, banquet," probably via the notion of a picnic basket; this led to extended sense of "pleasure trip...

 scrod 

 A Boston brahmin is on a business trip to Philadelphia....

 spark 

 Middle English sparke, from Old English spearca "glowing or fiery particle thrown off" from burning wood, heated iron, etc., from Proto-Germanic *spark- (source also of Middle Low German sparke, Middle Dutch spranke, not found in other Germanic languages). As "a gleam of light," 

 trek 

 1849 (n.) "a stage of a journey by ox wagon;" 1850 (v.), "to travel or migrate by ox wagon," from Afrikaans trek, from Dutch trekken "to march, journey," originally "to draw, pull," from Middle Dutch trecken (cognate with Middle Low German trecken, Old High German trechan "to dra

 post 

 "a timber of considerable size set upright," from Old English post "pillar, doorpost," and from Old French post "post, upright beam," both from Latin postis "door, post, doorpost," in Medieval Latin "a beam, rod, pole," which is perhaps from Vulgar Latin *por- "forth," a variant 

 Share trip 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/trip Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/trip">Etymology of trip by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of trip. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/trip Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of trip," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trip. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of trip." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/trip. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of trip." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/trip (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near trip 
 trinket 
 trinomial 
 trio 
 triolet 
 trionym 
 trip 
 tripartient 
 tripartite 
 tripe 
 tri-personal 
 triple 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix