URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/nectar
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T18:32:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Nectar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Nectar - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of nectar 

 nectar (n.) 

 1550s, from Latin nectar , from Greek nektar , name of the drink of the gods, which is perhaps an ancient Indo-European poetic compound of nek- "death" (from PIE root *nek- (1) "death") + -tar "overcoming," which is reconstructed to be from PIE root *tere- (2) "cross over, pass through, overcome." The sense of "any delicious drink" is from 1580s. The meaning "sweet liquid in flowers" is recorded by c. 1600.
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to nectar 

 nectarine (n.) 

 type of peach with smooth skin and firmer pulp, 1660s, noun use of adjective meaning "of or like nectar" (1610s; see nectar + -ine (1)). Probably inspired by German nektarpfirsich "nectar-peach." Earlier in English as nectrine .

 *nek- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "death." It might form all or part of: innocent ; innocuous ; internecine ; necro- ; necropolis ; necrosis ; necromancy ; nectar ; nectarine ; nociceptive ; nocuous ; noxious ; nuisance ; obnoxious ; pernicious .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit nasyati "disappears, perishes," Avestan nasyeiti "disappears," nasu- "corpse," Old Persian vi-nathayatiy "he injures;" Greek nekros "corpse;" Latin nex , genitive necis "violent death, murder" (as opposed to mors ), nocere "to harm, hurt," noxius "harmful;" Greek nekus "dead" (adj.), nekros "dead body, corpse;" Old Irish ec , Breton ankou , Welsh angeu "death."

 *tere- (2) 

 *terə- Proto-Indo-European root meaning "cross over, pass through, overcome."

 It might form all or part of: avatar ; caravanserai ; nectar ; nectarine ; nostril ; seraglio ; thrill ; thorough ; through ; tranche ; trans- ; transient ; transom ; trench ; truculent ; truncate ; trunk .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit tirah , Avestan taro "through, beyond;" Latin trans "beyond;" Old Irish tre , Welsh tra "through;" Old English þurh "through."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ambrosia 

 1560s, "favored food or drink of the gods," from Latin ambrosia, from Greek ambrosia "food of the gods," noun use of fem. of ambrosios "divine," probably literally "of the immortals," from ambrotos "immortal, imperishable," from a- "not" (see a- (3)) + mbrotos, related to mortos 

 paradisiacal 

 paradise rivals NECTAR in the number of experiments that the desire for a satisfactory adjective has occasioned....But, whereas nectar is in the end well enough provided, no-one uses any adjective from paradise without feeling that surely...

 tear 

 "fluid drop from the eye," Old English tear "tear, drop, nectar, what is distilled in drops," from earlier teahor, tæhher...

 sap 

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE root *sab- "juice, fluid" (source also of Sanskrit sabar- "sap, milk, nectar," Irish...

 pop 

 A new manufactory of a nectar, between soda-water and ginger-beer, and called pop, because 'pop goes the cork' when it is...

 mildew 

 fungus that appears on plants or decaying organic matter," mid-14c., a transferred sense of a word that meant originally "nectar...

 Hesperides 

 They were far-famed in antiquity; for it was there that springs of nectar flowed by the couch of Zeus, and there that the...

 dainty 

 c. 1300, deinte, "delightful, pleasing" (late 12c. as a surname), from dainty (n.); see below. Meaning evolved in Middle English to "choice, excellent" (late 14c.) to "delicately pretty, exhibiting exquisite taste or skill" (c. 1400). Sense of "fastidious, affectedly fine, weak, 

 treat 

 c. 1300, "negotiate, bargain, deal with," from Old French traitier "deal with, act toward; set forth (in speech or writing)" (12c.), from Latin tractare "manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward," originally "drag about, tug, haul, pull violently," frequentative of trahe

 hour 

 c. 1200, "divine office prescribed for each of the seven canonical hours; the daily service at the canonical hours;" c. 1300, "time of day appointed for prayer, one of the seven canonical hours," from Old French ore, hore "canonical hour; one-twelfth of a day" (sunrise to sunset)

 Share nectar 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/nectar Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/nectar">Etymology of nectar by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of nectar. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/nectar Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of nectar," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nectar. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of nectar." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/nectar. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of nectar." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/nectar (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near nectar 
 necrophobia 
 necropolis 
 necropsy 
 necrosis 
 necrotomy 
 nectar 
 nectarine 
 *ned- 
 Ned 
 nee 
 need 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close