URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/beacon
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:11:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Beacon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Beacon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of beacon 

 beacon (n.) 

 Middle English beken , from Old English beacen "sign, portent, lighthouse," from West Germanic *baukna "beacon, signal" (source also of Old Frisian baken , Old Saxon bokan , Old High German bouhhan ); according to Watkins it is probably from Proto-Germanic *baukna- "beacon, signal," from suffixed form of PIE root *bha- (1) "to shine." The figurative use is attested from c. 1600.

 Entries linking to beacon 

 beckon (v.) 

 Middle English bekenen , from Old English gebecnian (West Saxon beacnian ) "to make a mute sign, signal by a nod or gesture," from Proto-Germanic *bauknjan (source also of Old Saxon boknian , Old High German bouhnen ), from PIE root *bha- (1) "to shine" (compare beacon ). Related: Beckoned ; beckoning . The noun is attested from 1718, from the verb.

 buoy (n.) 

 "float fixed in a place to indicate the position of objects underwater or to mark a channel," late 13c., boie , probably from Old French buie or Middle Dutch boeye , both of which likely are from Proto-Germanic *baukna- "beacon, signal" (see beacon ). OED and Century Dictionary, however, suggest it is from Middle Dutch boeie or Old French boie "fetter, chain" (see boy ), "because of its being fettered to a spot."

 *bha- (1) 

 *bhā- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine."

 It might form all or part of: aphotic ; bandolier ; banner ; banneret ; beacon ; beckon ; buoy ; diaphanous ; emphasis ; epiphany ; fantasia ; fantasy ; hierophant ; pant (v.); -phane ; phanero- ; phantasm ; phantasmagoria ; phantom ; phase ; phene ; phenetic ; pheno- ; phenology ; phenomenon ; phenyl ; photic ; photo- ; photocopy ; photogenic ; photograph ; photon ; photosynthesis ; phosphorus ; phaeton ; sycophant ; theophany ; tiffany ; tryptophan .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit bhati "shines, glitters;" Greek phainein "bring to light, make appear," phantazein "make visible, display;" Old Irish ban "white, light, ray of light."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Pharos 

 as a word or name for a lighthouse, literal or figurative, 1550s, extended from the name of mighty lighthouse which Ptolemy Philadelphius had built on an island off the coast of Alexandria, from Greek pharos "lighthouse," a word of unknown origin. Hence also pharology (1847) "the

 lantern 

 , from Latin lanterna "lantern, lamp, torch," altered (by influence of Latin lucerna "lamp") from Greek lampter "torch, beacon...

 lamp 

 French lampe "lamp, lights" (12c.), from Latin lampas "a light, torch, flambeau," from Greek lampas "a torch, oil-lamp, beacon-light...

 dale 

 level or gently sloping ground between low hills with a stream flowing through it, Old English dæl "vale, valley, gorge," from Proto-Germanic *dalaz "valley" (source also of Old Saxon, Dutch, Gothic dal, Old Norse dalr, Old High German tal, German Tal "valley"), perhaps from PIE 

 deal 

 "a part or portion," Middle English del, from from Old English dæl "a part of a whole, a share;" with qualification (great, etc.), "an extent, degree, quantity, amount," from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (source also of Old Norse deild, Old Frisian del "part; juridical district," Dutch

 lade 

 Old English hladan (past tense hlod, past participle gehladen) "to load, heap up, burden" (the general Germanic sense), also "to draw or take up water" (a meaning peculiar to English), from Proto-Germanic *hlathan- (source also of Old Norse hlaða "to pile up, load, especially a s

 lead 

 "to guide," Old English lædan (transitive) "cause to go with oneself; march at the head of, go before as a guide, accompany and show the way; carry on; sprout forth, bring forth; pass (one's life)," causative of liðan "to travel," from Proto-Germanic *laidjanan (source also of Ol

 shine 

 Middle English shinen, from Old English scinan "shed, send forth, or give out light; be radiant, be resplendent, illuminate," of persons, "be conspicuous" (class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen). This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *skeinanan (s

 take 

 Middle English taken, from late Old English tacan "to grip, seize by force, lay hold of," from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka "take, grasp, lay hold," past tense tok, past participle tekinn; also compare Swedish ta, past participle tagit). This is reconstructed to 

 credit 

 1540s, "belief, faith," from French crédit (15c.) "belief, trust," from Italian credito, from Latin creditum "a loan, thing entrusted to another," neuter past participle of credere "to trust, entrust, believe" (see credo). The commercial sense of "confidence in the ability and in

 Share beacon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/beacon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/beacon">Etymology of beacon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of beacon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/beacon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of beacon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/beacon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of beacon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/beacon. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of beacon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/beacon (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near beacon 
 be- 
 beach 
 beach-comber 
 beach-front 
 beach-head 
 beacon 
 bead 
 beadle 
 beadsman 
 beadwork 
 beady 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix