URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/carbon
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:23:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Carbon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Carbon - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of carbon 

 carbon (n.) 

 non-metallic element occurring naturally as diamond, graphite, or charcoal, 1789, coined 1787 in French by Lavoisier as charbone , from Latin carbonem (nominative carbo ) "a coal, glowing coal; charcoal," from PIE root *ker- (3) "heat, fire."

 Carbon 14 , the long-lived radioactive isotope used in dating organic deposits, is from 1936. Carbon-dating (using carbon 14) is recorded from 1958. Carbon cycle is attested from 1912; carbon footprint was in use by 2001. Carbon-paper "paper faced with carbon, used between two sheets for reproduction on the lower of what is drawn or written on the upper" is from 1855, earlier it was carbonic paper (1850).
 also from 1789 

 Entries linking to carbon 

 boron (n.) 

 non-metallic chemical element, 1812, from borax + ending abstracted unetymologically from carbon (its properties somewhat resemble those of carbon). Originally called boracium by Humphry Davy because it was drawn from boracic acid . Related: Boric .

 carbide (n.) 

 compound formed by combination of carbon and another element, 1848, from carb- , combining form of carbon + chemical suffix -ide . The earlier word was carburet .

 carbolic 
 carbon dioxide 
 carbon monoxide 
 carbonaceous 
 carbonate 
 carbon-copy 
 carbonic 
 carboniferous 
 carbonization 
 Carborundum 
 carbuncle 
 carburetor 
 fluorocarbon 
 hydrocarbon 
 radio-carbon 
 *ker- 
 carbo- 
 See All Related Words (19) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 carboniferous 

 1799, "coal-bearing, containing or yielding carbon or coal," from Latin carbo (genitive carbonis) "coal" (see carbon) + -ferous "producing, containing, bearing," from ferre "to bear" (from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear children"). It was used in designating the ro

 carbuncle 

 early 13c., "fiery jewel, gem of a deep red color, ruby," also the name of a semi-mythical gem from the East Indies formerly believed to be capable of shining in the dark, from Old North French carbuncle (Old French charbocle, charboncle) "carbuncle-stone," also "carbuncle, boil,

 carburetor 

 also carburator, carburettor, device to enhance a gas flame by adding volatile hydrocarbons, 1866, from carburet "compound of carbon and another substance" (1795, now displaced by carbide), also used as a verb, "to combine with carbon" (1802); from carb-, combining form of carbon

 carbohydrate 

 general name for a group of organic compounds consisting of carbon atoms in multiples of 6 and hydrogen and oxygen in the...proportion of water, 1851, from carbo-, combining form of carbon, + hydrate (n.), denoting compound produced when certain...The name carbohydrate was given to these compounds because, in composition, they are apparently hydrates of carbon....

 anthracite 

 Deep black with a brilliant luster, it is nearly pure carbon and burns almost without a flame and formerly was mined extensively...

 epoxy 

 Epoxy- is used as a prefix in chemistry to indicate an oxygen atom that is linked to two carbon atoms of a chain, thus forming...

 cyan- 

 word-forming element used in science for the carbon-nitrogen compound radical, from a Latinized form of Greek kyanos "dark...

 paper 

 mid-14c., "material consisting of a compacted web or felting of vegetable fibers, commonly as a thin, flexible sheet for writing, printing, etc.," from Anglo-French paper, Old French papier "paper, document," and directly from Latin papyrus "paper, paper made of papyrus stalks," 

 copy 

 mid-14c., "written account or record," from Old French copie (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin copia "reproduction, transcript," from Latin copia "an abundance, ample supply, profusion, plenty," from assimilated form of com "with" (see com-) + ops (genitive opis) "power, we

 petroleum 

 early 15c., "petroleum, rock oil, oily inflammable substance occurring naturally in certain rock beds" (mid-14c. in Anglo-French), from Medieval Latin petroleum, from Latin petra "rock" (see petrous) + oleum "oil" (see oil (n.)). Commercial production and refinement of it began i

 Share carbon 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/carbon Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/carbon">Etymology of carbon by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of carbon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/carbon Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of carbon," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/carbon. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of carbon." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/carbon. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of carbon." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/carbon (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near carbon 
 carbide 
 carbine 
 carbo- 
 carbohydrate 
 carbolic 
 carbon 
 carbon dioxide 
 carbon monoxide 
 carbonaceous 
 carbonara 
 carbonate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix