URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/iron
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:28:25Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Iron - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Iron - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of iron 

 iron (n.) 

 Middle English iron , iren , yron , from Old English iren , variant (with rhotacism of -s- ) of isen , later form of isern , isærn "the metal iron; an iron weapon or instrument," from Proto-Germanic *isarn (source also of Old Saxon isarn , Old Frisian isern , Old Norse isarn , Middle Dutch iser , Old High German isarn , German Eisen ).

 This perhaps is an early borrowing of Celtic *isarnon (compare Old Irish iarn , Welsh haiarn ), which Watkins suggests is from PIE *is-(e)ro- "powerful, holy," from PIE *eis "strong" (source also of Sanskrit isirah "vigorous, strong," Greek ieros "strong"), on the notion of "holy metal" or "strong metal" (in contrast to softer bronze).

 Both an adjective and a noun in Old English, but in form an adjective. The alternative isen survived into early Middle English as izen . In southern England the Middle English word tended to be ire , yre , with loss of -n , perhaps regarded as an inflection; in the north and Scotland, however, the word tended to be contracted to irn , yrn , still detectable in dialect.

 Right so as whil that Iren is hoot men sholden smyte. [Chaucer, c. 1386]

 Chemical symbol Fe  is from the Latin word for the metal, ferrum (see ferro- ).

 The meaning "metal device used to press or smooth clothes" is from 1610s. The meaning "golf club with an iron head" is by 1842. To have (too) many irons in the fire "to be doing too much at once" is from 1540s. Iron lung "artificial respiration tank" is from 1932. The iron crown was that of the ancient kings of Lombardy, with a thin band of iron in the gold, said to have been forged from a nail of Christ's Cross.

 Iron horse "railroad locomotive" is from an 1839 poem. Iron maiden , instrument of torture, is from 1837 (probably translating German eiserne jungfrau ). The unidentified French political prisoner known as the man in the iron mask died in the Bastille in 1703. In British history, Wellington was called the Iron Duke by 1832.

 iron (v.) 

 c. 1400, irenen , "to make of iron," from iron (n.). Meaning "shackle with irons" is from 1650s. Meaning "press clothes" (with a heated flat-iron) is recorded from 1670s. Related: Ironed ; ironing .
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to iron 

 ironing (n.) 

 "act of pressing and smoothing clothes with a heated flat-iron," 1725, verbal noun from iron (v.). Ironing-board attested from 1762.

 andiron (n.) 

 "fire-dog, one of the pair of metallic stands used to support wood burned on an open hearth," c. 1300, aundiren , from Old French andier "andiron," which is of unknown origin, perhaps from Gaulish *andero- "a young bull" (source also of Welsh anner "heifer"), which would make sense if they once had bull's heads cast onto them. Altered by influence of Middle English iren (see iron (n.)).

 cast-iron 
 Eisenhower 
 flat-iron 
 iron curtain 
 iron-bound 
 ironclad 
 iron-gray 
 ironmonger 
 iron-on 
 irons 
 ironstone 
 ironwork 
 irony 
 Isegrim 
 pig iron 
 ferro- 
 See All Related Words (18) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cast-iron 

 1660s, cast iron, from iron (n.) + cast (adj.) "made by melting and being left to harden in a mold" (1530s), past-participle adjective from cast (v.) in its sense "to throw something (in a particular way)," c. 1300, especially "form metal into a shape by pouring it molten" (1510s

 irony 

 "figure of speech in which the intended meaning is the opposite of the literal meaning" (usually covert sarcasm under a serious or friendly pretense), c. 1500, from Latin ironia, from Greek eironeia "dissimulation, assumed ignorance," from eiron "dissembler," perhaps related to e

 press 

 c. 1300, presse, "a crowd, throng, company; crowding and jostling of a throng; a massing together," from Old French presse (n.) "a throng, a crush, a crowd; wine or cheese press" (11c.), from Latin pressare (see press (v.1)). Late Old English had press in the sense of "clothes pr

 galvanized 

 As "coated with a metal by galvanism" from 1839, originally in galvanized iron....Iron covered with zinc has been called galvanised iron, from the fact that we have two metals in different electrical conditions...; the zinc, suffering chemical change, oxidising, and acting as a protecting agent to the iron....

 sidero- 

 word-forming element meaning "iron," used since late 18c. in medical terms and mineral names, from Greek sidēros "iron,"...Beekes writes that "The Greeks got to know iron from Asia Minor, the Pontus and Caucasus, and it is likely that they took...He points to resemblance to Udian (Caucasian) zido "iron."...He also mentions other theories: that the Greek word originally referred to meteoric iron, and is derived from Latin sidus...

 mitrailleuse 

 "small missile," especially grape, canister, etc., fired at close quarters (14c.), originally "small coins," hence "old iron..., scrap iron," then "grapeshot;" a diminutive of mite "a small coin" (see mite (n.2))...."For sense development it should be borne in mind that orig. guns used to be loaded with scrap iron" [Klein]....

 tire 

 late 15c., "iron plates forming a rim of a carriage wheel," probably from tire "equipment, dress, covering" (c. 1300), a...A tire-iron originally was one of the iron plates; as a device for separating a tire from a wheel, by 1909....

 mashie 

 in golf, "straight-faced niblick," (Linskill's "Golf," 1889, calls it "a cross between a niblick and a lofting-iron"), historical version of a modern five iron, 1881, mashy, from Scottish, probably named for a mason's hammer, from French massue "club," from Vulgar Latin *mattiuca

 club 

 c. 1200, "thick stick wielded in the hand and used as a weapon," from Old Norse klubba "cudgel" or a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish klubba, Danish klubbe), assimilated from Proto-Germanic *klumbon and related to clump (n.). Old English words for this were sagol, cyc

 wedge 

 Old English wecg "a wedge," from Proto-Germanic *wagjaz (source also of Old Norse veggr, Middle Dutch wegge, Dutch wig, Old High German weggi "wedge," dialectal German Weck "wedge-shaped bread roll"), of uncertain origin; perhaps related to Latin vomer "plowshare." From 1610s in 

 Share iron 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/iron Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/iron">Etymology of iron by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of iron. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/iron Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of iron," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/iron. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of iron." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/iron. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of iron." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/iron (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near iron 
 Irishry 
 Irishwoman 
 irk 
 irksome 
 Irma 
 iron 
 Iron Age 
 Iron Cross 
 iron curtain 
 iron-bound 
 ironclad 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix