URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/control
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T01:33:24Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Control - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Control - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of control 

 control (v.) 

 early 15c., countrollen , "check the accuracy of, verify; regulate," from Anglo-French contreroller "exert authority," from Medieval Latin contrarotulus "a counter, register," from Latin contra "against" (see contra ) + rotulus , diminutive of rota "wheel" (see roll (n.)). The word apparently comes from a medieval method of checking accounts by a duplicate register.

 Un contrerollour qui doit contre roller au tresorere de la garderobe toutz lez receitez. [Household ordinances of Edward II, c. 1310] 

 The sense of "dominate, direct, exercise control over" is from mid-15c. Related: Controlled ; controlling . Control group in scientific experiments is attested from 1952 (from a sense of control attested by 1875).
 also from early 15c. 

 control (n.) 

 1580s, "act of keeping under authority and regulation, fact of checking and directing action," from control (v.).

 The meaning "a check, restraint" is from 1590s. The meaning "a standard of comparison in scientific experiments" is by 1857, probably from German Controleversuche . Airport control tower is from 1920; control-room is attested by 1897. Control freak "person who feels an obsessive need to have command of any situation" is by 1969.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to control 

 contra (prep., adv.) 

 "against, over against, opposite, on the opposite side; on the contrary, contrariwise," mid-14c., from Latin contra (prep. and adv.) "against," originally "in comparison with," ablative singular feminine of *com-teros , from Old Latin com "with, together" (see com- ) + -tr , zero-degree form of the comparative suffix -ter- .

 controlled (adj.) 

 "held in check, restrained," 1580s, past-participle adjective from control (v.). Of rent, from 1930.

 controlling 
 roll 
 controllable 
 controller 
 decontrol 
 self-control 
 uncontrolled 
 See All Related Words (9) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 roll 

 c. 1200, rolle, "rolled-up piece of parchment or paper, scroll" (especially one inscribed with an official record), from Old French rolle "document, parchment scroll, decree" (12c.), Medieval Latin rotulus "a roll of paper" (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian rullo), from Lati

 controller 

 late 14c., "official in charge of accounts in a king's household," from Anglo-French contrerolleour (late 13c.), Old French contrerelleor (Modern French contrôleur), from Medieval Latin contrarotulator, agent noun from *contra-rotulare (see control (v.)). Broader sense of "office

 command 

 c. 1300, "order or direct with authority" (transitive), from Old French comander "to order, enjoin, entrust" (12c., Modern French commander), from Vulgar Latin *commandare, from Latin commendare "to recommend, entrust to" (see commend); altered by influence of Latin mandare "to c

 refrain 

 mid-14c., refreinen, transitive, "exercise control over, restrain; hold (someone or something) back from action," senses...now obsolete, also "exercise control over" (thoughts, desires, feelings, vices, etc.); from Old French refraigner, refrener...This is from Latin refrenare "to bridle, hold in with a bit, check, curb, keep down, control," from re- "back" (see re-)...Reflexive sense of "control oneself, put restraint upon oneself" is from late 14c. Related: Refrained; refraining....

 impotent 

 ," from Old French impotent "powerless, weak, incapable of doing," from Latin imponentem (nominative impotens) "lacking control..., powerless, feeble; lacking self-control," from assimilated form of in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + ponentem (nominative...The figurative sense in Latin was "without self-control, headstrong, violent, ungovernable, lacking self-restraint," which...

 impotence 

 15c., "physical weakness," also "poverty," from Old French impotence "weakness" (13c.), from Latin impotentia "lack of control...or power," from impotentem "lacking control, powerless" (see impotent)....

 manumit 

 "control"), from the phrase manu mittere "release from control," from manu, ablative of manus "power of a master," literally...

 direction 

 late 14c., direccioun, "action of directing or guiding," from Latin directionem (nominative directio) "a making straight, a straight line, a directing (toward something)," noun of action from past-participle stem of dirigere "to set straight, arrange; give a particular direction 

 discipline 

 c. 1200, "penitential chastisement; punishment for the sake of correction," from Old French descepline "discipline, physical punishment; teaching; suffering; martyrdom" (11c., Modern French discipline) and directly from Latin disciplina "instruction given, teaching, learning, kno

 cap 

 late Old English cæppe "hood, head-covering, cape," a general Germanic borrowing (compare Old Frisian and Middle Dutch kappe, Old High German chappa) from Late Latin cappa "a cape, hooded cloak" (source of Spanish capa, Old North French cape, French chape), a word of uncertain or

 Share control 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/control Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/control">Etymology of control by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of control. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/control Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of control," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/control. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of control." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/control. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of control." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/control (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near control 
 contributor 
 contrite 
 contrition 
 contrivance 
 contrive 
 control 
 controllable 
 controlled 
 controller 
 controlling 
 controversary 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix