URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhinoceros
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:22:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rhinoceros - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rhinoceros - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rhinoceros 

 rhinoceros (n.) 

 "ungainly quadruped having tough, thick skin and usually one or two horns on the snout," once widespread but now limited to Africa and South Asia, c. 1300, rinoceros , "a rhinoceros," also "a horned beast, sometimes regarded as a species of unicorn" [Middle English Compendium], from Latin rhinoceros , from Greek rhinokerōs , literally "nose-horned," from rhinos "nose" (a word of unknown origin) + keras (genitive keratos, kerōs ) "horn of an animal" (from PIE root *ker- (1) "horn; head").

 What is the plural of rhinoceros? ... Well, Liddell and Scott seem to authorize 'rhinocerotes,' which is pedantic, but 'rhinoceroses' is not euphonious. [Sir Charles Eliot, "The East Africa Protectorate," 1905]

 Medieval Latin used rhinocerota . The adjective also is unsettled: Candidates include rhinocerontine , rhinocerine . Fitzedward Hall ("Modern English," 1873) needled Addison and Steele for rhinocerical and noted that " Rhinocerotic will do perfectly." The rhinoceros beetle (by 1680s) is so called for the large, upcurved horn on the head of males.
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to rhinoceros 

 rhino (n.) 

 short for rhinoceros , 1884. As slang for "cash" (also rino ) 1680s, but the signification is now unknown. Hence cant rhinocerial "rich."

 *ker- (1) 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "horn; head," with derivatives referring to horned animals, horn-shaped objects, and projecting parts.

 It might form all or part of: alpenhorn ; Capricorn ; carat ; carotid ; carrot ; carotene ; cerato- ; cerebellum ; cerebral ; cerebrum ; cervical ; cervix ; charivari ; cheer ; chelicerae ; corn (n.2) "hardening of the skin;" cornea ; corner ; cornet ; cornucopia ; cranium ; flugelhorn ; hart ; hartebeest ; horn ; hornbeam ; hornblende ; hornet ; keratin ; kerato- ; migraine ; monoceros ; reindeer ; rhinoceros ; saveloy ; serval ; triceratops ; unicorn .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit srngam "horn;" Persian sar "head," Avestan sarah- "head;" Greek karnon "horn," koryne "club, mace," koryphe "head;" Latin cornu "horn," cervus "deer;" Old English horn "horn of an animal;" Welsh carw "deer."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 battery 

 1530s, "action of battering," in law, "the unlawful beating of another," from French batterie, from Old French baterie "beating, thrashing, assault" (12c.), from batre "to beat," from Latin battuere (see batter (v.)). The meaning shifted in French from "bombardment" ("heavy blows

 bolster 

 Old English bolster "bolster, cushion, something stuffed so that it swells up," especially "a long, stuffed pillow," from Proto-Germanic *bolkhstraz (source also of Old Norse bolstr, Danish, Swedish, Dutch bolster, German polster), from PIE *bhelgh- "to swell," extended form of r

 commission 

 mid-14c., "authority entrusted to someone, delegated authority or power," from Old French commission and directly from Latin commissionem (nominative commissio) "act of committing," in Medieval Latin "delegation of business," noun of action from past participle stem of committere

 stake 

 "pointed stick or post; stick of wood sharpened at one end for driving into the ground, used as part of a fence, as a boundary-mark, as a post to tether an animal to, or as a support for something (a vine, a tent, etc.)," Old English staca "pin, stake," from Proto-Germanic *stako

 imminent 

 1520s, from French imminent (14c.) and directly from Latin imminentem (nominative imminens) "overhanging; impending," present participle of imminere "to overhang, lean towards," hence "be near to," also "threaten, menace, impend, be at hand, be about to happen," from assimilated 

 hocus-pocus 

 magical formula used in conjuring, 1630s, earlier Hocas Pocas, common name of a magician or juggler (1620s); a sham-Latin invocation used by jugglers, perhaps based on a perversion of the sacramental blessing from the Mass, Hoc est corpus meum "This is my body." The first to make

 Stepin Fetchit 

 type of stereotypical Black roles in Hollywood, or in popular culture generally, from the stage name of popular Black vaudeville actor Lincoln Theodore Perry (1902-1985), who first appeared in films under that name in "In Old Kentucky" (1927). Perry said he took the name from a r

 dwarf 

 Old English dweorh, dweorg (West Saxon), duerg (Mercian), "very short human being, person much below ordinary stature, whether of proportionate parts or not," also "supernatural being of subhuman size," from Proto-Germanic *dweraz (source also of Old Frisian dwerch, Old Saxon dwe

 syncope 

 1520s, "contraction of a word by omission of middle sounds or letters," from Latin syncope "contraction of a word by elision," from Greek synkopē "contraction of a word," literally "a cutting off, cutting up, cutting short," from synkoptein "to cut up." This is from syn- "togethe

 finance 

 c. 1400, "an end, settlement, retribution," from Old French finance "end, ending; pardon, remission; payment, expense; settlement of a debt" (13c.), noun of action from finer "to end, settle a dispute or debt," from fin (see fine (n.)). Compare Medieval Latin finis "a payment in 

 Share rhinoceros 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhinoceros Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhinoceros">Etymology of rhinoceros by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rhinoceros. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhinoceros Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rhinoceros," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhinoceros. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rhinoceros." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhinoceros. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rhinoceros." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rhinoceros (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rhinoceros 
 Rhineland 
 rhinestone 
 rhinitis 
 rhino 
 rhino- 
 rhinoceros 
 rhinology 
 rhinoplasty 
 rhinorrhea 
 rhinovirus 
 rhizo- 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix