URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/janitor
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:28:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Janitor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Janitor - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of janitor 

 janitor (n.) 

 1580s, "an usher in a school," later "doorkeeper" (1620s), from Latin ianitor "doorkeeper, porter," from ianua "door, entrance, gate," from ianus "arched passageway, arcade" (see Janus ) + agent suffix -tor .

 The meaning "caretaker of a building, man employed to see that rooms are kept clean and in order" is recorded by 1708. Fem. forms were janitress (1806), janitrix (1818). In Horace, Cerberus is ianitor of Hell.
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to janitor 

 Janus 

 ancient Italic deity, to the Romans the guardian god of portals, doors, and gates; patron of beginnings and endings, c. 1500, from Latin Ianus , literally "gate, arched passageway," perhaps from PIE root *ei- "to go" (cognates: Sanskrit yanah "path," Old Church Slavonic jado "to travel"). He is shown as having two faces, one in front the other in back (they may represent sunrise and sunset and reflect an original role as a solar deity). His temple in Rome was closed only in times of peace. Related: Janian .

 janitorial (adj.) 

 1869, from janitor + -ial .

 *ei- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to go."

 It might form all or part of: Abitur ; adit ; ambience ; ambient ; ambit ; ambition ; ambitious ; andante ; anion ; cation ; circuit ; coitus ; commence ; commencement ; concomitant ; constable ; count (n.1) title of nobility; county ; dysprosium ; errant ; exit ; initial ; initiate ; initiation ; introit ; ion ; issue ; itinerant ; itinerary ; janitor ; January ; Janus ; Jena ; Mahayana ; obit ; obituary ; perish ; praetor ; Praetorian ; preterite ; sedition ; sudden ; trance ; transient ; transit ; transitive ; viscount .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit e'ti "goes," imas "we go," ayanam "a going, way;" Avestan ae'iti "goes," Old Persian aitiy "goes;" Greek ienai "to go;" Latin ire "to go," iter "a way;" Old Irish ethaim "I go," Irish bothar "a road" (from *bou-itro- "cows' way"), Gaulish eimu "we go;" Lithuanian eiti "to go;" Old Church Slavonic iti "go;" Bulgarian ida "I go;" Russian idti "to go;" Gothic iddja "went."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sexton 

 The sense of "custodian and janitor of a church" had emerged by 1580s....

 superintendent 

 Meaning "janitor, custodian" is from c. 1935....

 steward 

 Middle English steuard, steward, "official in charge of the domestic affairs of a (large) household," from Old English stiward, stigweard "one who has charge of the affairs of the household or estate of another," from stig "hall, pen for cattle, part of a house" (see sty (n.1)) +

 education 

 1530s, "child-rearing," also "the training of animals," from French education (14c.) and directly from Latin educationem (nominative educatio) "a rearing, training," noun of action from past-participle stem of educare (see educate). Originally of instruction in social codes and m

 plague 

 late 14c., plage, "affliction, calamity, evil, scourge, severe trouble or vexation;" early 15c., "malignant disease," from Old French plage (14c., Modern French plaie), from Late Latin plaga "affliction; slaughter, destruction," used in Vulgate for "pestilence," from Latin plaga 

 sanction 

 1560s, "a law or decree," from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) "act of decreeing or ordaining," also "a decree, an ordinance, a law," noun of action from past-participle stem of sancire "to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred" (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecc

 devotion 

 c. 1200, devocioun, "profound religious emotion, awe, reverence," from Old French devocion "devotion, piety" and directly from Latin devotionem (nominative devotio), noun of action from past-participle stem of devovere "dedicate by a vow, sacrifice oneself, promise solemnly," fro

 gravity 

 c. 1500, "weight, dignity, seriousness, solemnity of deportment or character, importance," from Old French gravité "seriousness, thoughtfulness" (13c.) and directly from Latin gravitatem (nominative gravitas) "weight, heaviness, pressure," from gravis "heavy" (from PIE root *gwer

 giant 

 c. 1300, "fabulous man-like creature of enormous size," from Old French geant, earlier jaiant "giant, ogre" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *gagantem (nominative gagas), from Latin gigas "a giant," from Greek Gigas (usually in plural, Gigantes), one of a race of divine but savage and m

 slang 

 1756, "special vocabulary of tramps or thieves" or any set of persons of low character, later "jargon of a particular profession" (1801). The sense of "very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty" is by 1818. Anatoly Liberman writes here an extensive account of 

 Share janitor 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/janitor Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/janitor">Etymology of janitor by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of janitor. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/janitor Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of janitor," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/janitor. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of janitor." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/janitor. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of janitor." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/janitor (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near janitor 
 jams 
 Jane 
 Janet 
 jangle 
 jangly 
 janitor 
 janitorial 
 janizary 
 Jankin 
 Jansenism 
 January 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close