URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/egg
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:49:35Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Egg - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Egg - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of egg 

 egg (n.) 

 "the body formed in the females of all animals (with the exception of a few of the lowest type) in which by impregnation the development of the fetus takes place," mid-14c., egge , mostly in northern England dialect, from Old Norse egg , from Proto-Germanic *ajja(m) (source also of Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German, German ei , Gothic ada ), probably from PIE *owyo-/*oyyo- "egg" (source also of Old Church Slavonic aja , Russian jajco , Breton ui , Welsh wy , Greek ōon , Latin ovum ); possibly derived from root *awi- "bird."

 This Norse-derived northern word vied in Middle English with native cognates eye , eai , from Old English æg , until finally displacing the others after c. 1500. Caxton (15c.) writes of a merchant (probably a north-country man) in a public house on the Thames who asked for eggs:

 And the goode wyf answerde, that she coude speke no frenshe. And the marchaunt was angry, for he also coude speke no frenshe, but wolde have hadde egges, and she understode hym not. 

 She did, however, recognize another customer's request for "eyren." Used of persons from c. 1600. Bad egg in the figurative sense is from 1855; bad eggs aren't always obvious to outward view (there was an old proverb, "bad bird, bad egg"). To have egg on (one's) face "look foolish" is attested by 1948.

 [Young & Rubincam] realize full well that a crew can sometimes make or break a show. It can do little things to ruin a program or else, by giving it its best, can really get that all-important rating. They are mindful of an emcee of a variety show who already has been tabbed "old egg in your face" because the crew has managed to get him in such awkward positions on the TV screen. [Billboard, March 5, 1949] 

 We don't have egg on our face. We have omelet all over our suits. [NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw, some time past 3 a.m. ET on Nov. 8, 2000, after the U.S. television networks called a winner, then retracted the call, in the Bush-Gore presidential election]

   Eggs Benedict is attested by 1898; various Benedicts are cited as the eponym, and the dish itself is said to have originated in the Waldorf-Astoria or Delmonico's, both in New York. The figure of speech represented in to have (or put) all (one's) eggs in one basket "to venture all one has in one speculation or investment" is attested by 1660s. The conundrum of the chicken (or hen) and the egg is attested from 1875.

 Bumble, bramble, which came first, sir,

 Eggs or chickens? Who can tell?

 I'll never believe that the first egg burst, sir,

 Before its mother was out of her shell.

 [Mary Mapes Dodge, "Rhymes and Jingles," N.Y., 1875]
 also from mid-14c. 

 egg (v.) 

 "to incite, urge, encourage, instigate," c. 1200, from Old Norse eggja "to goad on, incite," from egg "edge" (see edge (n.)). The unrelated verb from egg (n.) is by 1808 in cookery, "to cover or mix with eggs;" the meaning "to pelt with (rotten) eggs" is from 1857. Related: Egged ; egging .
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to egg 

 edge (n.) 

 Old English ecg "corner, edge, point," also "sword" (also found in ecgplega , literally "edge play," ecghete , literally "edge hate," both used poetically for "battle"), from Proto-Germanic *agjo (source also of Old Frisian egg "edge;" Old Saxon eggia "point, edge;" Middle Dutch egghe , Dutch eg ; Old Norse egg , see egg (v.); Old High German ecka , German Eck "corner"), from PIE root *ak- "be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce."

 Spelling development of Old English -cg to Middle English -gg to Modern English -dge represents a widespread shift in pronunciation. To get the edge on (someone) is U.S. colloquial, first recorded 1911. Edge city is from Joel Garreau's 1992 book of that name. Razor's edge as a perilous narrow path translates Greek epi xyrou akmes . To be on edge "excited or irritable" is from 1872; to have (one's) teeth on edge is from late 14c., though "It is not quite clear what is the precise notion originally expressed in this phrase" [OED].

 egg roll (n.) 

 "fried spring roll," a Chinese-American food, by 1917, from egg (n.) + roll (n.). Modern versions often contain no egg and cabbage is the primary ingredient, but in the old recipe the shell they were rolled in was made from fried eggs.

 egg-beater 
 egg-cup 
 egghead 
 egg-nog 
 eggplant 
 eggshell 
 egg-timer 
 egg-white 
 egg-yolk 
 kidney 
 wind-egg 
 *ak- 
 *awi- 
 See All Related Words (15) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 egg-nog 

 also eggnog, "sweet, rich, and stimulating cold drink made of eggs, milk, sugar, and spirits," c. 1775, American English, from egg (n.) + nog "strong ale." Old recipes for the drink could be made with weak alcoholic beverages like beer or wine in lieu of the milk. … And Bryan O'

 eggshell 

 also egg-shell, "the shell or outside covering of an egg, especially the hard, brittle, calcareous covering of birds' eggs," early 15c., from egg (n.) + shell (n.). It displaced ay-schelle (Middle English ei-shel, also a measure of quantity, Old English ægscill), from the native 

 ball 

 "round object, compact spherical body," also "a ball used in a game," c. 1200, probably from an unrecorded Old English *beal, *beall (evidenced by the diminutive bealluc "testicle"), or from cognate Old Norse bollr "ball," from Proto-Germanic *balluz (source also of Dutch bal, Fl

 oval 

 "having the longitudinal shape of an egg, elliptical," 1570s, from Modern Latin ovalis "egg-shaped" (source of French oval..., 1540s), literally "of or pertaining to an egg," from Latin ovum "egg" (see ovum)....

 addle 

 Popularly used in the noun phrase addle egg (mid-13c.)..."egg that does not hatch, rotten egg," a loan-translation of Latin ovum urinum, literally "urine egg," which is itself an...erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion ōon "putrid egg," literally "wind egg," from ourios "of the wind" (confused by...

 caviar 

 from French caviar (16c.), from Italian caviaro (modern caviale) or Turkish khaviar, from Persian khaviyar, from khaya "egg...," from Middle Persian khayak "egg," from Old Iranian *qvyaka-, diminutive of *avya- (from PIE *ōwyo‑, *ōyyo‑ "egg," which...

 poach 

 Old French poché, past participle of pochier (12c.), apparently literally "put into a pocket" (perhaps as the white of an egg...But connection to poke (v.) via the notion of a "broken" (shell-less) egg also has been proposed....

 bombard 

 early 15c., "catapult, military engine for throwing large stones" ("The name generally given in Europe to the cannon during the 1st century of its use," says Century Dictionary), from Old French bombarde "mortar, catapult" (14c.), from bombe (see bomb (n.)). The same word, from t

 surface 

 1610s, "the bounding or limiting parts of a body," from French surface "an outermost boundary, outside part" (16c.), from Old French sur- "above" (see sur-) + face (see face (n.)). The French words is patterned on Latin superficies "surface, upper side, top" (see superficial). Th

 spawn 

 early 15c., spawnen, of a fish, "to shed roe" (intransitive), from Anglo-French espaundre, Old French espandre "to spread out, pour out, scatter, strew," in reference to fish, "to spawn" (Modern French épandre), from Latin expandere "to spread out, unfold, expand," from ex "out" 

 Share egg 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/egg Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/egg">Etymology of egg by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of egg. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/egg Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of egg," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/egg. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of egg." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/egg. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of egg." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/egg (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near egg 
 egalitarian 
 egalitarianism 
 Egbert 
 egest 
 egestion 
 egg 
 egg roll 
 egg-beater 
 egg-cup 
 egghead 
 egg-nog 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix