URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppet
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T00:56:57Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Puppet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Puppet - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of puppet 

 puppet (n.) 

 1530s, "doll or little figure of a person moved by strings or wires" (later applied to puppets in glove form), a later form of Middle English popet "doll" (c. 1300; compare poppet ), from Old French popette "little doll, puppet," diminutive of popee "doll, puppet" (13c., Modern French poupée ), from Vulgar Latin *puppa , from Latin pupa "girl; doll" (see pupil (n.1)).

 The metaphoric extension to "one actuated by the will of another, one whose actions are manipulated by another" is recorded from 1540s (as poppet ). Puppet show "dramatic performance with puppets" is attested from 1650s, earlier puppet-play (1550s). Puppet government , one managed by the will of another power, is attested from 1884 (in reference to Egypt). Puppet-master "manager of a puppet-show" is by 1630s.
 also from 1530s 

 Entries linking to puppet 

 poppet (n.) 

 "small human figure used in witchcraft and sorcery," c. 1300, popet , early form of puppet (n.). Meaning "small or dainty person" is recorded from late 14c.; later a term of endearment (18c.) but also in other cases one of contempt.

 pupil (n.1) 

 [student], late 14c., "orphan child, ward, person under the care of a guardian," from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from Latin pupillus (fem. pupilla ) "orphan child, ward, minor," diminutive of pupus "boy" (fem. pupa "girl"), probably related to puer "child" (and thus probably from a suffixed form of PIE root *pau- (1) "few, little").

 Meaning "disciple, student youth or any person of either sex under the care of an instructor or tutor" is recorded by 1560s. Related: Pupillary; pupillarity; pupillage .

 puppeteer 
 puppetry 
 puppy 
 *pau- 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 puppy 

 late 15c., "woman's small pet dog," a word of uncertain origin but likely to be from French poupée "doll, toy" (see puppet). "A little dog appears to have been called puppy because petted as a doll or puppet" [Century Dictionary]. The meaning shifted from "toy dog" to "young dog"

 creature 

 c. 1300, "anything created," hence "a thing" in general, animate or not, but most commonly "a living being," from Old French creature "created being; all creation" (Modern French créature), from Late Latin creatura "a thing created; the creation; a creature," from creatus, past p

 tool 

 Old English tol "instrument, implement used by a craftsman or laborer, weapon," from Proto-Germanic *tōwalan "implement" (source also of Old Norse tol), from a verb stem represented by Old English tawian "prepare" (see taw). The ending is the instrumental suffix -el (1). The figu

 ducky 

 Palmer ["Folk-Etymology," 1882] finds the use of duck as a term of endearment "identical with Danish dukke, a baby or puppet...(Wolff), Ger. docke, a doll or puppet, Shetland duckie, a doll or little girl ...," and thinks it probably is not a metaphoric...

 wire 

 Wire-puller in the political sense is by 1842, American English, on the image of pulling the wires that work a puppet; the...curtain falls on the first act of the political farce, to the infinite annoyance and surprise of the prime wire-puller in the puppet-show...

 moppet 

 endearing term for a baby, a girl, etc., c. 1600," also "puppet made of cloth, rag-baby" (Johnson, 1755), from Middle English...

 kabuki 

 1896, from Japanese, popular theater (as opposed to shadow puppet-plays or lyrical Noh dramas)....

 salve 

 "medicinal ointment or adhesive preparation for external use on wounds and sores," Old English sealf "healing ointment," from West Germanic *salbo- "oily substance" (source also of Old Saxon salba, Middle Dutch salve, Dutch zalf, Old High German salba, German salbe "ointment"), f

 doll 

 1550s, Doll, an endearing name for a female pet or a mistress, from the familiar form of the fem. proper name Dorothy (q.v.). The -l- for -r- substitution in nicknames is common in English: compare Hal for Harold, Moll for Mary, Sally for Sarah, etc.  From 1610s in old slang

 Lloyd 

 male proper name, from Welsh Llwyd, literally "gray," from PIE root *pel- (1) "pale." Lloyd's, meaning the London-based association of marine underwriters, is first recorded as such 1805, from Lloyd's Coffee House, London, opened in 1688 by Edward Lloyd, who supplied shipping inf

 Share puppet 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppet Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppet">Etymology of puppet by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of puppet. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppet Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of puppet," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppet. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of puppet." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppet. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of puppet." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/puppet (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near puppet 
 pup 
 pupa 
 pupate 
 pupation 
 pupil 
 puppet 
 puppeteer 
 puppetry 
 puppify 
 Puppis 
 puppy 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix