URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronze
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T05:58:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Bronze - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Bronze - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of bronze 

 bronze (n.) 

 1721, "alloy of copper and (usually) a smaller amount of tin," from French bronze , from Italian bronzo , from Medieval Latin bronzium , which is of uncertain origin. Perhaps cognate (via notion of color) with Venetian bronza "glowing coals," or German brunst "fire." Perhaps influenced by Latin Brundisium the Italian town of Brindisi (Pliny writes of aes Brundusinum ). Perhaps ultimately from Persian birinj "copper."

 In Middle English, the distinction between bronze (copper-tin alloy) and brass (copper-zinc alloy) was not clear, and both were called bras (see brass (n.)). Used historically for bells, cannons, statuary, and fine mechanical works. Also from French are Dutch brons , German Bronze , etc., and ultimately from the Medieval Latin word are Spanish bronce , Russian bronza , Polish bronc , Albanian brunze , etc.

 A bronze medal has been given to a third-place finisher at least since 1852. The archaeological Bronze Age (1850) falls between the Stone and Iron ages, and is a reference to the principal material for making weapons and ornaments.
 also from 1721 

 bronze (v.) 

 1640s, "give the color or appearance of bronze to," from French bronzer (16c.) or else from bronze (n.). Figuratively, of feelings, hearts, etc., "to harden like bronze," 1726. The meaning "to make to be brown or bronze in color" (by exposure to the sun, etc.) is from 1792. Related: Bronzed ; bronzing .
 also from 1640s 

 Entries linking to bronze 

 brass (n.) 

 "yellow malleable alloy metal, harder than copper," Old English bræs "brass, bronze," originally any alloy of copper, in England usually with tin (this is now called bronze ), later and in modern use an alloy of roughly two parts copper to one part zinc. A mystery word, with no known cognates beyond English. Perhaps akin to French brasser "to brew," because it is an alloy. It also has been compared to Old Swedish brasa "fire," but no sure connection can be made. Yet another theory connects it with Latin ferrum "iron," itself of obscure origin.

 Words for "brass" in other languages (such as German Messing , Old English mæsling , French laiton , Italian ottone ) also tend to be difficult to explain. As brass was unknown in early antiquity (it was well-known to Strabo, 1c., but not mentioned by Homer), the use of the English word in Bible translations, etc., likely means "bronze." The Romans were the first to deliberately make it.

 When works of Greek and Roman antiquity in 'brass' began to be critically examined, and their material discriminated, the Italian word for 'brass' (
 bronzo , 
 bronze ) came into use to distinguish this 'ancient brass' from the current alloy. [OED]

 Rhetorically or figuratively it was the common type of hardness, durability, or obduracy since late 14c. The meaning "effrontery, impudence, excessive assurance" is from 1620s. The slang sense of "high officials" is first recorded 1899, from their insignia. The meaning "brass musical instruments of a band" is from 1832.

 copper (n.1) 

 malleable metallic element, noted for its peculiar red color, tenacity, malleability, and electric conductivity, late Old English coper , from Proto-Germanic *kupar (source also of Middle Dutch koper , Old Norse koparr , Old High German kupfar ), from Late Latin cuprum , contraction of Latin Cyprium (aes) "Cyprian (metal)," after Greek Kyprios "Cyprus" (see Cyprus ).

 Ancient Greek had khalkos "ore, copper, bronze;" an old IE word for "ore, copper, bronze" is retained in Sanskrit ayah , Latin aes . Latin aes originally was "copper," but this was extended to its alloy with tin (see bronze ), and as this was far more extensively used than pure copper, the word's primary sense shifted to the alloy and a new word evolved for "copper," from the Latin form of the name of the island of Cyprus, where copper was mined (the alchemists associated copper with Venus).

 Aes passed into Germanic (which originally did not distinguish copper from its alloys) and became English ore . In Latin, aes was the common word for "cash, coin, debt, wages" in many figurative expressions. Chemical symbol Cu is from cuprum .

 As "a copper coin," from 1580s; as "a vessel made of copper," 1660s. The adjective, "of or resembling copper," is from 1570s; the verb, "to cover with copper" is from 1520s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tan 

 c. 1400, tannen, in part from late Old English tannian "convert hides into leather" (by steeping them in liquid containing tannin), from Medieval Latin tannare "tan, dye a tawny color" (c. 900), from tannum "crushed oak bark," used in tanning leather. This is believed to be from 

 aureate 

 *aus- (2) "gold" (source also of Sanskrit ayah "metal," Avestan ayo, Latin aes "brass," Old English ar "brass, copper, bronze...," Gothic aiz "bronze," Old Lithuanian ausas "gold"), which is probably related to root *aus- (1) "to shine."...

 ormolu 

 The sense of the word before it reached English began as "gold leaf prepared for gilding bronze, brass, etc.," then shifted...to "gilded bronze," then to various prepared metallic substances resembling it....

 stannic 

 Tin, essential in making bronze, was mined in Celtic regions in what is now Spain and southwestern England, and in the early...Roman era the Gallic Celts were masters of bronze metalworking....

 patina 

 "greenish encrustation on old bronze," 1748, from French patine (18c.), from Italian patina....pet-ano-, from root *pete- "to spread"), but it is uncertain why, as patina was found on many ancient objects other than bronze...

 ore 

 cognate with Low German ur "iron-containing ore," Dutch oer, Old Norse aurr "gravel"); and Old English ar "brass, copper, bronze...," from Proto-Germanic *ajiz- (source also of Old Norse eir "brass, copper," German ehern "brazen," Gothic aiz "bronze"),...

 colossus 

 The Greek word was used by Herodotus of giant Egyptian statues and by Romans of the bronze Helios at the entrance to the...But the island of Rhodes is almost the only place where Helios enjoys an important cult; ... the largest Greek statue in bronze...

 ant 

 c. 1500 shortening of Middle English ampte (late 14c.), from Old English æmette "ant," from West Germanic *emaitjon (source also of Old High German ameiza, German Ameise) from a compound of Germanic *e-, *ai- "off, away" + *mai- "cut," from PIE root *mai- (1) "to cut" (see maim).

 color 

 early 13c., "skin color, complexion," from Anglo-French culur, coulour, Old French color "color, complexion, appearance" (Modern French couleur), from Latin color "color of the skin; color in general, hue; appearance," from Old Latin colos, originally "a covering" (akin to celare

 dey 

 Old English dæge "female servant, woman who handles food in a household, housekeeper," from Proto-Germanic *daigjon (source also of Old Norse deigja "maid, female servant," Swedish deja "dairymaid"), from PIE root *dheigh- "to form, build." Now obsolete (though OED says, "Still i

 Share bronze 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronze Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronze">Etymology of bronze by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bronze. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronze Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of bronze," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronze. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of bronze." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronze. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of bronze." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bronze (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near bronze 
 brontophobia 
 brontosaurus 
 brontothere 
 Brontë 
 Bronx 
 bronze 
 brooch 
 brood 
 brooding 
 broody 
 brook 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix