URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/slave
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T20:57:32Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Slave - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Slave - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of slave 

 slave (n.) 

 c. 1300, sclave , esclave , "person who is the chattel or property of another," from Old French esclave (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin Sclavus "slave" (source also of Italian schiavo , French esclave , Spanish esclavo ), originally "Slav" (see Slav ); so used in this secondary sense because of the many Slavs sold into slavery by conquering peoples.

 The oldest written history of the Slavs can be shortly summarised--myriads of slave hunts and the enthralment of entire peoples. The Slav was the most prized of human goods. With increased strength outside his marshy land of origin, hardened to the utmost against all privation, industrious, content with little, good-humoured, and cheerful, he filled the slave markets of Europe, Asia, and Africa. It must be remembered that for every Slavonic slave who reached his destination, at least ten succumbed to inhuman treatment during transport and to the heat of the climate. Indeed Ibrāhīm (tenth century), himself in all probability a slave dealer, says: "And the Slavs cannot travel to Lombardy on account of the heat which is fatal to them." Hence their high price. 

 The Arabian geographer of the ninth century tells us how the Magyars in the Pontus steppe dominated all the Slavs dwelling near them. The Magyars made raids upon the Slavs and took their prisoners along the coast to Kerkh where the Byzantines came to meet them and gave Greek brocades and such wares in exchange for the prisoners. ["The Cambridge Medieval History," Vol. II, 1913] 

 The meaning "one who has lost the power of resistance to some habit or vice" is from 1550s. Applied to devices from 1904, especially those which are controlled by others (compare slave jib  in sailing, similarly of locomotives, flash bulbs, amplifiers). In U.S. history, slave state , one in which domestic slavery prevails, is from 1812.

 It is absurd to bring back a runaway slave. If a slave can survive without a master, is it not awful to admit that the master cannot live without the slave? [Diogenes, fragment 6, transl. Guy Davenport] 

 Old English Wealh  "Briton" also began to be used in the sense of "serf, slave" c. 850; and Sanskrit dasa- , which can mean "slave," apparently is connected to dasyu- "pre-Aryan inhabitant of India." Grose's dictionary (1785) has under Negroe "A black-a-moor; figuratively used for a slave," without regard to race. More common Old English words for slave were þeow (related to þeowian "to serve") and þræl (see thrall ). The Slavic words for "slave" (Russian rab , Serbo-Croatian rob , Old Church Slavonic rabu ) are from Old Slavic *orbu , from the PIE root *orbh- (also source of orphan (n.)), the ground sense of which seems to be "thing that changes allegiance" (in the case of the slave, from self to master). The Slavic word is also the source of robot .

 The reduction of scl- to sl- is normal in English (compare slate, also Dutch slaaf , Danish slave , but German Sklave ).

 also from c. 1300 

 Slave 

 native tribe of northwestern Canada, 1789, from slave (n.), said to translate Cree (Algonquian) awahkan "captive, slave."
 also from 1789 

 slave (v.) 

 1550s, "to enslave," from slave (n.). The meaning "work like a slave" is attested by 1719. Related: Slaved ; slaving .
 also from 1550s 

 Entries linking to slave 

 orphan (n.) 

 "a child bereaved of one or both parents, generally the latter," c. 1300, from Late Latin orphanus "parentless child" (source of Old French orfeno, orphenin , Italian orfano ), from Greek orphanos "orphaned, without parents, fatherless," literally "deprived," from orphos "bereft."

 This is from PIE *orbho- "bereft of father," also "deprived of free status," from root *orbh- "to change allegiance, to pass from one status to another" (source also of Hittite harb- "change allegiance," Latin orbus "bereft," Sanskrit arbhah "weak, child," Armenian orb "orphan," Old Irish orbe "heir," Old Church Slavonic rabu "slave," rabota "servitude" (see robot ), Gothic arbja , German erbe , Old English ierfa "heir," Old High German arabeit , German Arbeit "work," Old Frisian arbed , Old English earfoð "hardship, suffering, trouble").

 As an adjective from late 15c., "bereft of parents," said of a child or young dependent person. Figurative use is from late 15c. The Little Orphan Annie U.S. newspaper comic strip created by Harold Gray (1894-1968) debuted in 1924 in the New York "Daily News." Earlier it was the name (as Little Orphant Annie ) of the character in James Whitcomb Riley's 1885 poem, originally titled "Elf Child":

 LITTLE Orphant Annie's come to our house to stay,

 An' wash the cups an' saucers up, an' brush the crumbs away,

 An' shoo the chickens off the porch, an' dust the hearth, an' sweep,

 An' make the fire, an' bake the bread, an' earn her board-an'-keep;

 An' all us other childern, when the supper-things is done,

 We set around the kitchen fire an' has the mostest fun

 A-list'nin' to the witch-tales 'at Annie tells about,

 An' the Gobble-uns 'at gits you

 Ef you

 Don't

 Watch

 Out!

 Orphant was an old, corrupt form of orphan, attested from 17c.

 robot (n.) 

 1923, "mechanical person," also "person whose work or activities are entirely mechanical," from the English translation of the 1920 play "R.U.R." ("Rossum's Universal Robots") by Karel Capek (1890-1938), from Czech robotnik "forced worker," from robota "forced labor, compulsory service, drudgery," from robotiti "to work, drudge," from an Old Czech source akin to Old Church Slavonic rabota "servitude," from rabu "slave" (from Old Slavic *orbu- , from PIE *orbh- "pass from one status to another;" see orphan ).

 The Slavic word thus is a cousin to German Arbeit "work" (Old High German arabeit ). The play was enthusiastically received in New York from its Theatre Guild performance debut on Oct. 9, 1922. According to Rawson the word was popularized by Karel Capek's play, "but was coined by his brother Josef (the two often collaborated), who used it initially in a short story." Hence, "a human-like machine designed to carry out tasks like a human agent."

 "Young Rossum invented a worker with the minimum amount of requirements. He had to simplify him. He rejected everything that did not contribute directly to the progress of work—everything that makes man more expensive. In fact, he rejected man and made the Robot. My dear Miss Glory, the Robots are not people. Mechanically they are more perfect than we are, they have an enormously developed intelligence, but they have no soul." ["R.U.R."]

 Slav 
 thrall 
 ciao 
 enslave 
 esclavage 
 galley-slave 
 slave-driver 
 slaveholder 
 slaver 
 slavery 
 slave-trade 
 slavish 
 slavocracy 
 *kleu- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Share slave 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/slave Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/slave">Etymology of slave by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of slave. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/slave Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of slave," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/slave. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of slave." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/slave. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of slave." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/slave (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near slave 
 slaty 
 slaught 
 slaughter 
 slaughterhouse 
 Slav 
 slave 
 slave-driver 
 slaveholder 
 slaver 
 slavery 
 slave-trade 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix