URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Stephen
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:38:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Stephen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Stephen - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Stephen 

 Stephen 

 masc. proper name, from Latin Stephanus , from Greek Stephanos , a particular use of the noun stephanos "crown, wreath, garland, chaplet; crown of victory, wreath awarded as the prize to the victor in a public contest," and by extension "victory, honor, glory." Literally it is "that which surrounds;" the Greek word also was used of the ring of spectators at a fight or the wall around a town. It is from stephein "to encircle, crown, wreathe, tie around" (from PIE root *stebh- "post, stem; place firmly on, fasten;" see step (v.)).

 It was exclusively a monk's name in Anglo-Saxon England, it became popular after the Conquest. Saint Stephen , stoned to death, was said to be Christianity's first martyr.

 Stephen (and the older pronunciation of nephew , still maintained) were said to be the only cases where English - ph - isn't pronounced as /f/.

 Entries linking to Stephen 

 nephew (n.) 

 c. 1300, neveu , "son of one's sister or brother," also "a grandson; a relative; a kinsman," from Old French neveu (Old North French nevu ) "grandson, descendant," from Latin nepotem (nominative nepos ) "sister's son, grandson, descendant," in post-Augustan Latin (c. 150 A.D.), "nephew."

 This is reconstructed to be from PIE *nepot- "grandchild," and in a general sense, "male descendant other than son" (source also of Sanskrit napat "grandson, descendant;" Old Persian napat- "grandson;" Old Lithuanian nepuotis "grandson;" Dutch neef ; German Neffe "nephew;" Old Irish nia , genitive niath "son of a sister," Welsh nei ).

 The original pronunciation is /nev-u/; the spelling was changed unetymologically to -ph- after c. 1400, and the pronunciation partly followed it. Used in English in all the classical senses until the meaning narrowed in 17c., and also as a euphemism for "the illegitimate son of an ecclesiastic" (1580s). The Old English cognate, nefa "nephew, stepson, grandson, second cousin" survived to 16c.

 [I]ts final exclusive use for 'nephew' instead of 'grandson' is prob. due in part to the fact that, by reason of the great difference in age, a person has comparatively little to do with his grandsons, if he has any, while nephews are proverbially present and attentive, if their uncle is of any importance. [Century Dictionary]

 step (v.) 

 Middle English steppen , from Old English steppan (Anglian), stæppan (West Saxon) "take a step, move the legs and feet as in walking," from West Germanic *stapjanan "tread" (source also of Old Frisian stapa , Middle Dutch, Dutch stappen , Old High German stapfon , German stapfen "step").

 This is said in Watkins, etc., to be from a PIE root *stebh- "post, stem; to support, place firmly on," for which see staff (n.); if so, from the same root are Old Church Slavonic stopa "step, pace," stepeni "step, degree." The notion might be "a treading firmly on; a foothold." But Boutkan deconstructs the relevant Pokorny entry, finds the group only in Germanic, and gives no IE etymology.

 In general use, "to go a short distance." The transitive sense "to set or plant as in stepping" (as in step foot in , a form Century Dictionary labels "familiar") is attested from 1530s. Originally strong (past tense stop , past participle bestapen ); weak forms stepped, stepping emerged 13c. and were exclusive from 16c.

 To step out "leave for a short time" is from 1530s; the meaning "go out in public in style" is from 1907. Transitive step off "measure (a distance) by stepping" is by 1863. Step on it "hurry up" is 1923, it being the gas pedal of an automobile.

 Stephanie 
 Steven 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 tun 

 said Stephen. — Is that called a funnel? Is it not a tundish? — — What is a tundish? — — That....— asked the dean. — I never heard the word in my life. — — It is called a tundish in Lower Drumcondra — said Stephen, laughing...Upon my word I must. — His courtesy of manner rang a little false, and Stephen looked at the English convert with the same...

 ploy 

 Popularized in the sense of "move or gambit made to manipulate others and gain advantage" by British humorist Stephen Potter...

 schlemazel 

 Stephen J. Solarz, D.-N.Y., quoted 1986; there are many and older versions of the quip]...

 hulk 

 Sense of "big, clumsy person" is first recorded c. 1400 (early 14c. as a surname: Stephen le Hulke). HULK....

 patriotism 

 War of 1812 naval hero Stephen Decatur at a public dinner in Norfolk, Va., in April 1816, but the original seems to have...

 science 

 [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to "The Mismeasure of Man," 1981]...

 flush 

 mid-13c., flusshen "move rapidly or violently; rush, dart, spring" (intransitive); late 15c., flush up, transitive, "cause to fly; start or flush (birds)," perhaps imitative of the sound of beating wings. The sense of "spurt, rush out suddenly, flow with force" (1540s, usually of

 qualitative 

 early 15c., qualitatif, "that produces a (physical) quality," from Medieval Latin qualitativus "relating to quality," from stem of Latin qualitas "a quality, property, nature" (see quality). Meaning "concerned with quality, relating to the possession of qualities without referenc

 soul 

 "A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks, and wills" [Century Dictionary], Middle English soule, from Old English sawol "spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence; life, living being," from Proto-Germanic *saiwalō (sour

 standard 

 mid-12c., "distinctive flag or other conspicuous object displayed from a position in battle to serve as a rallying point for a military force," from shortened form of Old French estandart "military standard, banner" (Anglo-French estandard) and in part from Medieval Latin standar

 Share Stephen 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Stephen Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Stephen">Etymology of Stephen by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Stephen. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Stephen Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Stephen," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Stephen. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Stephen." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Stephen. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Stephen." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Stephen (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Stephen 
 stepchild 
 step-dance 
 stepdaughter 
 stepfather 
 Stephanie 
 Stephen 
 Stepin Fetchit 
 step-ladder 
 stepmother 
 steppe 
 stepper 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix