URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/liter
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T01:42:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Liter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Liter - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of liter 

 liter (n.) 

 unit of capacity in the metric system, 1797, from French litre (1793), from litron , name of an obsolete French measure of capacity for grain (16c.), from Medieval Latin litra , from Greek litra "pound" (unit of weight), which apparently is from the same Sicilian Italic source as Latin libra (see Libra ).
 also from 1797 

 Entries linking to liter 

 Libra (n.) 

 zodiac constellation represented by a pair of scales, late Old English, from Latin libra "a balance, pair of scales," also "pound (unit of weight)," from Proto-Italic *leithra- "pound." De Vaan compares Greek litra "name of a Sicilian coin," which "was probably borrowed from an Italic language at the stage containing [ -thr- ]."

 Not a separate constellation in ancient Greece, where it was khelae , "the claws" of adjacent Skorpios. Nativized in Old Norse as skala-merki . Meaning "person born under the sign of Libra" is from 1894. Related: Libral ; Libran .

 centiliter (n.) 

 also centilitre , metric liquid measure, "one hundredth of a liter," 1801, from French centilitre ; see centi- + liter .

 kiloliter 
 litre 
 milliliter 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 L 

 twelfth letter, Roman form of Greek lambda, which is from the Semitic lamed. The shape of the Roman letter is an early one in Greek, adopted in Italic before it was superseded in Greek by the inverted form which became the Greek lambda. In some words (ladder, lady, laughter, leap

 lad 

 c. 1300, ladde "foot soldier," also "young male servant" (attested as a surname from late 12c.), possibly from a Scandinavian language (compare Norwegian -ladd, in compounds for "young man"), but of obscure origin in any case. OED hazards a guess on Middle English ladde, plural o

 cubic 

 mid-15c., "being of the third power;" 1550s, "having the form of a cube," from Old French cubique (14c.), from Latin cubicus, from Greek kybikos, from kybos "cube" (see cube (n.)). Meaning "solid, three-dimensional" is from 1650s. Cubical is attested from 1590s with the meaning "

 cemetery 

 "burial ground, place set aside for burial of the dead," late 14c., cimiterie, from Old French cimetiere "graveyard" (12c.), from Medieval Latin cemeterium, Late Latin coemeterium, from Greek koimeterion "sleeping place, dormitory," from koiman "to put to sleep," keimai "I lie do

 stoop 

 Middle English stoupen, "bend forward and downward," especially of persons "lower the body by bending forward," from Old English stupian "to bow, bend," from Proto-Germanic *stupojanan (source also of Middle Dutch stupen "to bow, bend," Norwegian stupa "fall, drop"), perhaps from

 macabre 

 early 15c., in Macabrees daunce, daunce of Machabree, a kind of morality show or allegorical representation of death and his victims, from Old French (danse) Macabré "(dance) of Death" (1376), which is of uncertain origin. John Lydgate (c. 1370–c. 1451), the monk/poet who first t

 salmon 

 early 13c., samoun, the North Atlantic salmon, from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem (nominative salmo) "a salmon," probably originally "leaper," from salire "to leap" (see salient (adj.)), though some dismiss this as folk etymolo

 development 

 1756, "a gradual unfolding, a full working out or disclosure of the details of something;" see develop + -ment. Meaning "the internal process of expanding and growing" is by 1796; sense of "advancement through progressive stages" is by 1836.  Of property, with a sense of "a 

 pool 

 "small body of standing water," Old English pol "small body of water; deep, still place in a stream," from Proto-West Germanic *pōl- (source also of Old Frisian and Middle Low German pol, Dutch poel, Old High German pfuol, German Pfuhl "pool, puddle"), which is of uncertain origi

 Share liter 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/liter Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/liter">Etymology of liter by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of liter. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/liter Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of liter," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/liter. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of liter." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/liter. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of liter." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/liter (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near liter 
 listless 
 lit 
 litany 
 lite 
 -lite 
 liter 
 literacy 
 literal 
 literalism 
 literalist 
 literality 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix