URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/archive
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:18:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Archive - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Archive - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of archive 

 archive (v.) 

 "to file or enter into an archive collection," 1819 (implied in archived ), from archives . Related: Archiving .
 also from 1819 

 archive (n.) 

 see archives .

 Entries linking to archive 

 archives (n.) 

 c. 1600, "records or documents preserved as evidence," from French archif (16c., Modern French archives ), from Late Latin archivum (plural archiva ) "written records," also the place where they are kept, from Greek ta arkheia "public records," plural of arkheion "town hall, public building," from arkhē "government," literally "beginning, origin, first place" (verbal noun of arkhein "to be the first;" see archon ). The sense of "place where public records and historical documents are kept" in English is from 1640s.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 collect 

 early 15c., "gather into one place or group" (transitive), from Old French collecter "to collect" (late 14c.), from Latin collectus, past participle of colligere "gather together," from assimilated form of com "together" (see com-) + legere "to gather," from PIE root *leg- (1) "t

 repository 

 late 15c. (Caxton), "vessel, etc., for storage," from French repositoire or directly from Late Latin repositorium "store," in classical Latin, "a stand on which food is placed," from noun use of repositus, past participle of reponere "put away, store" (see repose (v.2)). The figu

 deposit 

 1620s, "place in the hands of another as a pledge for a contract," from Latin depositus, past participle of deponere "lay aside, put down, deposit," also used of births and bets, from de "away" (see de-) + ponere "to put, place" (past participle positus; see position (n.)). From 

 file 

 "place (papers) in consecutive order for future reference," mid-15c., from Old French filer "string documents on a thread or wire for preservation or reference" (15c.), earlier "to spin thread," from fil "thread, string" (12c.), from Latin filum "a thread, string; thread of fate;

 away 

 Middle English awei, from late Old English aweg, earlier on weg "on from this (that) place;" see a- (1) + way (n.). The meaning "from one's own or accustomed place" is from c. 1300; that of "from one state or condition to another" is from mid-14c.; that of "from one's possession 

 medicine 

 c. 1200, "medical treatment, cure, healing," also (early 14c.) "substance used in treatment of a disease, medicinal potion or plaster," also used figuratively of spiritual remedies, from Old French medecine (Modern French médicine) "medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, poti

 assess 

 early 15c., "to fix the amount (of a tax, fine, etc.)," from Anglo-French assesser, from Medieval Latin assessare "fix a tax upon," originally frequentative of Latin assessus "a sitting by," past participle of assidere/adsidere "to sit beside" (and thus to assist in the office of

 divine 

 late 14c., "pertaining to, of the nature of, or proceeding from God or a god; addressed to God," from Old French divin, devin (12c.), from Latin divinus "of a god," from divus "of or belonging to a god, inspired, prophetic," related to deus "god, deity" (from PIE root *dyeu- "to 

 tarot 

 1590s, from French tarot (16c.), from Old Italian tarocchi (singular tarocco), a word of unknown origin, perhaps from Arabic taraha "he rejected, put aside." Originally an everyday game deck in much of Europe (though not in Britain), their occult and fortune-telling use seems to 

 incarceration 

 "fact of being imprisoned," 1530s, from Medieval Latin incarcerationem (nominative incarceratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of incarcerare "to imprison," from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in") + carcer "prison, an enclosed space," from Proto-Italic *kar-kr(o)-, whi

 Share archive 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/archive Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/archive">Etymology of archive by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of archive. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/archive Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of archive," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/archive. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of archive." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/archive. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of archive." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/archive (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near archive 
 architectonic 
 architectural 
 architecture 
 architrave 
 archival 
 archive 
 archives 
 archivist 
 archivolt 
 archon 
 arch-rival 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix