URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caucasian
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:42:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Caucasian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Caucasian - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Caucasian 

 Caucasian (adj.) 

 1807, of or pertaining to the Caucasus Mountains (q.v.), with -ian . Applied to the "white" race 1795 (in Latin) by German anthropologist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1840), who in his pioneering treatise on anthropology distinguished mankind into five races: Mongolian, Ethiopian, Malay, (Native) American, and Caucasian. In the last group he included nearly all Europeans (except Lapps and Finns), Armenians, Persians, and Hindus, as well as Arabs and Jews. His attempt at division was based on physical similarities in skulls.

 Blumenbach had a solitary Georgian skull; and that skull was the finest in his collection: that of a Greek being the next. Hence it was taken as the type of the skull of the more organised divisions of our species. More than this, it gave its name to the type, and introduced the term 
 Caucasian . Never has a single head done more harm to science than was done in the way of posthumous mischief by the head of this well-shaped female from Georgia. [Robert Gordon Latham, M.D., "The Natural History of the Varieties of Man," London, 1850]

 The word has long since been abandoned as a historical/anthropological term. Compare Aryan .
 also from 1807 

 Caucasian (n.) 

 "resident or native of the Caucasus," 1843; see Caucasian (adj.). Meaning "one of the 'white' race" is from 1830.
 also from 1843 

 Entries linking to Caucasian 

 Aryan 

 c. 1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus , Ariana , from Greek Aria , Areia , names applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya- ), hence Iran . Ultimately from Sanskrit arya- "compatriot;" in later language "noble, of good family."

 Also the name Sanskrit-speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts. Thus it was the word early 19c. European philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked it with German Ehre "honor") applied to the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans, suspecting that this is what they called themselves. This use is attested in English from 1851. In German from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).

 German philologist Max Müller (1823-1900) popularized Aryan in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the name (replacing Indo-European , Indo-Germanic , Caucasian , Japhetic ) for the group of related, inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit and Persian. The spelling Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but it caused confusion with Arian , the term in ecclesiastical history.

 The terms for God, for house, for father, mother, son, daughter, for dog and cow, for heart and tears, for axe and tree, identical in all the Indo-European idioms, are like the watchwords of soldiers. We challenge the seeming stranger; and whether he answer with the lips of a Greek, a German, or an Indian, we recognize him as one of ourselves. [Müller, "History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature," 1859]

 Aryan was gradually replaced in comparative linguistics c. 1900 by Indo-European , except when used to distinguish Indo-European languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. From the 1920s Aryan began to be used in Nazi ideology to mean "member of a Caucasian Gentile race of Nordic type." As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazis adopted it.

 Caucasus (n.) 

 mountain range between the Black and Caspian seas, separating Europe and the Middle East, from Latin Caucasus , from Greek kaukasis , said by Pliny ("Natural History," book six, chap. XVII) to be from a Scythian word similar to kroy-khasis , literally "(the mountain) ice-shining, white with snow." But possibly from a Pelasgian root *kau- meaning "mountain."

 Caucasoid 
 -ian 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sidero- 

 He points to resemblance to Udian (Caucasian) zido "iron."...

 Georgia 

 The Caucasian nation is so-called for St....

 flesh 

 Flesh-wound is from 1670s; flesh-color, the hue of "Caucasian" skin, is first recorded 1610s, described as a tint composed...

 wasp 

 Old English wæps, wæsp "wasp," altered (probably by influence of Latin vespa) from Proto-Germanic *wabis- (source also of Old Saxon waspa, Middle Dutch wespe, Dutch wesp, Old High German wafsa, German Wespe, Danish hveps), from PIE *wopsa-/*wospa- "wasp" (source also of Latin ves

 swap 

 c. 1200, swappen, "to strike (with a sword, etc.), strike the hands together," senses now obsolete, a word of uncertain origin, possibly imitative of a hitting or slapping sound. By early 15c. as "strike with the hands." The sense of "strike a bargain" (late 14c.), hence "to exch

 individual 

 early 15c., "one and indivisible, inseparable" (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis, from Latin individuus "indivisible," from in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + dividuus "divisible," from dividere "divide" (see divide (v.)). Original sense now ob

 Semite 

 1847, "a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean" (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French Sémite (1845), from Modern Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem, Greek Sēm "Shem," one of the three sons of Noah (G

 mortal 

 late 14c., "deadly, destructive to life; causing or threatening death" (of illness, poisons, wounds, etc.); also, of persons or the body, "doomed to die, subject to death;" from Old French mortel "destined to die; deserving of death" and directly from Latin mortalis "subject to d

 whitey 

 "'white' person, person of European descent," 1828, also whity, from white (adj.) + -y (2) and -y (3). Earlier as an adjective, and Whitey-brown was a 19c. descriptive color name, used to describe, among other things, mulatto skin. Negro troops doing provost duty in Norfolk; kee

 Circassian 

 1550s, in reference to a people of the northern Caucasus along the Black Sea, from Circassia, Latinized from Russian Cherkesŭ, which is of unknown origin. Their name for themselves is Adighe. Their language is non-Indo-European. The race was noted for the "fine physical formation

 Share Caucasian 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caucasian Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caucasian">Etymology of Caucasian by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Caucasian. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caucasian Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Caucasian," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caucasian. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Caucasian." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caucasian. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Caucasian." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Caucasian (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Caucasian 
 cattish 
 cattle 
 catty 
 catty-cornered 
 catwalk 
 Caucasian 
 Caucasoid 
 Caucasus 
 caucus 
 caudal 
 caudate 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix