URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philip
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:30:30Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Philip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name

Philip - Etymology, Origin & Meaning of the Name 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of Philip 

 Philip 

 masc. proper name, most famously in classical history king of Macedon, father of Alexander the Great (compare philippic ); the from Latin Philippus , from Greek Philippos "fond of horses," from philos "beloved, loving" (see philo- ) + hippos "horse" (from PIE root *ekwo- "horse").

 In old poetry, imitative of the chirp of a sparrow, hence a common name for one (Skelton, Cartwright, etc.). In 16c., Philip and Cheyney was a way to say "any two common men."

 You remember the story of the poor woman who importuned King Philip of Macedon to grant her justice, which Philip refused : the woman exclaimed, "I appeal" : the king, astonished, asked to whom she appealed : the woman replied, "From Philip drunk to Philip sober." [Emerson, "New England Reformers," 1844] 

 Entries linking to Philip 

 philippic (n.) 

 "a bitter invective discourse, a denunciation," 1590s, from French philippique , from Latin (orationes) Philippicæ , a translation of Greek Philippikoi (logoi) , referrimg to the series of orations made in Athens by Demosthenes in 351-341 B.C.E. urging Greeks to awaken to their danger and unite to fight the rising power of Philip II of Macedon, father of Alexander the Great. The Latin phrase was used of the speeches made by Cicero against Marc Antony in 44 and 43 B.C.E.

 Philippa 

 fem. proper name, modern, fem. of Philip .

 Philippines 
 *ekwo- 
 philo- 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Chesterfield 

 Philip Stanhope, the fourth Earl of Chesterfield, (1694-1773) was the writer on manners and etiquette....

 docudrama 

 Call to Mind," a "dramatic presentation of the development of education and its significance in American life," written by Philip...

 laconic 

 When Philip of Macedon threatened them with, "If I enter Laconia, I will raze Sparta to the ground," the Spartans' reply...

 Pamela 

 fem. given name, invented by Philip Sidney in "Arcadia," published in the 1590s; it is presumed to have been coined from...

 Achilles tendon 

 Earlier Achilles' sinew, from Modern Latin chorda Achillis, coined 1693 by Dutch anatomist Philip Verheyden when dissecting...

 aquarium 

 The Victorian mania for indoor aquariums began with the book "The Aquarium," published 1854 by English naturalist Philip...

 oratorio 

 Philip Neri and performed in the church of Santa Maria in Vallicella....

 and 

 Old English and, ond, originally meaning "thereupon, next," from Proto-Germanic *unda (source also of Old Saxon endi, Old Frisian anda, Middle Dutch ende, Old High German enti, German und, Old Norse enn), from PIE root *en "in." Introductory use (implying connection to something 

 deed 

 "that which is done, acted, or performed, whether good or bad, great or small," Old English dæd "a doing, act, action; transaction, event," from Proto-Germanic *dethi- (source also of Old Saxon dad, Old Norse dað, Old Frisian dede, Middle Dutch daet, Dutch daad, Old High German t

 dyslexia 

 "a difficulty in reading due to a condition of the brain," 1885, from German dyslexie (1883), from Greek dys- "bad, abnormal, difficult" (see dys-) + lexis "word" (taken as "reading"), from legein "speak" (from PIE root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives meaning "to

 Share Philip 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philip Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philip">Etymology of Philip by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of Philip. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philip Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of Philip," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philip. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of Philip." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philip. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of Philip." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/Philip (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near Philip 
 -phile 
 Philemon 
 philharmonic 
 philhellene 
 -philia 
 Philip 
 Philippa 
 philippic 
 Philippines 
 Philistine 
 Phillips 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix