URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/eagle
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:23:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Eagle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Eagle - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of eagle 

 eagle (n.) 

 "very large diurnal raptorial bird of the genus Aquila ," mid-14c., from Old French egle , from Old Provençal aigla , from Latin aquila "black eagle," fem. of aquilus "eagle," often explained as "the dark colored" (bird); see aquiline . The native term was erne .

 Golf score sense is by 1908 (according to old golf sources, because it "soars higher" than a birdie ). As the name of a U.S. $10 coin minted from 1792 to 1933, established in the 1786 resolution for a new monetary system (but at first only the desperately needed small copper coins were minted). The figurative eagle-eyed "sharp-sighted" (like an eagle) is attested from c. 1600.
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to eagle 

 aquiline (adj.) 

 "curved like an eagle's beak," 1640s, originally in English in reference to long, hooked noses, from Latin aquilinus "of or like an eagle," from aquila "eagle," a word of uncertain origin. The meaning "pertaining to an eagle" is from 1650s; that of "eagle-like" is by 1742. 

 Latin aquila often is explained as "the dark bird;" compare aquilus "blackish, swarthy, of the color of darkness," but some suggest the color word is from the bird. De Vaan writes, "It is possible that 'eagle' was derived from aquilus 'dark' when this had received its colour meaning. It may not be the only dark bird, but it is certainly one of the biggest and most majestic of them." As for aquilus , "The Romans derived this colour from aqua 'water', which [Etymologicum Magnum] reject because they cannot imagine water being black. Still, this seems a more likely derivation to me than from aquila 'eagle' ...."

 birdie (n.) 

 "little bird," 1792, from bird (n.1) + -ie . As golf slang for "a hole played one under par," by 1908, perhaps from bird (n.) in American English slang sense of "exceptionally clever or accomplished person or thing" (1839).

 erne 
 eaglet 
 half-eagle 
 Kleagle 
 See All Related Words (6) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 erne 

 "sea eagle," from Old English earn "eagle," from Proto-Germanic *aron-, *arnuz "eagle" (source also of Old High German arn, German Aar, Middle Dutch arent, Old Norse örn, Gothic ara "eagle"), from PIE root *or- "great bird" (source also of Greek ornis "bird," Old Church Slavonic 

 Albania 

 Medieval Latin name of the country called by its inhabitants Shqipëri (literally "land of eagles," from shqiponje "eagle"...

 surmise 

 Then felt I like some watcher of the skies When a new planet swims into his ken; Or like stout Cortez, when with eagle...

 ossifrage 

 "sea-eagle, osprey," c. 1600, from Latin ossifraga "vulture," fem. of ossifragus, literally "bone-breaker," from ossifragus...

 spelunker 

 Originally in coverage of an active cave-exploring Spelunkers Club in western Massachusetts in the Berkshire "Eagle."...

 griffin 

 a surname), from Old French grifon "a bird of prey," also "fabulous bird of Greek mythology" (with head and wings of an eagle...

 bald 

 Bald eagle is attested by 1680s; so called for its white head....

 parrot 

 bird of the family Psittacidae, widespread in the tropics and noted for beautiful plumage and a fleshy tongue, which gives it the ability to learn to articulate words and sentences, 1520s, a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French perrot, from a variant of Pierre 

 harpy 

 winged monster of ancient mythology, late 14c., from Old French harpie (14c.), from Latin harpyia, from Greek Harpyia (plural), literally "snatchers," which is probably related to harpazein "to snatch" (see rapid (adj.)). Metaphoric extension to "repulsively greedy person" is c. 

 hit 

 late Old English hyttan, hittan "come upon, meet with, fall in with, 'hit' upon," from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse hitta "to light upon, meet with," also "to hit, strike;" Swedish hitta "to find," Danish and Norwegian hitte "to hit, find," from Proto-Germanic *hitjan,

 Share eagle 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/eagle Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/eagle">Etymology of eagle by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of eagle. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/eagle Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of eagle," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eagle. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of eagle." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/eagle. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of eagle." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/eagle (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near eagle 
 ea 
 -ea- 
 each 
 each other 
 eager 
 eagle 
 eaglet 
 Eames 
 -ean 
 ear 
 earache 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix