URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/parliament
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:00:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Parliament - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Parliament - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of parliament 

 parliament (n.) 

 c. 1300, parlement , "consultation; formal conference, assembly," from Old French parlement (11c.), originally "a speaking, talk," from parler "to speak" (see parley (n.)); the spelling was altered c. 1400 to conform with Medieval Latin parliamentum .

 Anglo-Latin parliamentum is attested from early 13c. The specific sense of "representative assembly of England or Ireland" (with capital P- ) emerged by mid-14c. from the broader meaning "a conference of the secular and/or ecclesiastical aristocracy summoned by a monarch."
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to parliament 

 parley (n.) 

 "conference, conversation, speech," especially with an enemy, mid-15c., parlai , from Old French parlée , from fem. past participle of Old French parler "to speak" (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *paraulare , from Late Latin parabolare "to speak (in parables)," from parabola "speech, discourse," from Latin parabola "comparison" (see parable ).

 parliamentary (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to a parliament; in accordance with the rules and usages of legislatures," 1610s, from parliament + -ary .

 *gwele- 

 *gwelə- , also *gwel- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to throw, reach," with extended sense "to pierce."

 It might form all or part of: anabolic ; arbalest ; astrobleme ; ball (n.2) "dancing party;" ballad ; ballet ; ballista ; ballistic ; ballistics ; belemnite ; catabolism ; devil ; diabolical ; discobolus ; emblem ; embolism ; hyperbola ; hyperbole ; kill (v.); metabolism ; palaver ; parable ; parabola ; parley ; parliament ; parlor ; parol ; parole ; problem ; quell ; quail (v.) "lose heart, shrink, cower;" symbol .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit apa-gurya "swinging," balbaliti "whirls, twirls;" Greek ballein "to throw, to throw so as to hit," also in a looser sense, "to put, place, lay," bole "a throw, beam, ray," belemnon "dart, javelin," belone "needle," ballizein "to dance;" Armenian kelem "I torture;" Old Church Slavonic zali "pain;" Lithuanian galas "end," gėla "agony," gelti "to sting."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 commons 

 the common people as distinguished from the rulers and nobility and the clergy; the freemen of England as represented in Parliament... Meaning "the lower house of Parliament, consisting of commoners chosen by the people as their representatives" is from...

 Reichstag 

 1867 as the name of parliaments in central European nations, especially "the German imperial parliament" (1871-1918), from...Also later as the name of the building (opened in 1894) in Berlin in which the imperial parliament met; hence Reichstag Fire...

 rump 

 remnant, tail-end of anything" derives from the notion of "tail" and is recorded from 1640s in reference to the English Rump Parliament...(December 1648-April 1653), so called from sitting after the expulsion of the majority of members of the Long Parliament...

 burgess 

 Applied from late 15c. to borough representatives in Parliament and used later in Virginia and Maryland to denote members...

 agitator 

 representative of the common soldiers in Cromwell's army," who brought grievances (chiefly over lack of pay) to their officers and Parliament...

 trespass 

 Meaning "enter unlawfully" is first attested in forest laws of Scottish Parliament (c. 1455)....

 guy 

 dressed person," originally (1806) "effigy of Guy Fawkes," a key figure in the Gunpowder Plot to blow up British king and Parliament...

 usher 

 late 13c., "servant who has charge of doors and admits people to a chamber, hall, etc.," from Anglo-French usser (12c.), Old French ussier, uissier "porter, doorman," from Vulgar Latin *ustiarius "doorkeeper," variant of Latin ostiarius "door-keeper," from ostium "door, entrance,

 turpitude 

 "depravity, infamy, inherent baseness or vileness," late 15c., from Old French turpitude (early 15c.), from Latin turpitudinem (nominative turpitudo) "baseness," from turpis "vile, foul, physically ugly, base, unsightly," figuratively "morally ugly, scandalous, shameful," a word 

 pun 

 "a Conceit arising from the use of two Words that agree in the Sound, but differ in the Sense" [Addison]; "An expression in which the use of a word in two different applications, or the use of two different words pronounced alike or nearly alike, presents an odd or ludicrous idea

 Share parliament 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/parliament Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/parliament">Etymology of parliament by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of parliament. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/parliament Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of parliament," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parliament. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of parliament." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/parliament. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of parliament." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/parliament (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near parliament 
 parkland 
 parlance 
 parlay 
 parley 
 parleyvoo 
 parliament 
 parliamentarian 
 parliamentary 
 parlor 
 parlour 
 parlous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix