URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/abbot
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T18:01:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Abbot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Abbot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of abbot 

 abbot (n.) 

 Old English abbod "abbot," from Latin abbatem (nominative abbas ), from Greek abbas , from Aramaic (Semitic) abba , title of honor, literally "the father, my father," emphatic state of abh "father." Spelling with -t is a Middle English Latinization. Originally a title given to any monk, later limited to the head of a monastery. The use as a surname is perhaps ironic or a nickname. The Latin fem. abbatissa is root of abbess . Related: Abbacy ; abbatial ; abbotship .

 Entries linking to abbot 

 abbess (n.) 

 c. 1300, abbese , "female superior of a convent of nuns," from Old French abbesse (12c.), from Late Latin abbatissa (6c.), fem. of abbas (see abbot ). Replaced earlier abbotess , from Old English abbodesse .

 Abbassid 

 dynasty of caliphs of Baghdad (C.E. 750-1258) claiming descent from Abbas (566-652), uncle of the Prophet. His name is from the same Semitic source as abbot . With patronymic suffix.

 abbe 
 abbey 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 abbey 

 mid-13c., "monastery or convent devoted to religion and celibacy, headed by an abbot or abbess," from Anglo-French abbeie, Old French abaïe (Modern French abbaye), from Late Latin abbatia, from abbas (genitive abbatis); see abbot. At the dissolution of the monasteries, the name o

 filbert 

 Frankish abbot, so called because the hazel nuts ripen near his feast day, Aug. 22 (Old Style)....

 oriflamme 

 France, it was supposed to have been of red or orange-red silk, with two or three points, and was given to the kings by the abbot...

 irregular 

 [Edwin Abbot, "Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions," 1885]...

 Abba 

 its employment by the Syriac monks, it has passed into general ecclesiastical language in the modified form of abbat or abbot...

 babe 

 late 14c., "infant, young child of either sex," short for baban (early 13c.), which probably is imitative of baby talk (see babble (v.)). In many languages the word means "old woman" (compare Russian babushka "grandmother," from baba "peasant woman"), and it is also sometimes a c

 superior 

 late 14c., "higher in position," from Old French superior "higher, upper" (Modern French superieur), from Latin superiorem (nominative superior) "higher," comparative of superus "situated above, upper," from super "above, over" (from PIE root *uper "over"). The meaning "higher in

 stoic 

 late 14c., "philosopher of the school founded by Zeno" (c. 334-c. 262 B.C.E.), from Latin stoicus, from Greek stoikos "pertaining to a member of or the teachings of the school founded by Zeno, characterized by austere ethical doctrines," literally "pertaining to a portico," from 

 haggard 

 1560s, "wild, unruly" (originally in reference to hawks), from French haggard, said in Watkins to be from Old French faulcon hagard "wild falcon," literally "falcon of the woods," from hagard, hagart, from Middle High German hag "hedge, copse, wood," from Proto-Germanic *hagon, f

 suppose 

 c. 1300, supposen, "hold as a belief or opinion; make a hypothesis, assume as the basis of argument" without regard to truth or falsehood, from Old French suposer "to assume" (13c.), probably a replacement (influenced by Old French poser "put, place") of *suppondre, from Latin su

 Share abbot 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/abbot Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/abbot">Etymology of abbot by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of abbot. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 3, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/abbot Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of abbot," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 3, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/abbot. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of abbot." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/abbot. Accessed 3 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of abbot." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/abbot (accessed September 3, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near abbot 
 ABBA 
 Abbassid 
 abbe 
 abbess 
 abbey 
 abbot 
 abbr. 
 abbreviate 
 abbreviation 
 ABC 
 Abd 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix