URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/azure
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:56:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Azure - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Azure - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of azure 

 azure (n.) 

 "sky-blue color; pigment or paint made of powdered lapis lazuli," early 14c., from Old French azur , asur , a color name (12c.), from a false separation of Medieval Latin lazur , lazuri (as though the -l- were the French article l' ), which comes from Greek lazour , from Persian lajward , from Lajward , a place in Turkestan mentioned by Marco Polo, where the stone was collected.
 also from early 14c. 

 Entries linking to azure 

 lapis lazuli (n.) 

 "azure-stone, rich ultramarine silicate stone," early 15c., from Middle Latin lapis lazuli , literally "stone of azure," from Latin lapis "a stone" (see lapideous ) + Medieval Latin lazuli , genitive of lazulum , from Arabic lazuward (see azure ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 cerulean 

 "sky-colored, sky-blue," 1660s, with -an + Latin caeruleus "blue, dark blue, blue-green," perhaps from a dissimilation of caelulum, diminutive of caelum "heaven, sky," which is of uncertain origin (see celestial). The Latin word was applied by Roman authors to the sky, the Medite

 sapphire 

 precious stone, a blue-to-transparent variety of corundum next in hardness to diamond, mid-13c., saphyr, from Old French saphir (12c.) and directly from Latin sapphirus (source also of Spanish zafir, Italian zaffiro), from Greek sappheiros, name of a blue precious stone, from a S

 Britannia 

 When Britain first, at Heaven's command      Arose from out the azure main; This was the charter...

 blue 

 "of the color of the clear sky," c. 1300, bleu, blwe, etc., "sky-colored," also "livid, lead-colored," from Old French blo, bleu "pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored; blue, blue-gray," from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *blæwaz 

 Laurence 

 masc. proper name, from Old French Lorenz (French Laurent), from Latin Laurentius, literally "of Laurentum," a maritime town in Latium, the name of which means literally "town of bay trees," from laurus (see laurel). The Italian form is Lorenzo. A popular given name in the Middle

 color 

 early 13c., "skin color, complexion," from Anglo-French culur, coulour, Old French color "color, complexion, appearance" (Modern French couleur), from Latin color "color of the skin; color in general, hue; appearance," from Old Latin colos, originally "a covering" (akin to celare

 bright 

 "radiating or reflecting light," Old English bryht, metathesis of beorht "bright; splendid; clear-sounding; beautiful; divine," from Proto-Germanic *berhtaz "bright" (source also of Old Saxon berht, Old Norse bjartr, Old High German beraht, Gothic bairhts "bright"), from PIE root

 endure 

 late 14c., "to undergo or suffer" (especially without breaking); also "to continue in existence," from Old French endurer (12c.) "make hard, harden; bear, tolerate; keep up, maintain," from Latin indurare "make hard," in Late Latin "harden (the heart) against," from in- (from PIE

 sheepish 

 c. 1200, shepishe, "of, pertaining to, or resembling a sheep" in some perceived characteristic, from sheep + -ish. Originally "meek, modest, docile, simple," often as qualities of good Christians. With suggestions of "easy to deceive" by c. 1400. The sense of "bashful, over-modes

 Share azure 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/azure Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/azure">Etymology of azure by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of azure. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/azure Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of azure," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/azure. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of azure." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/azure. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of azure." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/azure (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near azure 
 azo- 
 azoic 
 Azores 
 azotemia 
 Aztec 
 azure 
 B 
 b'hoy 
 B'nai B'rith 
 B.B.C. 
 B.C. 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix