URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/diamond
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:58:34Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Diamond - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Diamond - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of diamond 

 diamond (n.) 

 mid-14c., diamaunt, diamond , "extremely hard and refractive precious stone made of pure or nearly pure carbon," from Old French diamant , from Medieval Latin diamantem (nominative diamas ), from Vulgar Latin *adiamantem (which was subsequently altered by influence of the many Greek words in dia- ), from Latin adamantem (nominative adamans ) "the hardest metal," later, "diamond," from Greek adamas (genitive adamantos ), name of a hypothetical hardest material, noun use of an adjective meaning "unbreakable, inflexible," a word of uncertain origin (see adamant (n.)).

 From early 15c. as "person of great worth" (a sense also in Latin). From late 15c. as "geometric figure of four equal straight lines forming two acute and two obtuse angles." From 1590s as "playing-card stamped with one or more red diamonds." In baseball, "square space enclosed within the four bases," is American English, by 1875. As an adjective "resembling, consisting of, or set with diamonds," from 1550s.
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to diamond 

 adamant (n.) 

 "a very hard stone," mid-14c., adamant , adamaunt , from Old French adamant "diamond; magnet" or directly from Latin adamantem (nominative adamas ) "adamant, hardest iron, steel," also used figuratively, of character, from Greek adamas (genitive adamantos ), the name of a hypothetical hardest material.

 It is a noun use of an adjective meaning "unbreakable, inflexible," which was metaphoric of anything unalterable (such as Hades) and is of uncertain origin. It is perhaps literally "invincible, indomitable," from a- "not" (see a- (3)) + daman "to conquer, to tame," from PIE root *deme- "to constrain, force, break (horses)," for which see tame (adj.). "But semantically, the etymology is rather strange," according to Beekes, who suggests it might be a foreign word altered in Greek by folk etymology, and compares Akkadian (Semitic) adamu .

 Applied in antiquity to a metal resembling gold (Plato), white sapphire (Pliny), magnet (Ovid, perhaps through confusion with Latin adamare "to love passionately"), steel, emery stone, and especially diamond , which is a variant of this word. "The name has thus always been of indefinite and fluctuating sense" [Century Dictionary]. The word had been in Old English as aðamans , but the modern word is a re-borrowing.

 diamante (adj.) 

 "powdered glass or crystal," by 1904, from French diamanté , past participle of diamanter "to set with diamonds," from Old French diamant (see diamond ). Diamante also was a Middle English form of diamond .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rhomb 

 geometric figure, "oblique-angled equilateral parallelogram," 1570s, from French rhombe, from Latin rhombus "a magician's circle," also a kind of fish, which in Late Latin took on also the geometric sense. This is from Greek rhombos "circular movement, spinning motion; spinning-t

 rough 

 Phrase in the rough "in an unfinished or unprocessed condition" (of timber, etc.) is from 1620s, in rough diamond "diamond...in its natural state," which was used figuratively, of persons, by 1700, hence diamond in the rough (by 1874 of persons,...

 lozenge 

 14c., "plane figure having four equal sides and two acute and two obtuse angles," from Old French losenge "rhombus shape, diamond-shape...From late 14c. as "diamond-shaped cake or wafer;" specific sense "small cake or tablet (originally diamond-shaped) of medicine...

 Darjeeling 

 town in northeastern India, from Tibetan dojeling "diamond island," in reference to Vajrayana (literally "vehicle of the...diamond") Buddhism....

 quarrel 

 Now-archaic sense of "square or diamond-shaped plane of glass" is recorded from mid-15c., from Medieval Latin quadrellus...

 radiance 

 is strong, often too strong to be agreeable, and marked by variation or play and penetration : as, the brilliance of a diamond...

 carbon 

 non-metallic element occurring naturally as diamond, graphite, or charcoal, 1789, coined 1787 in French by Lavoisier as charbone...

 ballpark 

 also ball-park, "baseball stadium," 1893, short for baseball (or football) park; see ball (n.1) + park (n.). To be in the ballpark in the figurative sense of "within an acceptable range of approximation" is first recorded 1954, originally in the jargon of atomic weapons scientist

 hill 

 Old English hyll "hill," from Proto-Germanic *hulni- (source also of Middle Dutch hille, Low German hull "hill," Old Norse hallr "stone," Gothic hallus "rock," Old Norse holmr "islet in a bay," Old English holm "rising land, island"), from PIE root *kel- (2) "to be prominent; hil

 box 

 "rectangular wooden container," usually with a lid, Old English box, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from Greek pyxis "boxwood," pyxion "writing table, box," made of boxwood, from pyxos "box tree," which is of uncertain origin. Beekes suggests a loan-word

 Share diamond 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/diamond Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/diamond">Etymology of diamond by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of diamond. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/diamond Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of diamond," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diamond. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of diamond." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diamond. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of diamond." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/diamond (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near diamond 
 diamante 
 diameter 
 diametral 
 diametric 
 diametrically 
 diamond 
 Diana 
 dianetics 
 Dianthus 
 diaper 
 diaphanous 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix