URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/street
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Street - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Street - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of street 

 street (n.) 

 Middle English strete , "road in a city or town," also "road from one city or town to another," from Old English stret (Mercian, Kentish), stræt (West Saxon) "street, high road," from Late Latin strata , used elliptically for via strata "paved road." Latin strata is fem. past participle of sternere "lay down, spread out, pave," from PIE *stre-to- "to stretch, extend" (from nasalized form of PIE root *stere- "to spread").

 One of the rare words that has been in use in England continuously from Roman times. An early and widespread Germanic borrowing (Old Frisian strete , Old Saxon strata , Middle Dutch strate , Dutch straat , Old High German straza , German Strasse , Swedish stråt , Danish sträde "street"). The Latin is also the source of Spanish estrada , Old French estrée , Italian strada .

 It was the usual Old English term for Roman roads ( Watling Street, Icknield Street ), "later extended to other roads, urban streets, and in SE dialects to a street of dwellings, a straggling village or hamlet" [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]. "In the Middle Ages, a road or way was merely a direction in which people rode or went, the name street being reserved for the made road" [Weekley].

 It has been used since late 14c. to mean "the people in the street, inhabitants of a street;" the modern sense of "the realm of the people as the source of political support" dates from 1931. The street for an especially important street is from 1560s (originally of London's Lombard-street). Man in the street "ordinary person, non-expert" is attested from 1831.

 Street people "the homeless, vagrants" is from 1967; the expression on the street "homeless" is from 1852 (by 1728 of women, with implications of prostitution). Street smarts is from 1971; street-credibility is from 1979. Street-preacher is by 1722, originally of Methodists (and sometimes Quakers); street-preaching is by 1838, distinguished by the Methodists from field-preaching . Street-sweeper as an occupation is from 1848.

 Entries linking to street 

 backstreet (n.) 

 "minor street away from a high or main street," mid-15c., from back (adj.), + street . As an adjective often with connotations of secret and illicit.

 cross-street (n.) 

 "a street crossing another," 1704, from cross- + street .

 Main Street 
 off-street 
 strath 
 stray 
 street-car 
 street-walker 
 street-wise 
 *stere- 
 See All Related Words (10) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 stray 

 c. 1300, straien, of animals, "wander away from an enclosure or herd," also figurative, of persons, "wander from the path of justice or rectitude," a shortening of Old French estraier "wander about, roam, drift, run loose," said of animals, especially a horse without a master, al

 highway 

 High street (Old English heahstræte) was the word before 17c. applied to highways and main roads, whether in the country...In more recent usage, it generally is the proper name of the street of a town which is built upon a highway and was the principal...street of the place....

 piazza 

 1580s, "open public square in an Italian town," from Italian piazza, from Latin platea "courtyard, broad street," from Greek...plateia (hodos) "broad (street)," from platys "broad, flat" (from PIE root *plat- "to spread")....

 hunky-dory 

 elaboration of hunkey "all right, satisfactory" (1861), from hunk "in a safe position" (1847) New York City slang used in street...A theory from 1876, however, traces it to Honcho dori, said to be a street in Yokohama, Japan, where sailors went for diversions...

 flare-up 

 It seems to have had some vogue as a street expression in London in the 1830s. Flare up! flare up!...is all the cry, in every square and street — No other sound salutes your ear, whoe'er you chance to meet Where'er you...

 gate 

 ," Old Saxon gat "eye of a needle, hole," Old Frisian gat "hole, opening," Dutch gat "gap, hole, breach," German Gasse "street...Finnish katu, Lettish gatua "street" are Germanic loan-words....

 short 

 The slang meaning "car" is attested from 1897; originally "street car," so called because street cars (or the rides taken...

 avenue 

 c. 1600, "a way of approach" (originally a military word), from French avenue "way of access" (16c.), from Old French avenue "act of approaching, arrival," noun use of fem. of avenu, past participle of avenir "to come to, arrive," from Latin advenire "to come to, reach, arrive at

 rue 

 Old English hreowan (class II strong verb; past tense hreaw, past participle hrowen), "make (someone) sorry, cause (someone) to grieve, distress, affect with regret," transitive senses now obsolete, from Proto-Germanic *khrewan (which is source also of Old Frisian riowa, Middle D

 alley 

 mid-14c., "passage in a house; open passage between buildings; walkway in a garden," from Old French alee (13c., Modern French allée) "a path, passage, way, corridor," also "a going," from fem. of ale, past participle of aler "to go," which is of uncertain origin. It might be a c

 Share street 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/street Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/street">Etymology of street by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of street. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/street Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of street," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/street. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of street." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/street. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of street." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/street (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near street 
 stream 
 streamer 
 streamlet 
 streamline 
 *streb(h)- 
 street 
 street-car 
 street-walker 
 street-wise 
 strength 
 strengthen 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix