URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/congress
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:24:53Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Congress - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Congress - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of congress 

 congress (n.) 

 c. 1400, "a body of attendants; also "meeting of armed forces" (mid-15c.); the sense of "a coming together of people, a meeting of individuals" is from 1520s; from Latin congressus "a friendly meeting; a hostile encounter," past participle of congredi "to meet with; to fight with," from assimilated form of com "with, together" (see con- ) + gradi "to walk, step," from gradus "a step" (from PIE root *ghredh- "to walk, go").

 The meaning "sexual union" is from 1580s. The specific sense of "a meeting of delegates, formal meeting of persons having a representational character" is recorded by 1670s. It has been used in reference to the national legislative body of the American states (with a capital C- ) since 1775 (by 1765 in America as a name for proposed bodies).

 The three sittings of the Continental Congress , representing the 13 rebellious American colonies, met 1774, 1775-6, and 1776-81. The Congress of the Confederation met from 1781-89, and the Congress of the United States met from March 4, 1789. The Congress of Vienna met Nov. 1, 1814, to June 8, 1815, and redrew the map of Europe with an eye to creating a balance of powers after the disruptions of Napoleon.
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to congress 

 congressional (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to a congress," 1690s, from Latin congressionem (from congressus , see congress ) + -al (1); specifically "of or pertaining to the Congress of the American states" from 1776. As such the word was at first reviled as barbarous, but Pickering (1816) quotes an unnamed English correspondent: "The term Congress belonging to America, the Americans may employ its derivatives, without waiting for the assent of the English."

 congressman (n.) 

 1780, in reference to members of U.S. Congress , and it first appears in a piece of abuse (written by a Loyalist):

 Ye coxcomb Congressmen, declaimers keen,

 Brisk puppets of the Philadelphia scene ...

 Technically of members of both the Senate and the House of Representatives, but typically meaning only the House members. Congresswoman attested from 1918 (Jeannette Rankin (1880-1973) was the first).

 con- 
 *ghredh- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 meeting 

 "an action of coming together," Old English meting "assembly," verbal noun from meet (v.). Specific meaning "gathering of people for discussion, etc." is from 1510s. In 17c., in England and Ireland it was applied generally to worship assemblies of nonconformists, but this now is 

 bunk 

 Congress, supposedly on Feb. 25, 1820, North Carolina Rep....[Annals of Congress, House of Representatives, 16th Congress, 1st Session, p. 1539] "Well, when a critter talks for talk...

 frank 

 Congress, technically abolished 1873. Related: Franked; franking....

 perestroika 

 First proposed at the 26th Party Congress (1981); popularized in English 1985 during Mikhail Gorbachev's leadership of the...

 fourth 

 That there is due to Daniel Smith, of the city tavern, for his bill of expences of Congress, on the 4 of July last, including...[Auditor General's report, Aug. 8, 1777, Journals of Congress, vol. VII]...

 Idaho 

 Congress to a proposed territorial division centered in what is now eastern Colorado; said at the time to mean "Gem of the...

 star-spangled 

 timely intervention by Pennsylvania politicians, the inspiration of Francis Hopkinson, and a resolution of the Continental Congress...The Continental Congress accepted these contributions in the spirit of the open society that America was becoming....

 relation 

 c. 1300, relacioun, "relationship, connection, correspondence;" late 14c. as "act of telling or relating in words," from Anglo-French relacioun, Old French relacion "report, connection" (14c.) and directly from Latin relationem (nominative relatio) "a bringing back, restoring; a 

 oriental 

 late 14c., "of the orient; from the east," from Old French oriental "eastern, from the east" (12c.) and directly from Latin orientalis "of or belonging to the east," from orientem (see orient (n.)). Originally in reference to the sky, geographical sense, often with a capital O-, 

 gash 

 1540s, an alteration of Middle English garce "a gash, cut, wound, incision" (early 13c.), from Old North French garser "to scarify, cut, slash" (Old French *garse), apparently from Vulgar Latin *charassare, from Greek kharassein "engrave, sharpen, carve, cut" (from PIE *gher- (4)

 Share congress 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/congress Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/congress">Etymology of congress by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of congress. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/congress Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of congress," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/congress. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of congress." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/congress. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of congress." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/congress (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near congress 
 congratulatory 
 congregate 
 congregation 
 congregational 
 Congregationalist 
 congress 
 congressional 
 congressman 
 Congreve 
 congruence 
 congruent 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix