URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/philharmonic
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:17:21Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Philharmonic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Philharmonic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of philharmonic 

 philharmonic (adj.) 

 "loving harmony or music," 1813 (in the name of a society founded in London for the promotion of instrumental music), from French philharmonique (1739), from Italian filarmonico , literally "loving harmony," from Greek philos "loving" (see philo- ) + ta harmonika "theory of harmony, music," from neuter plural of harmonikos (see harmonic ). The Society name was taken up in the names of many symphony orchestras.
 also from 1813 

 Entries linking to philharmonic 

 harmonic (adj.) 

 1560s, "relating to music," from Latin harmonicus , from Greek harmonikos "harmonic, musical, skilled in music," from harmonia (see harmony ). From 1660s as "tuneful, harmonious; relating to harmony" (earlier as armonical "tuneful, harmonious," c. 1500). The noun, short for harmonic tone , is recorded from 1777. Related: Harmonically .

 philo- 

 before vowels phil- , word-forming element meaning "loving, fond of, tending to," from Greek philos (adj.) "dear, loved, beloved," as a noun, "friend," from philein "to love, regard with affection," a word of unknown origin. Productive of a great many compounds in ancient Greek (such as philokybos "a lover of dice-play"). Opposed to miso- . Compare -phile .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 symphony 

 c. 1300, simphonie, a name given to various types of musical instruments, from Old French simphonie, sifonie, simfone "musical harmony; stringed instrument" (12c., Modern French symphonie) and directly from Latin symphonia "a unison of sounds, harmony," from Greek symphōnia "harm

 orchestra 

 c. 1600, "area in an ancient theater for the chorus," from Latin orchestra, from Greek orkhēstra, semicircular space where the chorus of dancers performed, with suffix -tra denoting place + orkheisthai "to dance," perhaps an intensive of erkhesthai "to go, come," but not all expe

 cataract 

 early 15c., "a waterfall, floodgate, furious rush of water," from Latin cataracta "waterfall," from Greek katarhaktēs "waterfall, broken water; a kind of portcullis," noun use of an adjective compound meaning "swooping, down-rushing," from kata "down" (see cata-). The second elem

 dodge 

 1560s, "go this way and that in speech or action," a sense now obsolete; from 1680s as "start suddenly aside, shift suddenly," as to evade a blow;" 1704 as "to move to and fro, shift about;" origin and sense evolution obscure. Perhaps it is from or akin to Scottish and Northern E

 icon 

 also ikon, 1570s, "image, figure, picture," also "statue," from Late Latin icon, from Greek eikon "likeness, image, portrait; image in a mirror; a semblance, phantom image;" in philosophy, "an image in the mind," related to eikenai "be like, look like," which is of uncertain orig

 sanguine 

 late 14c., "blood-red, of a blood-red color" (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sanguin (fem. sanguine) and directly from Latin sanguineus "of blood," also "bloody, bloodthirsty," from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) "blood" (see sanguinary). The meaning "cheerful, hopeful, v

 sedition 

 mid-14c., sedicioun, "rebellion, uprising, revolt, factitious commotion in the state; concerted attempt to overthrow civil authority; violent strife between factions, civil or religious disorder, riot; rebelliousness against authority," from Old French sedicion (14c., Modern Fren

 stress 

 c. 1300, stresse, "hardship, adversity; constraining or compelling force or pressure, coercion;" the original senses are mostly archaic or obsolete. The word is in part a shortening of distress (n.) and in part from Old French estrece "narrowness, oppression," from Vulgar Latin *

 proud 

 late Old English prud, prute "excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, having or cherishing a high opinion of one's own merits; guilty of the sin of Pride," from Old French prud, oblique case of adjective prouz "brave, valiant" (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme "brave

 barge 

 early 14c., "seagoing vessel of moderate size with sails," from Old French barge "boat, ship," Old Provençal barca, from Medieval Latin barga, perhaps from Celtic, or perhaps from Latin *barica, from Greek baris "Egyptian boat," from Coptic bari "small boat." From late 14c. as "r

 Share philharmonic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/philharmonic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/philharmonic">Etymology of philharmonic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of philharmonic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/philharmonic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of philharmonic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/philharmonic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of philharmonic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/philharmonic. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of philharmonic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/philharmonic (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near philharmonic 
 philanthropist 
 philanthropy 
 philately 
 -phile 
 Philemon 
 philharmonic 
 philhellene 
 -philia 
 Philip 
 Philippa 
 philippic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix