URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/crimson
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:52:40Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Crimson - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Crimson - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of crimson 

 crimson (n.) 

 "highly chromatic deep red color," early 15c., cremesin, "cloth dyed deep purplish-red," also as an adjective, "of a crimson color," from Old Italian carmesi, cremesi (c. 1300), later carmisino, cremesinus , "crimson color; cochineal dye," from Arabic qirmizī (see kermes ). For similar transfer of the dye word to generic use for "red," compare Old Church Slavonic čruminu , Russian čermnyj "red," from the same source. The French form in 15c.-16c. when the word entered English was cramoisin . "The word in Italian came from Arabic, and the word in all other European languages came from Italian via exports of silk cloths from Italy." ["English Words of Arabic Ancestry"]
 also from early 15c. 

 crimson (v.) 

 c. 1600, "to make crimson" (transitive), from crimson (n.). From 1805 as "to become crimson" (intransitive). Related: Crimsoned ; crimsoning .
 also from c. 1600 

 Entries linking to crimson 

 kermes (n.) 

 c. 1600, "shield louse ( Coccus ilicis ) that yields a red dye" (1590s of the tree on which the insects live), from Medieval Latin cremesinus (also source of French kermès , Italian chermes , Spanish carmes ), from Arabic qirmiz "kermes," from Sanskrit krmi-ja a compound meaning "(red dye) produced by a worm."

 The Sanskrit compound is krmih "worm" (from PIE root *kwrmi- "worm," source also of Lithuanian kirmis , Old Irish cruim , Albanian krimp "worm") + -ja- "produced" (from PIE root *gene- "give birth, beget"). The insect lives in the Levant and southern Europe on a species of small evergreen oak (kermes oak) and in ancient Europe were the main source of red and scarlet dye. The dye is prepared from the dried bodies of pregnant females, which alive resemble small roundish grains about the size of peas and cling immobile to the tree on which they live. From this fact kermes dye was, for a long time, mistaken as being from a seed or excrescence of the tree, and the word for it in Greek was kokkos , literally "a grain, seed" (see cocco- ). This was passed to Latin as coccum , coccus "berry [sic] yielding scarlet dye," in late use "scarlet color, scarlet garment."

 So important was kermes ( coccus ) as a commercial source of scarlet dye that derivatives of the name for it have displaced the original word for "red" in many languages, such as Welsh coch (from Latin), Modern Greek kokkinos . Also compare Russian čcermnyj "purple-red," Old Church Slavonic čruminu . Compare also crimson (n.).

 Kermes dyes have been found in burial wrappings in Anglo-Scandinavian York, but the use of kermes dyes seems to have been lost in Europe from the Dark Ages until early 15c. It fell out of use again with the introduction of cochineal (the word for which itself might be from coccus ) from the New World.

 Cloths dyed with kermes are of a deep red colour; and though much inferior in brilliancy to the scarlet cloths dyed with real Mexican cochineal, they retain the colour better and are less liable to stain. The tapestries of Brussels and other parts of Flanders, which have scarcely lost any thing of their original brilliancy, even after a lapse of 200 years, were all dyed with kermes. [W.T. Brande, "Dictionary of Science, Literature, & Art," London, 1842]

 carmine (n.) 

 1712, "pure red dyestuff obtained from cochineal," from French carmin (12c.), from Medieval Latin carminium , from Arabic qirmiz "crimson" (see kermes , also compare crimson (n.)). The form was influenced in Latin by minium "red lead, cinnabar," a word said to be of Iberian origin. As an adjective from 1737; as a color name from 1799. Related: Carminic .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 blush 

 late 14c., bluschen, blischen, "to shine brightly; to look, gaze, stare," probably from Old English blyscan "blush, become red, glow" (glossing Latin rutilare), akin to blyse "torch," from Proto-Germanic *blisk- "to shine, burn," which also yielded words in Low German (Dutch bloz

 flush 

 mid-13c., flusshen "move rapidly or violently; rush, dart, spring" (intransitive); late 15c., flush up, transitive, "cause to fly; start or flush (birds)," perhaps imitative of the sound of beating wings. The sense of "spurt, rush out suddenly, flow with force" (1540s, usually of

 ruby 

 valuable precious gem, in modern understanding a clear, rich-red variety of corundum, c. 1300, rubi, rubie (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French rubi (12c.), from Medieval Latin rubinus lapis "red stone" (source also of Italian rubino), from Latin rubeus "red," which is relat

 vermeil 

 "bright-red," late 14c., from Anglo-French and Old French vermail, vermeil "bright-red, scarlet, crimson" (11c. in Old French...), from Late Latin vermiculus "a little worm," specifically, the cochineal insect from which crimson dyes were obtained (...

 red 

 A red yellower than vermillion is called scarlet; one much more purple is called crimson....A very dark red, if pure or crimson, is called maroon; if brownish, chestnut or chocolate....A pale red — that is, one of low chroma and high luminosity — is called a pink, ranging from rose-pink, or pale crimson,...

 magenta 

 brilliant crimson aniline dye, also the color it produces, 1860, named in honor of the Battle of Magenta in Italy, where...

 pompadour 

 Her name also was used in her lifetime in reference to accessories, furniture, and a certain shade of crimson or pink....

 scarlet 

 mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), "rich cloth" (often, but not necessarily, bright red), from a shortened form of Old French escarlate "scarlet (color), top-quality fabric" (12c., Modern French écarlate), which, with Medieval Latin scarlatum "scarlet, cloth of scarlet," Italian 

 color 

 early 13c., "skin color, complexion," from Anglo-French culur, coulour, Old French color "color, complexion, appearance" (Modern French couleur), from Latin color "color of the skin; color in general, hue; appearance," from Old Latin colos, originally "a covering" (akin to celare

 -red 

 word-forming element meaning "condition or state of," Middle English, from Old English -rede, from ræden "condition, rule, reckoning," a suffixed form of ræd "to advise, rule" (see rede). Common in Old English, less so in Middle English but still active in word-formation. It is a

 Share crimson 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/crimson Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/crimson">Etymology of crimson by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of crimson. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/crimson Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of crimson," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crimson. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of crimson." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/crimson. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of crimson." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/crimson (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near crimson 
 criminality 
 criminate 
 criminology 
 criminy 
 crimp 
 crimson 
 cringe 
 crinkle 
 crinkum-crankum 
 crinoid 
 crinoline 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix