URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/lot
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T21:01:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Lot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Lot - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of lot 

 lot (n.) 

 Old English hlot "object used to determine someone's share" (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed on it), also "what falls to a person by lot," from Proto-Germanic *khlutom (source also of Old Norse hlutr "lot, share," Old Frisian hlot "lot," Old Saxon hlot , Middle Dutch, Dutch lot , Old High German hluz "share of land," German Los ), from a strong verb (the source of Old English hleotan "to cast lots, obtain by lot; to foretell"). The whole group is of unknown origin.

 The object was placed with others in a receptacle (such as a hat or helmet), which was shaken, the winner being the one whose name or mark was on the lot that fell out first. Hence the expression cast lots ; to cast (one's) lot with another (1530s, originally biblical) is to agree to share winnings. In some cases the lots were drawn by hand, hence to draw lots . The word was adopted from Germanic into the Romanic languages (Spanish lote , and compare lottery , lotto ).

 Meaning "choice resulting from the casting of lots" first attested c. 1200. Meaning "share or portion of life" in any way, "that which is given by fate, God or destiny" is from c. 1300. Meaning "number of persons or things of the same kind" is from 1570s (compare Latin mala merx , of persons, literally "a bad lot"). Sense of "plot of land" is first recorded 1630s, American English (distribution of the most desirable properties in new settlements often was determined by casting lots), then especially "parcel of land set aside for a specified purpose" (the Hollywood sense is from 1928). The common U.S. city lot was a rectangle 25 feet wide (along the street) by 100 deep; it was so universal as to be sometimes a unit of measure.

 Meaning "group, collection" is 1725, from the notion of auction lots. Lots in the generalized sense of "great many" is attested by 1812; lotsa , colloquial for "lots of," is from 1927; lotta for "lot of" is by 1906.

 Entries linking to lot 

 lottery (n.) 

 1560s, "arrangement for an awarding of prizes by chance among those buying tickets," from Italian lotteria , from lotto "lot, portion, share," from a Germanic source. It is cognate with Old English hlot (see lot (n.)), and compare lotto . French loterie is from Middle Dutch loterje , from the same Germanic source. Formerly they were typically used to raise money for some state or charitable purpose.

 lotto (n.) 

 1778 as the name of a bingo-like game of chance, from French loto and directly from Italian lotto "a lot," from or with Old French lot "lot, share, reward, prize" a borrowing from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old English and Old Frisian hlot ; see lot (n.)). In reference to the drawing of numbers to match those on the cards. Meaning "a lottery, a game of chance" is attested from 1827.

 allot 
 alot 
 cross-lots 
 sand-lot 
 tot 
 truck-lot 
 See All Related Words (8) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 sand-lot 

 "plot of empty land in a town or suburb," by 1878, from sand (n.) + lot. As an adjective in reference to the kind of sports or games played on sand-lots by amateurs, it is recorded from 1890 in American English. Earlier it had reference to socialism or communism based on the poli

 fortune 

 c. 1300, "chance, luck as a force in human affairs," from Old French fortune "lot, good fortune, misfortune" (12c.), from Latin fortuna "chance, fate, good luck," from fors (genitive fortis) "chance, luck," possibly ultimately from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry," also "to bear ch

 destiny 

 mid-14c., "fate, over-ruling necessity, the irresistible tendency of certain events to come about; inexorable force that shapes and controls lives and events;" also "that which is predetermined and sure to come true," from Old French destinée "purpose, intent, fate, destiny; that

 conscription 

 Meaning "enlistment (of soldiers)" is from 1520s; the sense "compulsory enrollment by lot or selection of suitable men for...Technically, a conscription is the enrollment of a fixed number by lot, with options of providing a substitute....

 cleric 

 but in Greek Christian jargon by 2c., "of the clergy, belonging to the clergy," as opposed to the laity; from klēros "a lot...among their brethren: the Lord is their inheritance" (klēros being used as a translation of Hebrew nahalah "inheritance, lot...

 mauvais 

 worthless," from French mauvais (fem. mauvaise) "bad," 12c., from Vulgar Latin *malifatius, literally "one who has a bad lot...

 pound 

 Also used as a storage place for other goods seized; as a lot for impounded motor vehicles by 1970....

 plenty 

 mid-13c., "abundance; as much as one could desire; an ample supply," from Old French plentee, earlier plentet "abundance, profusion" (12c., Modern French dialectal plenté), from Latin plenitatem (nominative plenitas) "fullness," from plenus "full, filled, greatly crowded; stout, 

 mass 

 late 14c., "irregular shaped lump; body of unshaped, coherent matter," from Old French masse "lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot, bar" (11c.), and directly from Latin massa "kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like dough," probably from Greek maza "barley c

 deluge 

 late 14c., "an overflowing of water, a great flood, Noah's Flood in Genesis," from Old French deluge (12c.), earlier deluve, from Latin diluvium "flood, inundation," from diluere "wash away," from dis- "away" (see dis-) + -luere, combining form of lavere "to wash" (from PIE root 

 Share lot 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/lot Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/lot">Etymology of lot by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of lot. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/lot Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of lot," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lot. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of lot." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/lot. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of lot." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/lot (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near lot 
 loser 
 loss 
 loss-proof 
 lossy 
 lost 
 lot 
 lote 
 loth 
 Lothario 
 lotion 
 lotophagi 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close