URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/diabetes
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T02:29:38Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Diabetes - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Diabetes - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of diabetes 

 diabetes (n.) 

 medical name of a set of affections characterized by abnormal discharge of urine, 1560s, from medical Latin diabetes , from late Greek diabetes "excessive discharge of urine" (so named by Aretaeus the Cappadocian, physician of Alexandria, 2c.), literally "a passer-through, siphon," from diabainein "to pass through," from dia "through" (see dia- ) + bainein "to go, walk, step" (from PIE root *gwa- "to go, come").

 Now usually restricted to diabetes mellitus , which is characterized by an excessive quantity of sugar in the urine. An old common native name for it was pissing evil . In classical Greek, diabainein meant "to stand or walk with the legs apart," and diabetes meant "a drafting compass," from the position of the legs.
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to diabetes 

 diabetic (adj.) 

 1715, "of or pertaining to diabetes;" see diabetes + -ic . From 1840 as a noun, "one suffering from diabetes." Related: Diabetical (c. 1600).

 dia- 

 before vowels, di- , word-forming element meaning "through, in different directions, between," also often merely intensive, "thoroughly, entirely," from Greek dia "through; throughout," probably cognate with bi- and related to duo "two" (from PIE root *dwo- "two") with a base sense of "twice."

 *gwa- 

 *gwā- , also *gwem- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to go, come."

 It might form all or part of: acrobat ; adiabatic ; advent ; adventitious ; adventure ; amphisbaena ; anabasis ; avenue ; base (n.) "bottom of anything;" basis ; become ; circumvent ; come ; contravene ; convene ; convenient ; convent ; conventicle ; convention ; coven ; covenant ; diabetes ; ecbatic ; event ; eventual ; hyperbaton ; hypnobate ; intervene ; intervenient ; intervention ; invent ; invention ; inventory ; juggernaut ; katabatic ; misadventure ; parvenu ; prevenient ; prevent ; provenance ; provenience ; revenant ; revenue ; souvenir ; subvention ; supervene ; venire ; venue ; welcome .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit gamati "he goes," Avestan jamaiti "goes," Tocharian kakmu "come," Lithuanian gemu, gimti "to be born," Greek bainein "to go, walk, step," Latin venire "to come," Old English cuman "come, approach," German kommen , Gothic qiman .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 evil 

 Old English yfel (Kentish evel) "bad, vicious, ill, wicked," from Proto-Germanic *ubilaz (source also of Old Saxon ubil, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch evel, Dutch euvel, Old High German ubil, German übel, Gothic ubils), from PIE *upelo-, from root *wap- "bad, evil" (source also of

 melancholy 

 c. 1300, melancolie, malencolie, "mental disorder characterized by sullenness, gloom, irritability, and propensity to causeless and violent anger," from Old French melancolie "black bile; ill disposition, anger, annoyance" (13c.), from Late Latin melancholia, from Greek melankhol

 decorum 

 1560s, "that which is proper or fitting in a literary or artistic composition;" 1580s, "propriety of speech, behavior, or dress; formal politeness," from Latin decorum "that which is seemly," noun use of neuter of adjective decorus "fit, proper," from decor "beauty, elegance, cha

 hail 

 salutation in greeting, c. 1200, from Old Norse heill "health, prosperity, good luck," or a similar Scandinavian source, and in part from Old English shortening of wæs hæil "be healthy" (see health; and compare wassail). The interj. hail is thus an abbreviated sentence expressin

 coupon 

 1822, "certificate of interest due on a bond" (a piece which could be cut from the bond and presented for payment), from French coupon, literally "piece cut off," from couper "to cut," from coup "a blow" (see coup). Meaning widened to "discount ticket" 1860s by British travel age

 forgive 

 Old English forgiefan "give, grant, allow; remit (a debt), pardon (an offense)," also "give up" and "give in marriage" (past tense forgeaf, past participle forgifen); from for-, here probably "completely," + giefan "to give" (from PIE root *ghabh- "to give or receive"). The sense

 honeymoon 

 "indefinite period of tenderness and pleasure experienced by a newly wed couple," 1540s (hony moone), but probably older, from honey (n.) in reference to the new marriage's sweetness, and moon (n.) "month" in reference to how long it probably will last, or from the changing aspec

 hustle 

 1680s (trans.), "to shake to and fro" (especially of money in a cap, as part of a game called hustle-cap), metathesized from Dutch hutselen, husseln "to shake, to toss," frequentative of hutsen, variant of hotsen "to shake." "The stems hot-, hut- appear in a number of formations 

 comprehension 

 mid-15c., "act or fact of understanding," from Old French comprehénsion (15c.), and directly from Latin comprehensionem (nominative comprehensio) "a seizing, laying hold of, arrest," figuratively "perception, comprehension," noun of action from past participle stem of comprehende

 pluck 

 Middle English plukken, "pull (something) off or out from a surface" (especially hair or feathers, but also teeth), from late Old English ploccian, pluccian "pull off, cull," from West Germanic *plokken (source also of Middle Low German plucken, Middle Dutch plocken, Dutch plukke

 Share diabetes 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/diabetes Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/diabetes">Etymology of diabetes by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of diabetes. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/diabetes Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of diabetes," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diabetes. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of diabetes." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/diabetes. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of diabetes." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/diabetes (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near diabetes 
 dhoti 
 dhow 
 *dhwer- 
 di- 
 dia- 
 diabetes 
 diabetic 
 diabolic 
 diabolical 
 diabolism 
 diachronic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix