URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hundred
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:54:42Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hundred - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hundred - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hundred 

 hundred (adj., n.) 

 "1 more than ninety-nine, ten times ten; the number which is one more than ninety-nine; a symbol representing this number;" Old English hundred "the number of 100, a counting of 100," from Proto-Germanic *hunda-ratha- (source also of Old Frisian hundred , Old Saxon hunderod , Old Norse hundrað , German hundert ); first element is Proto-Germanic *hundam "hundred" (cognate with Gothic hund , Old High German hunt ), from PIE *km-tom "hundred," reduced from *dkm-tom- (source also of Sanskrit satam , Avestan satem , Greek hekaton , Latin centum , Lithuanian šimtas , Old Church Slavonic suto , Old Irish cet , Breton kant "hundred"), suffixed form of root *dekm- "ten."

 The second element is Proto-Germanic *rath "reckoning, number" (as in Gothic raþjo "a reckoning, account, number," garaþjan "to count;" from PIE root *re- "to reason, count"). The common word for the number in Old English was simple hund , and Old English also used hund-teontig . Also compare duodecimal .

 The meaning "division of a county or shire with its own court" (still in some British place names and U.S. state of Delaware) was in Old English and probably represents 100 hides of land. The Hundred Years War (which ran intermittently from 1337 to 1453) was first so called in 1874. The original Hundred Days was the period between Napoleon's restoration and his final abdication in 1815.

 Entries linking to hundred 

 duodecimal (adj.) 

 "reckoning by twelves and powers of twelve," 1714, from Latin in duodecimo (folded) "in a twelfth" of a sheet, from ablative of duodecimus "twelfth" (from duodecim "twelve;" see dozen ) + -al (1).

 Divisions based on 10s are convenient for arithmetical calculation and computation of numbers. Duodecimal reckoning (as in ounces, inches) is better suited to practical use in weights and measures for material substances (food, drink).

 Thus English, like many other Germanic languages, retains a shadow number system based on 12. Eleven and twelve ought to be the first numbers of the "teens" series. Their Old English forms, enleofan and twel(eo)f(an) , are more transparent: "leave one" and "leave two."

 Old English also had hund endleofantig for "110" and hund twelftig for "120." "One hundred" was hund teantig . The -tig formation (see -ty (1)) ran through 12 cycles, and could have bequeathed Modern English *eleventy ("110") and *twelfty ("120"), but already in Anglo-Saxon times it was being obscured.

 Old Norse used hundrað for "120" and þusend for "1,200." Tvauhundrað was "240" and þriuhundrað was "360." Older Germanic legal texts distinguished a "common hundred" (100) from a "great hundred" (120).

 Among all its conveniences, the decimal division has the great disadvantage of being itself divisible only by the numbers two and five. The duodecimal division, divisible by two, three, four, and six, would offer so many advantages over it, that while the French theory was in contemplation, the question was discussed, ... whether the number twelve should not be substituted for ten, as the term of the periodical return to the unit. [John Quincy Adams, "Report of the Secretary of State Upon Weights and Measures," 1821]

 cent (n.) 

 late 14c., "one hundred," from Latin centum "hundred" (see hundred ). The meaning shifted 17c. to "hundredth part" under influence of percent . It was chosen in this sense April 18, 1786, in a Board of Treasury report, as a name for a U.S. currency unit (the hundredth part of a dollar) by the Continental Congress. Dime also first appears as a U.S. coin name in the same document.

 The word cent first had been suggested by Robert Morris in 1782 under his original plan for a U.S. currency. Morris's system had an unnamed basic unit at a very small value, and 100 of these was to equal a cent . But the ratio of this cent to the dollar would have been about 144:1.

 The Money Unit will be equal to a quarter of a Grain of fine Silver in coined Money. Proceeding thence in a decimal Ratio one hundred would be the lowest Silver Coin and might be called a Cent. [Jan. 15, 1782, Morris's report, included in the Financier's response to a resolution of the Continental Congress on currency exchange] 

 Thomas Jefferson's counterproposal, which won approval, built on Morris's but eliminated the basic unit and made the decimal system uniform throughout.

 Before the cent, Revolutionary and colonial dollars were reckoned in ninetieths, based on the exchange rate of Pennsylvania money and Spanish coin.

 centavo 
 centenary 
 centennial 
 centimeter 
 centipede 
 century 
 cinquecento 
 hundredfold 
 hundredth 
 hundredweight 
 percent 
 quattrocento 
 thousand 
 *dekm- 
 *re- 
 centi- 
 See All Related Words (18) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 centenary 

 1640s, "relation to or consisting of 100 years," from Latin centenarius "of a hundred, relating to a hundred," from centenai "a hundred each," from centum "hundred" (see hundred). As a noun, c. 1600 as "period of 100 years;" 1788 as "a hundredth anniversary, commemoration or cele

 century 

 1530s, "one hundred" (of anything), from Latin centuria "group of one hundred" of things of one kind (including a measure of land and a division of the Roman army, one-sixteenth of a legion, headed by a centurion), from centum "hundred" (see hundred) on analogy of decuria "a comp

 hundredth 

 "next in order after the ninety-ninth; an ordinal numeral; being one of one hundred equal parts into which a whole is regarded as divided;" early 14c., "one of 100 equal parts," from hundred + -th (1). According to OED, Old English had no ordinal form. The hymn tune known as Old 

 quincentenary 

 or consisting of 500 years," irregularly formed from Latin quinque "five" (see quinque-) + centenarius "consisting of a hundred...A better formation is quingenary, from Late Latin quingenarius "consisting of five hundred each," from quingeni, distributive...of quingenti, quincenti "five hundred."...

 thousand 

 "10 times one hundred; the number which is ten times one hundred; a symbol representing this number;" Old English þusend,...tysiąc, Russian tysiacha, Czech tisic), and probably ultimately a compound with indefinite meaning "great multitude, several hundred...," literally "swollen-hundred," with first element from PIE root *teue- "to swell," second element from PIE root *dekm- "...

 hecatomb 

 It is a compound of hekaton "one hundred," which perhaps is dissimilation of *hem-katon, with hen, neuter of heis "one" +...*katon "hundred."...

 million 

 "ten hundred thousand, a thousand thousands," late 14c., milioun, from Old French million (late 13c.), from Italian millione...The ancient Greeks had no name for a number greater than ten thousand, the Romans for none higher than a hundred thousand..."A million" in Latin would have been decies centena milia, literally "ten hundred thousand."...

 one 

 "being but a single unit or individual; being a single person, thing, etc. of the class mentioned;" as a pronoun, "a single person or thing, an individual, somebody;" as a noun, "the first or lowest of the cardinal numerals; single in kind, the same; the first whole number, consi

 conniption 

 "attack of hysteria," 1833, in conniption fit, American English, origin uncertain; perhaps a fanciful formation related to corruption, which was used in a sense of "anger" from 1799, or from English dialectal canapshus "ill-tempered, captious," which probably is a corruption of c

 Share hundred 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hundred Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hundred">Etymology of hundred by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hundred. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hundred Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hundred," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hundred. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hundred." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hundred. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hundred." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hundred (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hundred 
 humvee 
 Hun 
 Hunan 
 hunch 
 hunchback 
 hundred 
 hundredfold 
 hundredth 
 hundredweight 
 hung 
 Hungary 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix