URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/chance
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:34:10Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Chance - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Chance - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of chance 

 chance (n.) 

 c. 1300, "something that takes place, what happens, an occurrence" (good or bad, but more often bad), especially one that is unexpected, unforeseen, or beyond human control, also "one's luck, lot, or fortune," good or bad; in a positive sense "opportunity, favorable contingency;" also "contingent or unexpected event, something that may or may not come about or be realized." It is from Old French cheance "accident, chance, fortune, luck, situation, the falling of dice" (12c., Modern French chance ), from Vulgar Latin *cadentia "that which falls out," a term used in dice, from neuter plural of Latin cadens , present participle of cadere "to fall" (from PIE root *kad- "to fall").

 In English frequently in plural, chances . The word's notions of "opportunity" and "randomness" are as old as the record of it in English and now all but crowd out its original notion of "mere occurrence." The meaning "fortuity, absence of any cause why an event should happen or turn out as it does, variability viewed as a real agent" is from c. 1400.

 Chance is equivalent to the mathematical concept of probability, which is a precisely measurable factor enabling the accurate prediction of average outcomes over long runs of random events — the longer the run, the more accurate the predictions. Luck is at best a platitude and at worst a superstition. [David Partlett, "A History of Card Games"]

 Main chance  "probability that offers greatest advantage," hence "thing of most importance" is from 1570s. The mathematical sense of "probability, likelihood of a certain outcome" is from 1778, hence the odds-making sense of "balanced probability of gain or loss."

 To stand a chance (or not) is from 1796. To take (one's) chances "accept what happens" (early 14c.) is from the old, neutral sense; to take a chance/take chances is originally (by 1814) "participate in a raffle or lottery or game;" the extended sense of "take a risk" is by 1826.
 also from c. 1300 

 chance (v.) 

 late 14c., "to come about, to happen," from chance (n.). The meaning "to risk, take the chances of" is attested from 1859. Related: Chanced ; chancing .
 also from late 14c. 

 chance (adj.) 

 "resulting or due to chance; casual, unexpected," 1670s, from chance (n.).
 also from 1670s 

 Entries linking to chance 

 bechance (v.) 

 "to happen, chance," 1520s, from be- + chance (v.). Related: Bechanced ; bechancing .

 cadence (n.) 

 late 14c., "flow of rhythm in prose or verse," from French cadence , from Old Italian cadenza "conclusion of a movement in music," literally "a falling," from Vulgar Latin *cadentia , from neuter plural of Latin cadens , present participle of cadere "to fall" (from PIE root *kad- "to fall"). A doublet of chance (n.).

 The notion is of a "fall" in the voice in reading aloud or speaking, as at the end of a sentence, also the rising and falling in modulation of tones in reciting. Later (1590s) extended to music, in reference to a sequence of chords expressing conclusion at the end of a phrase and resolving to the key in which the piece was written. Also the measure or beat of any rhythmic movement (c. 1600). In 16c., sometimes used literally for "an act of falling." Related: Cadential .

 chancy 
 mischance 
 off-chance 
 perchance 
 *kad- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 prospect 

 early 15c., "act of looking into the distance, condition of facing something else or a certain direction," from Latin prospectus "distant view, look out; sight, faculty of sight," noun use of past participle of prospicere "look out on, look forward," from pro "forward" (see pro-)

 opportunity 

 late 14c., opportunitie, "fit, convenient, or seasonable time," from Old French opportunite (13c.) and directly from Latin opportunitatem (nominative opportunitas) "fitness, convenience, suitableness, favorable time," from opportunus "fit, convenient, suitable, favorable," from t

 gamble 

 "risk something of value on a game of chance," 1726 (implied in gambling), from a dialectal survival of Middle English gammlen, variant of gamenen "to play, jest, be merry," from Old English gamenian "to play, joke, pun," from gamen (see game (n.)), with form as in fumble, etc. O

 casual 

 late 14c., casuel, "subject to or produced by chance," from Old French casuel (15c.), from Late Latin casualis "by chance...," from Latin casus "chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, event" (see case (n.1))....

 casualty 

 early 15c., casuelte, caswelte, "chance, accident; incidental charge," from casual (adj.) on the model of royalty, penalty...Casuality had some currency 16c.-17c. in the sense "chance, a chance occurrence," especially an unfortunate one, but now...

 fortune 

 c. 1300, "chance, luck as a force in human affairs," from Old French fortune "lot, good fortune, misfortune" (12c.), from...Latin fortuna "chance, fate, good luck," from fors (genitive fortis) "chance, luck," possibly ultimately from PIE root *...also "to bear children," which is supported by de Vaan even though "The semantic shift from 'load' or 'the carrying' to 'chance...

 accidental 

 non-essential," from Old French accidentel or directly from Medieval Latin accidentalis, from Latin accidentem "an accident, chance...Meaning "outside the normal course of nature" is from early 15c.; that of "coming by chance, unintentional" is from 1570s...

 find 

 Old English findan "come upon, meet with; discover; obtain by search or study" (class III strong verb; past tense fand, past participle funden), from Proto-Germanic *findan "to come upon, discover" (source also of Old Saxon findan, Old Frisian finda, Old Norse finna, Middle Dutch

 measure 

 early 14c., mesuren, "to exercise moderation;" mid-14c., "to deal out or divide up by measure," also "to ascertain spatial dimensions, quantity, or capacity of by comparison with a standard;" from Old French mesurer "measure; moderate, curb" (12c.), from Late Latin mensurare "to 

 try 

 c. 1300, "examine judiciously, discover by evaluation, test;" mid-14c., "sit in judgment of," also "attempt to do," from Anglo-French trier (13c.), from Old French trier "to pick out, cull" (12c.), from Gallo-Roman *triare, of unknown origin. The ground sense is "separate out (th

 Share chance 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/chance Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/chance">Etymology of chance by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of chance. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/chance Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of chance," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chance. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of chance." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/chance. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of chance." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/chance (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near chance 
 champertous 
 champerty 
 champignon 
 champion 
 championship 
 chance 
 chancel 
 chancellery 
 chancellor 
 chancery 
 chancre 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix