URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/catholic
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:34:03Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Catholic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Catholic - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of catholic 

 catholic (adj.) 

 mid-14c., catholik , "of the doctrines of the ancient Church" (before the East/West schism), literally "universally accepted," from French catholique , from Church Latin catholicus "universal, general," from Greek katholikos , from phrase kath' holou "on the whole, in general," from kata "about" + genitive of holos "whole" (from PIE root *sol- "whole, well-kept").

 Medieval Latin catholicus was practically synonymous with Christianus and meant "constituting or conforming to the church, its faith and organization" (as opposed to local sects or heresies).

 With capital C- , it was applied by Protestants to the Church in Rome by c. 1554, after the Reformation began in England. The general sense of "embracing all, universal" in English is attested from 1550s. The meaning "not narrow-minded or bigoted" is from 1580s. The Latin word was rendered in Old English as eallgeleaflic .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Catholic (n.) 

 "member of the Roman Catholic church," 1560s, from Catholic (adj.).
 also from 1560s 

 Entries linking to catholic 

 acatholic (adj.) 

 "non-Catholic," 1809, from a- (3) + Catholic .

 Catholicism (n.) 

 "faith and practice of the Catholic church," 1610s, from Catholic + -ism .

 catholicity 
 *sol- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Protestant 

 to 'papist,' and thus accepted by English Churchmen generally; in more recent times, being generally opposed to 'Roman Catholic...,' or ... to 'Catholic,' ... it is viewed with disfavour by those who lay stress on the claim of the Anglican Church to be...equally Catholic with the Roman....

 martyrology 

 Especially, in the Catholic Church, "a list or calendar of martyrs, arranged according to their anniversaries."...

 sodality 

 Also "a fraternity or sorority," especially of religious guilds in the Catholic Church....

 beatify 

 The Catholic Church sense of "to pronounce as being in heavenly bliss" (1620s) is the first step toward canonization....

 penitent 

 Also, in plural, a name distinguishing some Catholic orders, especially those formed for the reception of reformed courtesans...

 benedict 

 produced the proper name and surname Bennet; hence also benet (late 14c.), the third of the four lesser orders of the Roman Catholic...

 supererogation 

 1520s, "performance of more than duty requires," in Catholic theology, from Late Latin supererogationem (nominative supererogatio...

 pope 

 "the Bishop of Rome as head of the Roman Catholic Church," c. 1200, from Old English papa (9c.), from Church Latin papa "bishop, pope" (in classical Latin, "tutor"), from Greek papas "patriarch, bishop," originally "father" (see papa). Applied to bishops of Asia Minor and taken a

 Christian 

 1520s as a noun, "a believer in and follower of Christ;" 1550s as an adjective, "professing the Christian religion, received into the Christian church," 16c. forms replacing Middle English Cristen (adjective and noun), from Old English cristen, from a West Germanic borrowing of C

 lackadaisical 

 "sentimentally woebegone" [Century Dictionary], 1768, lack-adaysical (Sterne), from interjection lackadaisy "alas, alack" (1748), a ludicrous alteration of lack-a-day (1690s), an exclamation of sorrow or regret, from alack the day (1590s). Hence, "given to crying 'lack-a-day,' va

 Share catholic 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/catholic Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/catholic">Etymology of catholic by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of catholic. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/catholic Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of catholic," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/catholic. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of catholic." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/catholic. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of catholic." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/catholic (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near catholic 
 cathedral 
 Catherine 
 catheter 
 cathexis 
 cathode 
 catholic 
 Catholicism 
 catholicity 
 Catiline 
 cation 
 catkin 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix