URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/gymnasium
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T20:28:15Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Gymnasium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Gymnasium - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of gymnasium 

 gymnasium (n.) 

 1590s, "place of exercise," from Latin gymnasium "school for gymnastics," from Greek gymnasion "public place where athletic exercises are practiced; gymnastics school," in plural, "bodily exercises," from gymnazein "to exercise or train," literally or figuratively, literally "to train naked," from gymnos "naked," from a metathesis of PIE *nogw-mo- , suffixed form of *nogw- "naked" (see naked ).

 A feature of all ancient Greek communities, at first it was merely an open space, later with extensive facilities and including training for the mind as well as the body. Hence its use in German from 15c. as a name for "high school" (more or less paralleling a sense also in Latin); in English it has remained purely athletic. For the "continental high school sense," English in 19c. sometimes used gymnastical as an adjective, gymnasiast for a student.
 also from 1590s 

 Entries linking to gymnasium 

 naked (adj.) 

 Old English nacod "nude, unclothed, bare; empty," also "not fully clothed" (a sense still used in 18c.), from Proto-Germanic *nakwadaz (source also of Old Frisian nakad , Middle Dutch naket , Dutch naakt , Old High German nackot , German nackt , Old Norse nökkviðr , Old Swedish nakuþer , Gothic naqaþs "naked"), from PIE root *nogw- "naked" (source also of Sanskrit nagna , Hittite nekumant- , Old Persian *nagna- , Greek gymnos , Latin nudus , Lithuanian nuogas , Old Church Slavonic nagu- , Russian nagoi , Old Irish nocht , Welsh noeth "bare, naked").

 Of things, "without the usual or customary covering" (of a sword, etc.), from Old English. Applied to qualities, actions, etc., "mere, pure, open to view, unconcealed," from c. 1200; phrase the naked truth is from early 15c. Phrase naked as a jaybird (1943) was earlier naked as a robin (1879, in a Shropshire context); Middle English had naked as a worm (mid-14c.), naked as a needle (late 14c.). Naked eye "the eye unassisted by any instrument" is from 1660s, an unnecessary term before telescopes and microscopes.

 gym (n.) 

 short for gymnasium , 1871, U.S. student slang.

 gymnastic (adj.) 

 1570s, "pertaining to athletic exercise," from Latin gymnasticus , from Greek gymnastikos "fond of or skilled in bodily exercise," from gymnazein "to exercise or train" (see gymnasium ).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 lyceum 

 1580s, Latin form of Greek lykeion, name of a grove or garden with covered walks in the eastern suburb of ancient Athens, also the site of an athletic facility. Aristotle taught there. The name is from the neuter of Lykeios, an epithet of Apollo under which he had a temple nearby

 palestra 

 c. 1400, palestre, "ancient Greek gymnasium," from Old French palestre (12c.) and directly from Latin palaestra, from Greek...palaistra "gymnasium, public place for exercise under official direction," originally "wrestling school," from palaiein...

 body-builder 

 Roberts, superintendent of the Boston Y.M.C.A. gymnasium. See body (n.) + build (v.)....

 cynic 

 But more likely it is from Kynosarge "The Gray Dog," the name of the gymnasium outside ancient Athens (for the use of those...Antisthenes, a crusty type who hated students, emphasized self-knowledge, discipline, and restraint, and held forth at a gymnasium...

 Academe 

 sciences were taught, 1580s, from phrase groves of Academe (translating Horace's silvas Academi), the name of the public gymnasium...

 medicine 

 dictionary of terms for his prescription department in physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium...

 school 

 [place of instruction] Middle English scole, from Old English scol, "institution for instruction," from Latin schola "meeting place for teachers and students, place of instruction;" also "learned conversation, debate; lecture; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect," als

 high 

 Old English heh (Anglian), heah (West Saxon) "of great height, tall, conspicuously elevated; lofty, exalted, high-class," from Proto-Germanic *hauha- (source also of Old Saxon hoh, Old Norse har, Danish høi, Swedish hög, Old Frisian hach, Dutch hoog, Old High German hoh, German h

 academy 

 mid-15c., Achademie, "the classical Academy," properly the name of the public garden where Plato taught his school, from Old French (Modern French Académie) and directly from Latin Academia, from Greek Akadēmeia "The Academy; the grove of Akadēmos," a legendary Athenian of the Tr

 secondary 

 late 14c., secondarie, "belonging to the second class; not chief or principal; second in importance or authority; of a lesser quality or worth; subordinate to something else, depending upon the action of primary qualities," from Old French secondaire and directly from Latin secun

 Share gymnasium 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/gymnasium Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/gymnasium">Etymology of gymnasium by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of gymnasium. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/gymnasium Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of gymnasium," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gymnasium. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of gymnasium." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/gymnasium. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of gymnasium." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/gymnasium (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near gymnasium 
 *gwora- 
 *gwou- 
 gybe 
 gym 
 gymkhana 
 gymnasium 
 gymnast 
 gymnastic 
 gymnastics 
 gymno- 
 gymnosophist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix