URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/khan
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:35:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Khan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Khan - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of khan 

 khan (n.) 

 title of sovereign princes in Tatar counties, c. 1400, from Turkic, literally "lord, prince," contraction of khaqan "ruler, sovereign." The word has been known in the languages of Europe since 13c.; compare Medieval Latin chanis , Medieval Greek kanes , Old French chan , Russian khanu . In time it degenerated and became a title of respect. The female form is khanum (1824), from Turkish khanim .
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to khan 

 cham (n.) 

 old alternative form of khan (q.v.), 1550s, from French cham , Medieval Latin cham , alternative forms of chan , can . (For the "companion" word, see chum (n.1).) "Formerly commonly applied to the rulers of the Tatars and Mongols; and to the emperor of China" [OED]. Used figuratively of any great leader in any activity or art.

 khanate (n.) 

 "the dominion of a khan," 1799, from khan + -ate (1).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 Tartar 

 the Tartars"), from Medieval Latin Tartarus, from Persian Tatar, first used 13c. in reference to the hordes of Ghengis Khan...

 inn 

 Old English inn "lodging, dwelling, house," probably from inne (adv.) "inside, within" (see in). Meaning "public house with lodging" is perhaps by c. 1200, certainly by c. 1400. Meaning "lodging house or residence for students" is attested from early 13c. in Anglo-Latin, now obso

 hostelry 

 late 14c. (as a surname from early 14c.), from Old French ostelerie, hostelerie "house, guest-house; kitchen; hospice, almshouse" (12c., Modern French hôtellerie), from hostel "house, home" (see hostel). Rare in modern English before Scott. Alternative hostry (from Old French hos

 lodge 

 Middle English logge, mid-13c. in surnames and place names; late 13c. as "small building or hut," from Old French loge "arbor, covered walk; hut, cabin, grandstand at a tournament" (12c.), from Frankish *laubja "shelter" (cognate with Old High German louba "porch, gallery," Germa

 caravan 

 1590s, in reference to in North Africa or western Asia, "company of travelers, pilgrims, merchants, etc., going together for security," from French caravane, from Old French carvane, carevane "caravan" (13c.), or Medieval Latin caravana, words picked up during the Crusades, via A

 trim 

 mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman "strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite; set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong," from trum "strong, stable," from Proto-Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of root *deru- "be firm, solid

 conspiracy 

 mid-14c., "a plotting of evil, unlawful design; a combination of persons for an evil purpose," from Anglo-French conspiracie, Old French conspiracie "conspiracy, plot," from Latin conspirationem (nominative conspiratio) "agreement, union, unanimity," noun of action from past-part

 Deuteronomy 

 5th book of the Pentateuch, late 14c., Deutronomye (Wycliffe), from Late Latin Deuteronomium, from Ecclesiastical Greek Deuteronomion, literally "second law," from deuteros "second" (see deutero-) + nomos "law" (from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take"). A mistranslation of Hebr

 epitome 

 1520s, "an abstract; brief statement of the chief points of some writing," from French épitomé (16c.), from Latin epitome "an abridgment," from Greek epitome "an abridgment, a cutting on the surface; brief summary," from epitemnein "cut short, abridge," from epi "into" (see epi-)

 clean 

 Old English clæne "free from dirt or filth, unmixed with foreign or extraneous matter; morally pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open," of beasts, "not forbidden by ceremonial law to eat," from West Germanic *klainja- "clear, pure" (source also of Old Saxon kleni "dainty, deli

 Share khan 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/khan Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/khan">Etymology of khan by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of khan. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/khan Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of khan," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/khan. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of khan." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/khan. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of khan." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/khan (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near khan 
 keyword 
 Keziah 
 KGB 
 kh- 
 khaki 
 khan 
 khanate 
 khatib 
 khedive 
 Khmer 
 kibble 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix