URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/read
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T23:17:33Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Read - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Read - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of read 

 read (v.) 

 Middle English reden , ireden , "to counsel, advise," also "to read," from Old English rædan , gerædan (West Saxon), redan , geredan (Anglian) "to advise, counsel, persuade; discuss, deliberate; rule, guide; arrange, equip; forebode; to read (observe and apprehend the meaning of something written), utter aloud (words, letters, etc.); to explain; to learn through reading; to put in order."

 This is reconstructed to be from Proto-Germanic *redan, source also of Old Norse raða , Old Frisian reda , Dutch raden , Old High German ratan , German raten "to advise, counsel, interpret, guess," from PIE root *re- "to reason, count."

 Cognate words in most modern Germanic languages still mean "counsel, advise" (compare rede ). Old English also had a related noun ræd , red "advice," and read is connected to riddle (n.1) via the notion of "interpret." Century Dictionary notes that the past participle should be written red , as it formerly was, and as in lead / led . Middle English past participle variants include eradde , irad , ired , iræd , irudde . 

 The sense-transference to "interpret and understand the meaning of written symbols" is said to be unique to English and (perhaps under Old English influence) Old Norse raða . Most languages use a word rooted in the idea of "gather up" as their word for "read" (such as French lire , from Latin legere ).

 Sense of "make out the character of (a person)" is attested from 1610s. Musical sense of "perform (at first sight) from the notes" is by 1792. To read up "systematically study" is from 1842; read out (v.) "expel by proclamation" (Society of Friends) is from 1788. Read-only in computer jargon is recorded from 1961.

 read (n.) 

 "an act of reading, a perusal," 1825, colloquial, from read (v.). The older word for "an act of reading " was reading (Old English). In reference to a written or printed work regarded as to character or quality ( a good read , etc.), by 1870.
 also from 1825 

 read (adj.) 

 1580s, "having knowledge gained from reading," now especially in well-read , past-participle adjective from read (v.).
 also from 1580s 

 Entries linking to read 

 rede (n.) 

 "counsel, advice," Old English ræd "advice, counsel," from Proto-Germanic *redin (source also of Old Saxon rad "advice, counsel, help, advantage," Old Frisian red "council, advice," Dutch raad "advice, counsel," German Rat "advice, counsel," Old Norse rað "advice, consideration, remedy, power; marriage"), from the source of read (v.), which originally meant "to advise, counsel." A very frequent word in Old English and early Middle English, falling from literary use 17c. until revived somewhat in 19th century archaic and poetic diction.

 The verb 
 read in the already obsolete sense ' counsel, advise,' was much affected by Spenser, and in the early modern and ME. spelling 
 rede which he used has likewise been much affected by his archaizing imitators; but there is no historical ground for a difference in spelling. [Century Dictionary]

 riddle (n.1) 

 "A word game or joke, comprising a question or statement couched in deliberately puzzling terms, propounded for solving by the hearer/reader using clues embedded within that wording" [Oxford Dictionary of English Folklore], early 13c., redels , from Old English rædels "riddle; counsel; conjecture; imagination; discussion," common Germanic (Old Frisian riedsal "riddle," Old Saxon radisli , Middle Dutch raetsel , Dutch raadsel , Old High German radisle , German Rätsel "riddle").

 The first element is from Proto-Germanic *redaz- (from PIE *re-dh- , from root *re- "to reason, count"). The ending is Old English noun suffix -els , the -s of which later was mistaken for a plural affix and stripped off in early Modern English. The meaning "anything which puzzles or perplexes" is from late 14c.

 Conrad 
 mind-reader 
 misread 
 Ralph 
 readable 
 reader 
 Reading 
 readout 
 reread 
 sight-reading 
 unread 
 unready 
 well-read 
 *re- 
 See All Related Words (16) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 unready 

 mid-14c., "not prepared," from un- (1) "not" + ready (adj.). In English history, applied from c. 1200 (Etheldredus Unrad) to Anglo-Saxon King Æðelræd II (968-1016), where it preserves Middle English unredi, a different adjective, from Old English ungeræd "ill-advised, rede-less, 

 say 

 Middle English seien, from Old English secgan "to utter, inform, speak, tell, relate," from Proto-Germanic *sagjanan "to say" (source also of Old Saxon seggian, Old Norse segja, Danish sige, Old Frisian sedsa, Middle Dutch segghen, Dutch zeggen, Old High German sagen, German sage

 register 

 late 14c., registre, "public record book, private account book, an official written account regularly kept," from Old French registre (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin registrum, regestrum, properly regestum, from Late Latin regesta "list, matters recorded," noun use of Lat

 lector 

 late 14c., "reader, a cleric in one of the minor orders appointed to read holy works to the people," from Late Latin lector..."reader," agent noun from Latin legere "to read," from PIE root *leg- (1) "to collect, gather," with derivatives meaning...

 peruse 

 Meaning "read carefully and critically" is by 1530s, but this could be a separate formation....Meaning "read casually" is from 19c. Related: Perused; perusing....

 legend 

 French légende) and directly from Medieval Latin legenda "legend, story," especially lives of saints, which were formerly read...at matins and in refectories of religious houses, literally "(things) to be read," on certain days in church, etc., from...Latin legendus, neuter plural gerundive of legere "to read; to gather, pluck, select," from PIE root *leg- (1) "to collect...

 lection 

 French lection, from Latin lectionem (nominative lectio) "a reading," noun of action from past participle stem of legere "to read...Meaning "a sacred writing to be read in a church" is from c. 1600; sense of "a particular reading of a text from a certain...

 mouth 

 Old English muþ "oral opening of an animal or human; opening of anything, door, gate," from Proto-Germanic *muntha- (source also of Old Saxon, Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund, German Mund, Gothic munþs "mouth"), 

 learn 

 Old English leornian "to get knowledge, be cultivated; study, read, think about," from Proto-Germanic *lisnojanan (cognates: Old Frisian lernia, Middle Dutch leeren, Dutch leren, Old High German lernen, German lernen "to learn," Gothic lais "I know"), with a base sense of "to fol

 renal 

 "of or pertaining to the kidneys," 1650s, from French rénal and directly from Late Latin renalis "of or belonging to kidneys," from Latin ren (plural renes) "kidneys," a word of of uncertain etymology, with possible cognates in Old Irish aru "kidney, gland," Welsh arenn "kidney, 

 Share read 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/read Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/read">Etymology of read by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of read. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/read Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of read," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/read. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of read." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/read. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of read." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/read (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near read 
 reaction 
 reactionary 
 reactivate 
 reactive 
 reactor 
 read 
 readability 
 readable 
 reader 
 readership 
 readily 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix