URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hog
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:13:01Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hog - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hog - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hog 

 hog (n.) 

 mid-14c., hogge , but probably in Old English (implied late 12c. in hogaster ), "a swine," especially a castrated male, "swine reared for slaughter" (usually about a year old), also used by stockmen for "young sheep before the first shearing" (early 14c.) and for "horse older than one year," suggesting the original sense had to do with age, not type of animal. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as "improbable."

 Extended to the wild boar by late 15c. As a term of opprobrium for a greedy or gluttonous person, c. 1400. Meaning "Harley-Davidson motorcycle" is attested from 1967. Road hog is attested from 1886, hence hog "rude person heedless of the convenience or safety of others" (1906). To go hog-wild is American English from 1904. Hog in armor "awkward or clumsy person in ill-fitting attire" is from 1650s (later used of the armadillo).

 Phrase go the whole hog (1828, American English) is sometimes said to be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the allegorical story (recorded in English from 1779) of Muslim sophists, forbidden by their faith from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated which part was intended and in the end managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition.

 Had he the sinful part express'd,

 They might, with safety, eat the rest.

 But for one piece, they thought it hard,

 From the whole hog to be debarr'd

 And set their wits to work, to find

 What joint the prophet had in mind.

 [Cowper, "The Love of the World Reproved"]
 also from mid-14c. 

 hog (v.) 

 "to appropriate greedily," 1884, U.S. slang (first attested in "Huck Finn"), from hog (n.). Earlier it meant "Cause to form a horizontal arch" (like the back of a hog), 1798, and "cut a horse's mane short" (so it bristles like a hog's back), 1769. Related: Hogged ; hogging .
 also from 1884 

 Entries linking to hog 

 groundhog (n.) 

 also ground-hog , "American marmot," 1784, from ground (n.) + hog (n.). Also known colloquially as a whistlepig , woodchuck , and compare aardvark . Ground Hog Day as a weather forecasting event is first recorded 1869, in an Ohio newspaper article that calls it "old tradition;" the custom though not the name, attested from 1850s. Similar superstitions are widespread; Webster ("The White Devil") refers to one from Elizabethan London:

 Let all that belong to great men remember th' old wives'

 tradition, to be like the lions i'th' Tower on Candlemasday ;

 to mourn if the sun shine, for fear of the pitiful remainder

 of winter to come.

 hedgehog (n.) 

 mid-15c. (replacing Old English igl ), from hedge (n.) + hog (n.). First element from its frequenting hedges; the second element a reference to its pig-like snout.

 hoagie 
 hogfish 
 hogger 
 hoggish 
 hog-pen 
 hog-reeve 
 hog-tie 
 hogwash 
 hogweed 
 hogwort 
 wart-hog 
 whole 
 whole nine yards 
 See All Related Words (15) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hoagie 

 American English (originally Philadelphia) word for "hero sandwich, large sandwich made from a long, split roll;" originally hoggie (c. 1936), traditionally said to be named for Big Band songwriter Hoagland Howard "Hoagy" Carmichael (1899-1981), but the use of the word pre-dates 

 whole 

 Old English hal "entire, whole; unhurt, uninjured, safe; healthy, sound; genuine, straightforward," from Proto-Germanic *haila- "undamaged" (source also of Old Saxon hel, Old Norse heill, Old Frisian hal, Middle Dutch hiel, Dutch heel, Old High German, German heil "salvation, wel

 sow 

 Middle English soue, from Old English sugu, su "female of the swine, adult female hog," from Proto-Germanic *su- (source...Sowbug "hog-louse, pill-bug" is from 1750; sow in reference to any terrestrial isopod that can roll itself into a ball is...

 porcupine 

 body and tail, c. 1400, porke despyne, from Old French porc-espin (early 13c., Modern French porc-épic), literally "spine hog...," from Latin porcus "hog" (from PIE root *porko- "young pig") + spina "thorn, spine" (see spine)....

 soil 

 excrement," c. 1600, a sense extended from Middle English soile "miry or muddy place, bog," especially as a wallow for a hog...

 bacon 

 early 14c., "meat from the back and sides of a hog" (originally either fresh or cured, but especially cured), from Old French...

 flitch 

 of bacon," Middle English flicche (c. 1200), "side of a slaughtered animal," especially the salted and cured side of a hog...

 sinew 

 "cord or tendon of the body," connecting a muscle to a bone or other body part, Middle English sineu, from Old English seonowe, oblique form of nominative sionu "sinew," from Proto-Germanic *sinwō (source also of Old Saxon sinewa, Old Norse sina, Old Frisian sine, Middle Dutch se

 garb 

 "fashion of dress," 1620s, from earlier sense "person's outward demeanor" (c. 1600), originally "elegance, stylishness" (1590s), from French garbe "graceful outline, gracefulness, comeliness" (Modern French galbe) or directly from Italian garbo "grace, elegance, pleasing manners,

 grab 

 "seize forcibly or roughly," 1580s, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grabben "to grab," from Proto-Germanic *grab-, *grap- (source also of Old English græppian "to seize," Old Saxon garva, Old High German garba "sheaf," literally "that which is gathered up together"), from 

 Share hog 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hog Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hog">Etymology of hog by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hog. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hog Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hog," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hog. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hog." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hog. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hog." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hog (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hog 
 hodman 
 hoe 
 hoe-cake 
 hoedown 
 hoer 
 hog 
 hogan 
 Hogen-Mogen 
 hogfish 
 hogger 
 hoggish 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix