URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/merchant
FETCHED: 2026-09-07T16:24:44Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Merchant - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Merchant - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of merchant 

 merchant (n.) 

 "one engaged in the business of buying commercial commodities and selling them again for profit," early 13c., marchaunt (late 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French marchaunt "merchant, shopkeeper" (Old French marcheant , Modern French marchand ), from Vulgar Latin *mercatantem (nominative *mercatans ) "a buyer," present participle of *mercatare , frequentative of Latin mercari "to trade, traffic, deal in" (see market (n.)). Meaning "fellow, chap" is from 1540s; with a specific qualifier, and suggesting someone who deals in it (such as speed merchant "one who enjoys fast driving," by 1914).
 also from early 13c. 

 merchant (adj.) 

 "relating to trade or commerce; pertaining to merchants," c. 1400, from merchant (n.) and from Old French marcheant (adj.).
 also from c. 1400 

 Entries linking to merchant 

 market (n.) 

 early 12c., "a meeting at a fixed time for buying and selling livestock and provisions, an occasion on which goods are publicly exposed for sale and buyers assemble to purchase," from Old North French market "marketplace, trade, commerce" (Old French marchiet , Modern French marché ), from Latin mercatus "trading, buying and selling; trade; market" (source of Italian mercato , Spanish mercado , Dutch markt , German Markt ), from past participle of mercari "to trade, deal in, buy," from merx (genitive mercis ) "wares, merchandise." This is from an Italic root *merk- , possibly from Etruscan, referring to various aspects of economics.

 The god 
 Mercuriu s was probably the god of exchange. According to [Walde-Hoffmann], the god's name was borrowed from Etruscan; in principle, the same is possible for the stem 
 *merk- altogether. [de Vaan]

 Meaning "public building or space where markets are held" is attested from late 13c. Meaning "a city, country or region considered as a place where things are bought or sold" is from 1610s. Sense of "sale as controlled by supply and demand" is from 1680s. Market-garden "plot of land on which vegetables are grown for market" is by 1789. Market-basket "large basket used to carry marketing" is by 1798. Market price "price a commodity will bring when sold in open market" is from mid-15c.; market value "value established or shown by sales" (1690s) is first attested in the writings of John Locke. Market economy is from 1948; market research is from 1921.

 Mercator 

 type of map projection, 1660s, invented by Flemish geographer Gerhard Kremer (1512-1594), who Latinized his surname, which means "dealer, tradesman," as Mercator (see merchant ). He first used this type of map projection in 1568. Its great distortions in the northern and southern regions renders it unsuitable for land maps, but as on it a constant compass bearing always is represented by a straight line, it is useful for sea maps.

 merchandise 
 merchantman 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 merchandise 

 mid-13c., marchaundise, "trading, commerce, action or business of buying and selling goods or commodities for profit;" mid-14c., "commodities of commerce; wares, movable objects, and articles for sale or trade," from Anglo-French marchaundise, Old French marcheandise "goods, merc

 emporium 

 1580s, "place of trade, mart," from Latin emporium, from Greek emporion "trading place, market," from emporos "merchant,"...Greek emporos in the "merchant" sense meant especially "one who trades on a large scale, usually but not necessarily by sea...

 galleon 

 kind of large ship, 1520s, from French galion "armed ship of burden," and directly from Spanish galeón "galleon, armed merchant...In English use, especially of Spanish royal treasure-ships or the government warships that escorted private merchant ships...

 carrack 

 related to Medieval Latin carraca, Italian caracca, all of uncertain origin, perhaps from Arabic qaraqir, plural of qurqur "merchant...

 monger 

 Old English mangere "merchant, trader, broker," agent noun from mangian "to traffic, trade," from Proto-Germanic *mangojan...degradation through which words go, that what was in the Saxon period the designation for the most elevated description of merchant...

 grocer 

 Sense of "a merchant selling individual items of food" is 16c.; in Middle English this was a spicer....

 chandler 

 By 1580s the word also came to mean "dealer in provisions, merchant."...

 bourgeois 

 1560s, "of or pertaining to the French middle class," from French bourgeois, from Old French burgeis, borjois "town dweller" (as distinct from "peasant"), from borc "town, village," from Frankish *burg "city" (via Germanic from PIE root *bhergh- (2) "high," with derivatives refer

 threat 

 Old English þreat "crowd, troop," also "oppression, coercion, menace," related to þreotan "to trouble, weary," from Proto-Germanic *thrautam (source also of Dutch verdrieten, German verdrießen "to vex"), from PIE *treud- "to push, press squeeze" (source also of Latin trudere "to 

 hatter 

 "maker or seller of hats," late 14c., from hat + -er (1). Mad as a hatter, originally a Scottish phrase, is from 1829 as "demented, violently insane," 1837 as "enraged, violently angry;" an earlier expression was to do something like a hatter (1826) "in a frenzy or energetically"

 Share merchant 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/merchant Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/merchant">Etymology of merchant by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of merchant. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 7, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/merchant Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of merchant," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 7, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/merchant. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of merchant." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/merchant. Accessed 7 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of merchant." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/merchant (accessed September 7, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near merchant 
 mercer 
 merchandise 
 merchandize 
 merchandizer 
 merchandizing 
 merchant 
 merchantman 
 Mercia 
 merciful 
 merciless 
 mercurial 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix