URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/liberty
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T14:51:59Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Liberty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Liberty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of liberty 

 liberty (n.) 

 late 14c., "free choice, freedom to do as one chooses," also "freedom from the bondage of sin," from Old French liberte "freedom, liberty, free will" (14c., Modern French liberté ), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas ) "civil or political freedom, condition of a free man; absence of restraint; permission," from liber "free" (see liberal (adj.)). At first of persons; of communities, "state of being free from arbitrary, despotic, or autocratic rule or control" is by late 15c.

 The French notion of liberty is political equality; the English notion is personal independence. [William R. Greg, "France in January 1852" in "Miscellaneous Essays"]

 Nautical sense of "leave of absence" is from 1758. The meaning "unrestrained action, conduct, or expression" (1550s) led to take liberties "go beyond the bounds of propriety" (1620s). The sense of "privileges by grant" (14c.) led to the sense of "a person's private land" (mid-15c.), within which certain special privileges may be exercised, which yielded in 18c. in both England and America a sense of "a district within a county but having its own justice of the peace," and also "a district adjacent to a city and in some degree under its municipal jurisdiction" (as in Northern Liberties of Philadelphia). Also compare Old French libertés "local rights, laws, taxes."

 Liberty-cap is from 1803; the American Revolutionary liberty-pole , "tall flagstaff set up in honor of liberty and often surmounted by a liberty-cap" is from 1775. Liberty-cabbage was a World War I U.S. jingoistic euphemism for sauerkraut .

 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to liberty 

 liberal (adj.) 

 mid-14c., "generous," also "nobly born, noble, free;" from late 14c. as "selfless, magnanimous, admirable;" from early 15c. in a bad sense, "extravagant, unrestrained," from Old French liberal "befitting free people; noble, generous; willing, zealous" (12c.), and directly from Latin liberalis "noble, gracious, munificent, generous," literally "of freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free person," from liber "free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled, unchecked, licentious."

 This is conjectured to be from PIE *leudh-ero- , which probably originally meant "belonging to the people," though the precise semantic development is obscure; but compare frank (adj.). This was a suffixed form of the base *leudh- (2) "people" (source also of Old Church Slavonic ljudu , Lithuanian liaudis , Old English leod , German Leute "nation, people;" Old High German liut "person, people").

 Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,

 Confess'd the vile encounters they have had

 A thousand times in secret.

 ["Much Ado," IV.1.93]

 Liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a term of reproach with the meaning "free from restraint in speech or action." The Enlightenment revived it in a positive sense "free from prejudice, tolerant, not bigoted or narrow," which emerged 1776-88. In 19c. often theological rather than political, opposed to orthodox , used of Unitarians, Universalists, etc. For educational use, see liberal arts .

 Purely in reference to political opinion, "tending in favor of freedom and democracy," it dates from c. 1801, from French libéral . In English the label at first was applied by opponents (often in the French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to the party more favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending to mean "favorable to government action to effect social change," which seems at times to draw more from the religious sense of "free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established institutions" (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which emerged by 1823.

 This is the attitude of mind which has come to be known as liberal. It implies vigorous convictions, tolerance for the opinions of others, and a persistent desire for sound progress. It is a method of approach which has played a notable and constructive part in our history, and which merits a thorough trial today in the attack on our absorbingly interesting American task. [Guy Emerson, "The New Frontier," 1920]

 sauerkraut (n.) 

 "a favorite German dish consisting of cabbage cut fine, pressed, salted, and fermented until sour," 1630s, from German Sauerkraut , literally "sour cabbage," from sauer "sour" (from Proto-Germanic *sura- ; see sour (adj.)) + Kraut "vegetable, cabbage," from Old High German krut , from Proto-Germanic *kruthan .

 They pickle it [cabbage] up in all high Germany, with salt and barberies, and so keepe it all the yeere, being commonly the first dish you have served in at table, which they call their 
 sawerkrant . [James Hart, "Klinike, or the diet of the diseased," 1633]

 In U.S. slang, figurative use for "a German" dates from 1858 (compare kraut ). "The effort to substitute liberty-cabbage for sauerkraut , made by professional patriots in 1918, was a complete failure." [Mencken]. French choucroute (19c.) is the German word, but via Alsatian German surkrut but with folk etymology alteration in French based on chou "cabbage" + croûte "crust" (n.).

 libertarian 
 liberticide 
 libertine 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 libertarian 

 1789, "one who holds the doctrine of free will" (especially in extreme forms; opposed to necessitarian), from liberty (q.v.) on model of unitarian, etc. Political sense of "person advocating the greatest possible liberty in thought and conduct" is from 1878. As an adjective by 18

 libertine 

 late 14c., "a freedman, an emancipated slave," from Latin libertinus "condition of a freedman; member of a class of freedmen," from libertus "one's freedmen, emancipated person," from liber "free" (see liberal (adj.)). The sense of "freethinker" is recorded by 1560s, from French 

 autonomy 

 "autonomous condition, power or right of self-government," 1620s, of states, from Greek autonomia "independence," abstract noun from autonomos "independent, living by one's own laws," from autos "self" (see auto-) + nomos "custom, law" (from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take").

 licence 

 late 14c., "formal authorization, official permission, permit, privilege," from Old French licence "freedom, liberty, power..., possibility; permission," (12c.), from Latin licentia "freedom, liberty; unrestrained liberty, wantonness, presumption,...Meaning "excessive liberty, disregard of propriety" in English is from mid-15c....

 option 

 c. 1600, "action of choosing;" 1630s, "power or liberty of choosing," from French option (Old French opcion), from Latin...optionem (nominative optio) "choice, free choice, liberty to choose," from optare "to desire, pray for, choose," which is...

 permit 

 Meaning "grant liberty or leave" is from 16c. Related: Permitted; permitting....

 Mercury 

 numismatics, the Mercury-head dime (so called by 1941) was in circulation from 1916; properly it is the female head of Liberty...The coin is more correctly the Winged Liberty-head dime (simple Liberty-head dime being a designation of the previous design...

 urn 

 late 14c., "large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead," from Latin urna "a jar, vessel of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead" (also used as a ballot box and for drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus "pitcher, jug," and 

 run 

 Old English, "move swiftly by using the legs, go on legs more rapidly than walking," also "make haste, hurry; be active, pursue or follow a course," and, of inanimate things, "to move over a course." The modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which t

 self-determination 

 1680s, "determination of mind; determination by one's own will or powers without external influence," from self- + determination. The political sense, action of a people in deciding its statehood and form of government," is attested by 1911, popularized 1918 by U.S. President Woo

 Share liberty 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/liberty Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/liberty">Etymology of liberty by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of liberty. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/liberty Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of liberty," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/liberty. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of liberty." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/liberty. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of liberty." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/liberty (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near liberty 
 liberator 
 Liberia 
 libertarian 
 liberticide 
 libertine 
 liberty 
 libidinal 
 libidinous 
 libido 
 Libra 
 librarian 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix