URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/colony
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:14:00Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Colony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Colony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of colony 

 colony (n.) 

 late 14c., "ancient Roman settlement outside Italy," from Latin colonia "settled land, farm, landed estate," from colonus "husbandman, tenant farmer, settler in new land," from colere "to cultivate, to till; to inhabit; to frequent, practice, respect; tend, guard," from PIE root *kwel- (1) "revolve, move round; sojourn, dwell" (source also of Latin -cola "inhabitant"). Also used by the Romans to translate Greek apoikia "people from home."

 In reference to modern situations, "company or body of people who migrate from their native country to cultivate and inhabit a new place while remaining subject to the mother country," attested from 1540s. Meaning "a country or district colonized" is by 1610s.

 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to colony 

 cologne (n.) 

 "a distilled spirit blended with certain essential oils so as to give off a fragrant scent," by 1844, short for Cologne water (1814), loan-translation of French eau de Cologne (which also was used in English), literally "water from Cologne," from the city in Germany (German Köln , from Latin Colonia Agrippina ) where it was made, first by Italian chemist Johann Maria Farina, who had settled there in 1709.

 "Now, a worked Lyon handkerchief, moistened, not with cologne, but with rose-water. 
 Eau de cologne is vulgar, it's the odor of every shopboy; and now you are ready, and I leave you." ["Charles Sealsfield" (Karl Anton Postl), "Rambleton," 1844]

 The city seems to have been known in English generally by its French name in 18c. The city was founded 38 B.C.E. as Oppidum Ubiorum , renamed and made a colony in 50 C.E. at the request of emperor Claudius's wife Agrippina the Younger, who was born there. By 450 C.E. the name had been shortened to Colonia (see colony ).

 colonial (adj.) 

 "pertaining to or belonging to a colony," 1756, from Latin colonia (see colony ) + -al (1), or directly from colony on model of baronoinal . In U.S., especially "from or characteristic of America during colonial times" (1776). The noun meaning "inhabitant of a colony, a colonist" is recorded from 1816.

 colonist 
 colonize 
 corticole 
 cult 
 cultural 
 culture 
 domicile 
 inquiline 
 lapidocolous 
 nidicolous 
 sanguicolous 
 *kwel- 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 colonize 

 1620s, "to settle with colonists, plant or establish a colony in," from stem of Latin colonus "tiller of the soil, farmer" (see colony). From 1630s as "to migrate to and settle in." It is attested by 1790s in the sense of "to make another place into a national dependency" without

 cult 

 1610s, "worship, homage" (a sense now obsolete); 1670s, "a particular form or system of worship;" from French culte (17c.), from Latin cultus "care, labor; cultivation, culture; worship, reverence," originally "tended, cultivated," past participle of colere "to till" (see colony)

 cultural 

 1813, "of or pertaining to the raising of plants or animals," from Latin cultura "tillage, a cultivating, agriculture," figuratively "care, culture, an honoring," from past participle stem of colere "to tend, guard; to till, cultivate" (see colony). With -al (1). Figurative sense

 Libya 

 The modern nation acquired the name in 1934, when Italy, which then held it as a colony, revived the name as that of the...colony, which became formally independent in 1951....

 thanksgiving 

 acknowledging divine favors" thanksgiving dates from 1630s (the first one in America was held October 1621 by Plymouth Colony...

 Florida 

 U.S. state, formerly a Spanish colony, probably from Spanish Pascua florida, literally "flowering Easter," a Spanish name...

 proprietary 

 From 1630s in reference to the American colonies, "grantee or owner of a colony" (called proprietary colonies in distinction...

 outpost 

 1757, "military position detached from the main body of troops or outside the limits of a camp," from out- + post (n.2). Originally in George Washington's letters. Phrase outpost of Empire (by 1895) "remotest territory of an empire" in later use often echoes Kipling: There he sh

 body 

 Middle English bodi, from Old English bodig "trunk of a man or beast; the whole physical structure of a human or animal; material frame, material existence of a human; main or principal part of anything," related to Old High German botah, but otherwise of unknown origin. Not else

 us 

 Old English us (cognate with Old Saxon, Old Frisian us, Old Norse, Swedish oss, Dutch ons, German uns), accusative and dative plural of we, from PIE *nes- (2), forming oblique cases of the first person plural personal pronoun (source also of Sanskrit nas, Avestan na, Hittite nash

 Share colony 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/colony Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/colony">Etymology of colony by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of colony. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/colony Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of colony," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/colony. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of colony." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/colony. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of colony." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/colony (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near colony 
 colonist 
 colonization 
 colonize 
 colonnade 
 colonoscopy 
 colony 
 colophon 
 color 
 colorable 
 Colorado 
 colorant 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix