URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/banner
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T06:41:29Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Banner - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Banner - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of banner 

 banner (n.) 

 c. 1200, "piece of cloth attached to the upper end of a pole or staff," from Old French baniere "flag, banner, standard" (12c., Modern French bannière ), from Late Latin bandum "standard," borrowed from Frankish or another West Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *bandwa- "identifying sign, banner, standard," also "company under a banner" (source also of Gothic bandwa "a sign"), from suffixed form of PIE root *bha- (1) "to shine."

 Formerly the standard of a king, lord, or knight, behind which his followers marched to war and to which they rallied in battle. The figurative sense of "anything displayed as a profession of principles" is from early 14c. Of newspaper headlines that stream across the top of the page, from 1913.
 also from c. 1200 

 Entries linking to banner 

 bandolier (n.) 

 1570s, "shoulder belt" (for a wallet, etc.), from French bandouiliere (16c.), from Italian bandoliera or Spanish bandolera , from diminutive of banda "a scarf, sash," a Germanic loan-word related to Gothic bandwa (see banner ). In some cases, directly from Spanish to English as bandoleer . The meaning "ammunition belt for a musket" is from 1590s; hence bandolero "highwayman, robber" (1832), from Spanish, literally "man who wears a bandoleer."

 banneret (n.) 

 c. 1300, an order of knighthood, originally in reference to one who could lead his men into battle under his own banner (q.v.). Later it meant one who received rank for valiant deeds done in the king's presence in battle. Also "a small banner" (c. 1300, also bannerette ).

 *bha- (1) 

 *bhā- , Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to shine."

 It might form all or part of: aphotic ; bandolier ; banner ; banneret ; beacon ; beckon ; buoy ; diaphanous ; emphasis ; epiphany ; fantasia ; fantasy ; hierophant ; pant (v.); -phane ; phanero- ; phantasm ; phantasmagoria ; phantom ; phase ; phene ; phenetic ; pheno- ; phenology ; phenomenon ; phenyl ; photic ; photo- ; photocopy ; photogenic ; photograph ; photon ; photosynthesis ; phosphorus ; phaeton ; sycophant ; theophany ; tiffany ; tryptophan .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit bhati "shines, glitters;" Greek phainein "bring to light, make appear," phantazein "make visible, display;" Old Irish ban "white, light, ray of light."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 standard 

 mid-12c., "distinctive flag or other conspicuous object displayed from a position in battle to serve as a rallying point for a military force," from shortened form of Old French estandart "military standard, banner" (Anglo-French estandard) and in part from Medieval Latin standar

 gonfalon 

 flag," from a Proto-Germanic compound of *gunthjo "war, battle" (from PIE *gwhen- "to strike, kill;" see bane) + *fano "banner...

 Agnus Dei 

 1620s in reference to an image of a lamb as emblematic of Christ; usually it is pictured with a nimbus and supporting the banner...

 display 

 c. 1300, "unfold, spread out, unfurl" (a banner, etc.), from Old French desploiir (Modern French déployer) "unfold, unfasten...

 oriflamme 

 sacred banner of St. Denis, mid-15c., oriflamble, from Old French orie flambe, from Latin aurea flamma "golden flame."...

 signal 

 late 14c., "visible sign, indication" (a sense now obsolete), also "a supernatural act of God; a device on a banner," from...

 ensign 

 early 15c., "a token, sign, symbol; badge of office, mark or insignia of authority or rank;" also "battle flag, flag or banner...

 flag 

 "cloth ensign," late 15c., now in all modern Germanic languages (German Flagge, Dutch vlag, Danish flag, Swedish flagg, etc.) but apparently first recorded in English, of unknown origin, but likely connected to flag (v.1) or else an independent imitative formation "expressing the

 headline 

 1670s, from head (n.) in sense "heading of a book or chapter" (c. 1200) + line (n.). Originally a printers' term for the line at the top of a page containing the title and page number; used of the lines that form the title of a newspaper article from 1890, and transferred unthink

 innovation 

 mid-15c., innovacion, "restoration, renewal," from Late Latin innovationem (nominative innovatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of innovare "to change; to renew," from in- "into" (from PIE root *en "in") + novus "new" (see new). Meaning "a novel change, experimental v

 Share banner 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/banner Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/banner">Etymology of banner by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of banner. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/banner Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of banner," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/banner. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of banner." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/banner. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of banner." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/banner (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near banner 
 bankroll 
 bankrupt 
 bankruptcy 
 banlieue 
 bann 
 banner 
 banneret 
 bannock 
 banns 
 banquet 
 banquette 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix