URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/rheumatism
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T02:00:11Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Rheumatism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Rheumatism - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of rheumatism 

 rheumatism (n.) 

 1680s as a name applied to various similar diseases causing inflammation and pain in the joints, from Late Latin rheumatismus , from Greek rheumatismos , from rheumatizein "suffer from the flux," from rheuma "a discharge from the body" (see rheum ). "The meaning of a disease of the joints is first recorded in 1688, because rheumatism was thought to be caused by an excessive flow of rheum into a joint thereby stretching ligaments" [Barnhart].
 also from 1680s 

 Entries linking to rheumatism 

 rheum (n.) 

 late 14c., reume , "watery fluid or humid matter in the eyes, nose, or mouth" (including tears, saliva, mucous discharge from the nostrils), from Old French reume "a head-cold" (13c., Modern French rhume ) and directly from Latin rheuma , reuma , from Greek rheuma "discharge from the body, flux; a stream, current, flood, a flowing," literally "that which flows," from rhein "to flow" (from PIE root *sreu- "to flow").

 In old medicine it was conceived as draining from the higher to lower parts of the body and causing ailments if out of balance. Also from late 14c. as "a head-cold, catarrh." The -h- was restored in early Modern English.

 *sreu- 

 Proto-Indo-European root meaning "to flow."

 It might form all or part of: amenorrhea ; catarrh ; diarrhea ; gonorrhea ; hemorrhoids ; maelstrom ; rheo- ; rheology ; rheostat ; rheum ; rheumatic ; rheumatism ; rheumatoid ; rhinorrhea ; rhythm ; seborrhea ; stream .

 It might also be the source of: Sanskrit sravati "flows," srotah "stream;" Avestan thraotah- "stream, river," Old Persian rauta "river;" Greek rhein "to flow," rheos "a flowing, stream," rhythmos "rhythm," rhytos "fluid, liquid;" Old Irish sruaim , Irish sruth "stream, river;" Welsh ffrwd "stream;" Old Norse straumr , Old English stream ; Lettish strauma "stream, river;" Lithuanian sravėti "to trickle, ooze;" Old Church Slavonic struja "river," o-strovu "island," literally "that which is surrounded by a river;" Polish strumień "brook."

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rheumatic 

 By 1738 with the meaning "suffering from rheumatism;" the sense of "pertaining to or caused by rheumatism" is by 1886....

 gout 

 joint disease, c. 1200, from Old French gote "a drop, bead; the gout, rheumatism" (10c., Modern French goutte), from Latin...

 tractor 

 Earlier used of a quack device consisting of two metal rods which were supposed to relieve rheumatism (1798, in full Perkins's...

 snake oil 

 Snake oil in this sense is attested by 1858: it was said to heal rheumatism and gout in Georgia, but was touted as a cure...

 disease 

 early 14c., "discomfort, inconvenience, distress, trouble," from Old French desaise "lack, want; discomfort, distress; trouble, misfortune; disease, sickness," from des- "without, away" (see dis-) + aise "ease" (see ease (n.)). Restricted pathological sense of "sickness, illness"

 seaside 

 also sea-side, "the land bordering on the sea, the margin or brim of the sea," c. 1200, from sea + side (n.). Especially in England, "the seacoast as a resort for pleasure or health," 1782; as an adjective in this sense from 1781. The meaning "the side facing the sea" seems to be

 forlorn 

 mid-12c., forloren "disgraced, depraved," past participle of obsolete forlesan "be deprived of, lose, abandon," from Old English forleosan "to lose, abandon, let go; destroy, ruin," from for- "completely" + leosan "to lose" (from Proto-Germanic *lausa-, from PIE root *leu- "to lo

 exacerbation 

 "act of exacerbating; state of being exacerbated; increase of violence or virulence, aggravation," c. 1400, exacerbacioun, from Late Latin exacerbationem (nominative exacerbatio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin exacerbare "exasperate, irritate, provoke," from e

 pregnant 

 ["convincing, weighty, pithy, full of meaning"] late 14c., "cogent, convincing, compelling" (of evidence, an argument, etc.); c. 1400 as "full of meaning;" from Old French preignant "pregnant, pithy, ready capable," which is probably from Latin praegnans "with child, pregnant, fu

 ragamuffin 

 mid-14c., "demon;" late 14c., "a ragged lout," also in surnames (Isabella Ragamuffyn, 1344), from Middle English raggi "ragged" ("rag-y"?) + "fanciful ending" [OED], or else perhaps second the element is Middle Dutch muffe "mitten." Or, as Johnson has it, "From rag and I know not

 Share rheumatism 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/rheumatism Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/rheumatism">Etymology of rheumatism by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of rheumatism. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 13, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/rheumatism Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of rheumatism," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 13, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rheumatism. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of rheumatism." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/rheumatism. Accessed 13 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of rheumatism." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/rheumatism (accessed September 13, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near rheumatism 
 rhetoric 
 rhetorical 
 rhetorician 
 rheum 
 rheumatic 
 rheumatism 
 rheumatoid 
 rheumatology 
 rheumy 
 rhinal 
 Rhine 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix