URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/cassock
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T15:59:28Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Cassock - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Cassock - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of cassock 

 cassock (n.) 

 1540s, "long loose gown or outer cloak," from French casaque "long coat" (16c.), corresponding to Spanish casaca , Italian casacca , probably ultimately from Turkish quzzak "nomad, adventurer," (the source of Cossack ), from their typical riding coat. Or perhaps from Arabic kazagand , from Persian kazhagand "padded coat," from kazh "raw silk" + agand "stuffed." Chiefly a soldier's cloak 16c.-17c.; ecclesiastical use is from 1660s.
 also from 1540s 

 Entries linking to cassock 

 Cossack (n.) 

 "one of a military people who inhabit the steppes of southern Russia, 1590s, from Russian kozak , from Turkish kazak "adventurer, guerrilla, nomad," from qaz "to wander." The same Turkic root is the source of the people-name Kazakh and the nation of Kazakhstan .

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 ignominious 

 early 15c., from Latin ignominiosus "disgraceful, shameful," from ignominia "disgrace, infamy, loss of a (good) name," from assimilated form of in- "not, opposite of" (see in- (1)) + nomen (genitive nominis) "name" (from PIE root *no-men- "name"). The Latin spelling perhaps influ

 hilarity 

 mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) "cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment," from hilaris "cheerful, merry," from Greek hilaros "cheerful, merry, joyous," related to hilaos "graceful, kindly," hilaskomai "to propitiate, appease, reconcile,"and probably from a suffix

 perspicacity 

 "state or character of being perspicacious; keenness of sight, clearness of understanding," 1540s, from French perspicacité (15c.) and directly from Late Latin perspicacitas "sharp-sightedness, discernment," from Latin perspicax "sharp-sighted, having the power of seeing through,

 spring 

 Middle English springen, from Old English springan "to leap, leap up, jump;" of a fountain, spring, etc., "burst forth;" also "fly up; spread, grow" (class III strong verb; past tense sprang, past participle sprungen). This is from Proto-Germanic *sprenganan (source also of Old N

 commodity 

 early 15c., "benefit, profit, welfare;" also "a convenient or useful product," from Old French commodit "benefit, profit" (15c.) and directly from Latin commoditatem (nominative commoditas) "fitness, adaptation, convenience, advantage," from commodus "proper, fit, appropriate, co

 Platonic 

 1530s, "of or pertaining to Greek philosopher Plato" (429 B.C.E.-c. 347 B.C.E.), from Latin Platonicus, from Greek Platōnikos. The name is Greek Platōn, a nickname in reference to his broad shoulders (from platys "broad;" from PIE root *plat- "to spread"); his original name was A

 Egypt 

 Old English Egipte "the Egyptians," from French Egypte, from Greek Aigyptos "the river Nile, Egypt," from Amarna Hikuptah, corresponding to Egyptian Ha(t)-ka-ptah "temple of the soul of Ptah," the creative god associated with Memphis, the ancient city of Egypt. Strictly one of th

 intuition 

 mid-15c., intuicioun, "insight, direct or immediate cognition, spiritual perception," originally theological, from Late Latin intuitionem (nominative intuitio) "a looking at, consideration," noun of action from past participle stem of Latin intueri "look at, consider," from in- "

 pandemic 

 of diseases, "incident to a whole people or region," 1660s, from Late Latin pandemus, from Greek pandemos "pertaining to all people; public, common," from pan- "all" (see pan-) + dēmos "people" (see demotic). Modeled on epidemic; OED reports that it is "Distinguished from epidemi

 gossamer 

 c. 1300, "filmy substance (actually spider threads) found in fields of stubble in late fall," apparently from gos "goose" (see goose (n.)) + sumer "summer" (see summer (n.)). Blount (1656) has it as gossymeare or gossomor "the white and cobweb-like exhalations, which fly abroad i

 Share cassock 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/cassock Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/cassock">Etymology of cassock by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of cassock. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/cassock Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of cassock," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cassock. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of cassock." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/cassock. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of cassock." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/cassock (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near cassock 
 cassette 
 cassia 
 Cassiopeia 
 cassis 
 Cassius 
 cassock 
 cassowary 
 cast 
 castanet 
 castaway 
 caste 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix