URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/sway
FETCHED: 2026-09-14T03:18:47Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Sway - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Sway - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of sway 

 sway (v.) 

 early 14c., sweien , "move, go, go quickly;" also transitive, "move (something) along, carry," probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse sveigja "to bend, swing, give way," Old Danish svegja ) and perhaps merged with an unrecorded Old English cognate. The whole group might be related to swag (v.) and swing (v.).

 The sense of "swing, waver, move in a swaying or sweeping motion" is from late 14c. The meaning "move or bend from side to side," as by excess of weight, is from c. 1500. The transitive sense "cause to move from side to side" is from 1550s (according to OED, it was not common before 19c.) and is perhaps from Low German. The meaning "lean away from the perpendicular" is by 1570s. The figurative sense "cause to be directed toward one side, prejudice" is from 1590s. Related: Swayed ; swaying .
 also from early 14c. 

 sway (n.) 

 late 14c., "movement from side to side, circular movement," from sway (v.). The meaning "controlling influence" (in under the sway of , etc.), is from 1510s, from a transitive sense of the verb in Dutch and other languages. Century Dictionary suggests this is "probably in allusion to the sway of the scepter, or of the sword, embodying and illustrating government."
 also from late 14c. 

 Entries linking to sway 

 swag (v.) 

 "move heavily or unsteadily," 1520s, now provincial or archaic, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse sveggja "to swing, sway," from the same source as Old English swingan "to swing" (see swing (v.)). Earlier it meant "swing an object" (c. 1400), "swing or shake freely" (late 15c.). Related: Swagged ; swagging (mid-15c.).

 swing (v.) 

 Middle English swingen "cause to move, throw, cast, fling; move, dash, rush;" also "deliver a blow, smite with a weapon," from Old English swingan "to beat, strike; scourge, flog; to rush, fling oneself" (strong verb, past tense swang , past participle swungen ). This is from Proto-Germanic * swangwi- (source also of Middle Dutch swingen , Old Saxon, Old High German swingan "to swing," Old Frisian swinga "pour," German schwingen "to swing, swingle, oscillate"), which is of uncertain origin and might be in Germanic only. Swirl , switc h, swivel , swoop are sometimes considered to be from the same source. Boutkan finds Pokorny's IE reconstruction implausible for formal and semantic reasons.

 The meaning "move freely back and forth," as a body suspended from a fixed point, is recorded by 1540s; that of "move with a swinging step" is by 1854. The transitive sense "cause to sway or oscillate" is from 1550s. From 1660s as "ride on a swing;" colloquially, "be hanged," 1520s.

 The sense of "bring about, make happen" is by 1934. Related: Swung ; swinging .

 sway-backed 
 unswayed 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 rock 

 [stone, mass of mineral matter], Middle English rokke, roche "stone as a substance; large rocky formation, rocky height or outcrop, crag," from Old English rocc (as in stanrocc "stone rock or obelisk") and directly from Old North French roque, variant of Old French roche, which i

 shake 

 Middle English shaken, from Old English sceacan "move (something) quickly to and fro, cause to move with quick vibrations; brandish; move the body or a part of it rapidly back and forth;" also "go, glide, hasten, flee, depart" (as in sceacdom "flight"); also intransitive, of pers

 reel 

 late 14c., relen, "to whirl about, turn around," also "sway, swing, rock, become unsteady," probably from reel (n.1), on...The sense of "sway or stagger as a result of a blow, etc." is from late 15c....

 potentate 

 c. 1400, potentat, "a ruler, lord, prince, monarch; person who possesses independent power or sway," from Old French potentat...

 Rasputin 

 acquired name (Russian, literally "debauchee") of Grigory Yefimovich Novykh (c. 1872-1916), mystic and faith healer who held sway...

 Dietrich 

 Theodric the Ostrogoth, who held sway in Italy 493-526, appears in later German tales as Dietrich von Bern (Verona)....

 influence 

 late 14c., an astrological term, "streaming ethereal power from the stars when in certain positions, acting upon character or destiny of men," from Old French influence "emanation from the stars that acts upon one's character and destiny" (13c.), also "a flow of water, a flowing 

 churl 

 Old English ceorl "peasant, one of the lowest class of freemen, man without rank," from Proto-Germanic *kerlaz, *karlaz (source also of Old Frisian zerl "man, fellow," Middle Low German kerle, Dutch kerel "freeman of low degree," German Kerl "man, husband," Old Norse karl "old ma

 lurch 

 "sudden pitch to one side," 1784, from earlier lee-larches (1765), a nautical term for "the sudden roll which a ship makes to lee-ward in a high sea, when a large wave strikes her, and bears her weather-side violently up, which depresses the other in proportion" ["Complete Dictio

 Share sway 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/sway Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/sway">Etymology of sway by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of sway. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/sway Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of sway," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 14, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sway. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of sway." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/sway. Accessed 14 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of sway." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/sway (accessed September 14, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near sway 
 swat 
 swatch 
 swath 
 swathe 
 swatter 
 sway 
 sway-backed 
 swear 
 swearing 
 swear-word 
 sweat 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix