URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/other
FETCHED: 2026-09-04T19:58:39Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Other - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Other - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of other 

 other (adj., pron.) 

 Old English oþer "second, the second of two; additional, further" (adj.), also as a pronoun, "one of the two; a different person or thing from the one in view," from Proto-Germanic *anthera- (source also of Old Saxon athar , Old Frisian other , Old Norse annarr , Middle Dutch and Dutch ander , Old High German andar , German ander , Gothic anþar "second, other").

 These are from PIE *an-tero- (source of Lithuanian antras , Old Prussian anters "other, second), which is perhaps a variant of *al-tero- "the other of two" (source of Latin alter ), from root *al- "beyond" + adjectival comparative suffix *-tero- . Or the first element might be the pronoun *eno- , *ono- [Boutkan]. The Old English, Old Saxon, and Old Frisian forms show "a normal loss of n before fricatives" [Barnhart].

 The sense of "second" was detached from this word in English (which now uses second (adj.), which is from Latin) and German ( zweiter , from zwei "two") to avoid ambiguity. In Scandinavian, however, the second floor is still the "other" floor (Swedish andra , Danish anden ). Also compare Old English oþergeara "next year."

 As an adverb, "secondly" (late Old English); "otherwise" (c. 1200); "in addition" (mid-14c.).

 The other woman "a woman with whom a man begins a love affair while he is already committed" is from 1855. The other day originally (late Old English) was "the next day;" later (c. 1300) "yesterday;" and now, loosely, "a day or two ago" (early 15c.). OED notes that the other place was euphemistic for Hell or "Oxford as regarded in Cambridge (and vice versa)." Phrase other half in reference to either the poor or the rich, is recorded from c. 1600.

 La moitié du monde ne sçayt comment l'aultre vit. [Rabelais, 
 "Pantagruel," 1532]

 Halfe the world knowes not how the other halfe li[v]es. [George Herbert, "Outlandish Proverbs," 1640]

 Entries linking to other 

 second (adj.) 

 c. 1300, "next in order, place, time, etc., after the first; an ordinal numeral; being one of two equal parts into which a whole is regarded as divided;" from Old French second , secont , and directly from Latin secundus "following, next in time or order," also "secondary, subordinate, inferior," from PIE *sekw-ondo- , pariticipal form of root *sekw- "to follow."

 It replaced native other in this sense because of the ambiguity of the earlier word. From late 14c. as "other, another" (as in "No Second Troy"), also "next in order in rank, quality, or importance."

 Second sight is from 1610s; it presumably implies a second way of seeing in addition to the physical sight with the eyes, but it is etymologically perverse as it means the sight of events before, not after, they occur or are revealed. Second-degree in a general sense of "next to lowest on a scale of four" in Arostotelian qualities is from Middle English; in reference to burns, by 1890.

 Second fiddle is attested by 1809:

 A metaphor borrowed from a musical performer who plays the second or counter to one who plays the first or the "air." [Bartlett, "Dictionary of Americanisms," 1848]

 To play first violin , figuratively as "take the leading part" is attested by 1780.

 Latin secundus , tertius , etc. appended to personal names in English schools (to designate boys having the same surname by order of seniority) is attested by 1826s.

 alter (v.) 

 late 14c., "to change (something), make different in some way," from Old French alterer "to change, alter," from Medieval Latin alterare "to change," from Latin alter "the other (of the two)," which is reconstructed to be from PIE root *al- (1) "beyond" + comparative suffix -ter (as in other ). Intransitive sense "to become otherwise" is recorded by 1580s. Related: Altered ; altering .

 alteration 
 another 
 each other 
 else 
 further 
 ither 
 otherness 
 others 
 otherwise 
 otherworldly 
 *al- 
 *al- 
 See All Related Words (14) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 alteration 

 late 14c., alteracioun, "change, transformation, action of altering," from Old French alteracion "change, alteration" (14c.), and directly from Medieval Latin alterationem (nominative alteratio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Late Latin alterare "to change," from La

 else 

 Old English elles "in another manner, other, otherwise, besides, different," from Proto-Germanic *aljaz (source also of Gothic aljis "other," Old High German eli-lenti, Old English el-lende, both meaning "in a foreign land;" see also Alsace), an adverbial genitive of the neuter o

 further 

 Old English furðor, forðor "to a more advanced position, forward, onward, beyond, more distant; farther away; later, afterward; to a greater degree or extent, in addition; moreover," etymologically representing either "forth-er" or "fore-ther." The former would be from furðum (se

 alternate 

 "following each other by turns, reciprocal," 1510s, from Latin alternatus "one after the other," past participle of alternare..."to do first one thing then the other; exchange parts," from alternus "one after the other, alternate, in turns, reciprocal...," from alter "the other" (see alter)....turns (as night and day); an alternative is a choice of two things, the acceptance of one implying the rejection of the other...

 alternative 

 1620s, in rhetoric, "proposition involving two statements, the acceptance of one implying the rejection of the other," from...noun use of Medieval Latin alternativus "do one thing and then another, do by turns," from Latin alternus "one after the other..., alternate, in turns, reciprocal," from alter "the other" (see alter)....Of objects, etc., "the other of two which may be chosen," by 1836....

 et cetera 

 also etcetera, early 15c., from Latin et cetera, literally "and the others," from et "and" + neuter plural of ceterus "the other..., other part, that which remains," from Proto-Italic *ke-etero‑, from *ke-, variant form of PIE root *ko-, the stem of demonstrative...pronoun meaning "this" + *etero‑ "other (of two), again, a second time, again," a PIE adjective of comparison....

 haft 

 To haven other haeftes in hand "have other hafts in hand" was a 14c.-15c. way of saying "have other business to attend to...

 layer 

 late 14c., "one who or that lays" (especially stones, "a mason"), agent noun from lay (v.). Passive sense of "a thickness of some material laid over a surface" is first recorded 1610s, but because the earliest English use was in cookery this is perhaps from French liue "binding,"

 relay 

 late 14c., in hunting, relai, "hounds placed along a line of chase" (to replace those that tire), from Old French relais "reserve pack of hounds or other animals; rest, stop, remission, delay" (13c.), from relaier "to exchange tired animals for fresh," literally "leave behind," f

 mesa 

 "high table land, in the U.S. Southwest, a broad and flat region between canyons or rivers," 1759, from Spanish mesa "plateau," literally "table," from Latin mensa "table" for sacred offerings or for meals (source of Romanian masa, Old French moise "table"), which de Vaan writes 

 Share other 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/other Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/other">Etymology of other by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of other. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/other Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of other," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/other. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of other." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/other. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of other." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/other (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near other 
 ostrich 
 Ostrogoth 
 Oswald 
 Oswego 
 otalgia 
 other 
 otherness 
 others 
 otherwise 
 otherworldly 
 otic 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix