URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/balcony
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T14:13:08Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Balcony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Balcony - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of balcony 

 balcony (n.) 

 1610s, "platform projecting from a wall of a building surrounded by a wall or railing," from Italian balcone , from balco "scaffold," which is from a Germanic source (perhaps Langobardic *balko- "beam"), from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (see balk (n.)). With Italian augmentative suffix -one . From 1718 as "gallery in a theater." Until c. 1825, regularly accented on the second syllable. Related: Balconied .
 also from 1610s 

 Entries linking to balcony 

 balk (n.) 

 also baulk , Middle English balke , from Old English balca "ridge, bank," from or influenced by Old Norse balkr "ridge of land," especially between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (source also of Old Saxon balko , Danish bjelke , Old Frisian balka , Old High German balcho , German Balken "beam, rafter"), from PIE root *bhelg- "beam, plank" (source also of Latin fulcire "to prop up, support," fulcrum "bedpost;" Lithuanian balžiena "cross-bar;" and possibly Greek phalanx "trunk, log, line of battle"). Italian balco "a beam" is from Germanic (see balcony ).

 In old use especially "an unplowed strip in a field, often along and marking a boundary." The modern senses are figurative, representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)), or else the notion of "a piece missed in plowing" as "a blunder, a failure." Hence, in baseball, "a motion made by the pitcher as if to deliver the ball, but without doing so," attested from 1845, probably from the plowing sense.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 pew 

 bench-like seat for certain worshipers" (ladies, important men, etc.), frequently enclosed, from Old French puie, puy "balcony..., elevated place or seat; elevation, hill, mound," from Latin podia, plural of podium "elevated place," also "front balcony...

 terrace 

 1510s, "gallery, portico, balcony," later "flat, raised place for walking" (1570s), from French terrace (Modern French terasse...

 correspondent 

 newspaper correspondent, as may naturally be supposed, is one of alternate cloud and sunshine—one day basking in an Andalusian balcony...

 veranda 

 also verandah, 1711, Anglo-Indian, from Hindi varanda, which probably is from Portuguese varanda, originally "long balcony...

 box 

 "rectangular wooden container," usually with a lid, Old English box, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from Greek pyxis "boxwood," pyxion "writing table, box," made of boxwood, from pyxos "box tree," which is of uncertain origin. Beekes suggests a loan-word

 construction 

 late 14c., construccioun, "act of construing; manner of understanding the arrangement of words in translation" (a sense now obsolete), from Latin constructionem (nominative constructio) "a putting or placing together, a building," noun of action from past-participle stem of const

 structure 

 mid-15c.; the sense might be "building materials" or "action or process of building or construction," either way it is obsolete. From 1610s as "that which is built, an edifice," especially if large or imposing. It is from Latin structura "a fitting together, adjustment; a buildin

 gallery 

 mid-15c., "covered walk or passageway, narrow and partly open passageway along a wall," from Old French galerie "a long portico" (14c.), from Medieval Latin galeria, of unknown origin. Perhaps an alteration of galilea "church porch," which is probably from Latin Galilaea "Galilee

 reparation 

 late 14c., reparacioun, "repair, act of mending" (a sense now rare or obsolete), also "amends, compensation, recompense, satisfaction for injury, what is done to repair a wrong," from Old French reparacion and directly from Late Latin reparationem (nominative reparatio) "act of r

 exorcism 

 early 15c., "a calling up or driving out of evil spirits," from Late Latin exorcismus, from Greek exorkismos "administration of an oath," in Ecclesiastical Greek, "exorcism," from exorkizein "exorcise, bind by oath," from ex "out of" (see ex-) + horkizein "cause to swear," from h

 Share balcony 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/balcony Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/balcony">Etymology of balcony by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of balcony. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/balcony Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of balcony," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/balcony. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of balcony." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/balcony. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of balcony." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/balcony (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near balcony 
 balance 
 balance-beam 
 balanced 
 balance-sheet 
 balbutient 
 balcony 
 bald 
 balderdash 
 baldhead 
 balding 
 baldness 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix