URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/journal
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:38:41Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Journal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Journal - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of journal 

 journal (n.) 

 mid-14c., "book of church services," from Anglo-French jurnal , from Old French jornel , "a day; time; a day's travel or work" (12c., Modern French journal ), properly "that which takes place daily," noun use of adjective meaning "daily, of the day," from Late Latin diurnalis "daily," from Latin dies "day," from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine."

 The meaning "book for inventories and daily accounts" is from late 15c. in English (14c. in French); that of "personal diary" is c. 1600, also from a sense developed in French. Meaning "daily publication" is from 1728. Classical Latin used diurnus for "of the day, by day," and also as a noun, "account-book, day-book."

 Initial -d- in Latin usually remains in French, but according to Brachet, when it is followed by an -iu- , the -i- becomes consonantized as a -j- "and eventually ejects the d." He also cites jusque from de-usque .
 also from mid-14c. 

 Entries linking to journal 

 journalese (n.) 

 "language typical of newspaper articles or headlines," 1882, from journal (n.) + -ese .

 journalism (n.) 

 "business of writing, editing, or publishing a newspaper or public journal," 1821, regarded at first as a French word in English, from French journalisme (1781), from journal "daily publication" (see journal ); compare journalist .

 Where men are insulated they are easily oppressed; when roads become good, and intercourse is easy, their force is increased more than a hundred fold: when, without personal communication, their opinions can be interchanged, and the people thus become one mass, breathing one breath and one spirit, their might increases in a ratio of which it is difficult to find the measure or the limit. Journalism does this office .... ["New Monthly Magazine," London, 1831]

 [Géo] London was in western France covering the trial of a parricide that began in mid-afternoon. Because he had an early deadline, he telephoned a story that he was certain would take place: an angry crowd cursing the accused as he was marched to the courthouse from his holding cell at the police station. London then relaxed over lunch until he saw with dismay the guards and the prisoner coming but "not even the shadow of a gawker." His reputation at stake, he stalked to the door, cried out, "Kill him!" and returned to his table. [Benjamin F. Martin, "France in 1938"]

 journalist 
 *dyeu- 
 See All Related Words (4) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 diary 

 1580s, "an account of daily events, a journal kept by one person of his or her experiences and observations," from Latin diarium "daily allowance," later "a journal," neuter of diarius "daily," from dies "day" (from PIE root *dyeu- "to shine," in derivatives "sky, heaven, god"); 

 blotter 

 The Waste-Book, or Blotter, is nothing different from the Journal, only from the circumstance that it is used in moments...business of the day, when it is not practicable to observe that precision, neatness, and order, which we wish to appear on our Journal...

 ethnology 

 ["Atlantic Journal and Friend of Knowledge," Philadelphia, summer 1832]...

 pictorial 

 The noun meaning "journal in which pictures are the main feature" is attested by 1844. Related: Pictorially....

 absolutely 

 Smith, "Leaves from a Physician's Journal," New York: 1867]...

 log 

 It [the log-book] is a journal of all important items happening on shipboard, contains the data from which the navigator...determines his position by dead-reckoning ... and is, when properly kept, a complete meteorological journal....

 nightcap 

 [The Typographical Journal, September 1923]...

 ledger 

 c. 1400, " a book that lies permanently in some specified place" (especially a large copy of a breviary in a church), noun from leggen "to place, lay" (see lay (v.)). Perhaps formed on the model of a Dutch word; the -er seems to indicate "that which has been." Commercial sense of

 axle 

 "pole or pin upon which a wheel revolves" (properly, the round ends of the axle-tree which are inserted in the hubs or naves of the wheels), 1630s, from Middle English axel-, from some combination of Old English eax and Old Norse öxull "axis," both from Proto-Germanic *akhsulaz (

 blog 

 "online journal," 1998, short for weblog (which is attested from 1993 but in the sense "file containing a detailed record of each request received by a web server"), from (World Wide) Web (n.) + log (n.2). Joe Bloggs (c. 1969) was British slang for "any hypothetical person" (comp

 Share journal 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/journal Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/journal">Etymology of journal by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of journal. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 4, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/journal Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of journal," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 4, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/journal. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of journal." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/journal. Accessed 4 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of journal." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/journal (accessed September 4, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near journal 
 joual 
 jouissance 
 jouk 
 joule 
 jounce 
 journal 
 journalese 
 journalism 
 journalist 
 journey 
 journeyman 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix