URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/democracy
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T17:28:56Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Democracy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Democracy - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of democracy 

 democracy (n.) 

 "government by the people, system of government in which the sovereign power is vested in the people as a whole exercising power directly or by elected officials; a state so governed," 1570s, from French démocratie (14c.), from Medieval Latin democratia (13c.), from Greek dēmokratia "popular government," from dēmos "common people," originally "district" (see demotic ), + kratos "rule, strength" (see -cracy ).

 Sometimes 16c.-17c. in Latinized form democratie . In 19c. England it could refer to "the class of people which has no hereditary or other rank, the common people." In 19c. U.S. politics it could mean "principles or members of the Democratic Party."

 Democracy implies that the man must take the responsibility for choosing his rulers and representatives, and for the maintenance of his own 'rights' against the possible and probable encroachments of the government which he has sanctioned to act for him in public matters. [Ezra Pound, "ABC of Economics," 1933]

 also from 1570s 

 Entries linking to democracy 

 demotic (adj.) 

 "of or belonging to the people," especially "pertaining to the common people, popular, vulgar," 1822, from Latinized form of Greek dēmotikos "of or for the common people, in common use," from dēmos "common people," originally "district," from PIE *da-mo- "division," from root *da- "to divide." Originally in English it was used in reference to the simpler of two forms of ancient Egyptian writing (opposed to hieratic or hieroglyphic ); the broader sense is by 1831. Used of the popular form of modern Greek since 1927.

 aristocracy (n.) 

 1560s, "government by those who are the best citizens," from French aristocracie (Modern French aristocratie ), from Late Latin aristocratia , from Greek aristokratia "government or rule of the best; an aristocracy," from aristos "best of its kind, noblest, bravest, most virtuous" (see aristo- ) + abstract noun from kratos "rule, power" (see -cracy ).

 In early use contrasted with monarchy ; after the French and American revolutions, with democracy . The meaning "rule by a privileged class, oligarchy, government by those distinguished by rank and wealth" (best-born or best-favored by fortune) is from 1570s and became paramount 17c. Hence the meaning "patrician order, the class of hereditary nobles" (1610s), and, generally, that of "persons notably superior in any way, taken collectively" (1650s).

 democrat 
 democratic 
 democratize 
 -cracy 
 *da- 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 democrat 

 1790, "adherent or advocate of democracy," with reference to France, from French démocrate (18c., opposed to aristocrate), back-formation from démocratie (see democracy); formally revived in U.S. as a political party affiliation 1798, with a capital D. As a shortening of this, De

 democratic 

 c. 1600, "of the nature of or characterized by democracy; pertaining to democracy," from French démocratique, from Medieval Latin democraticus, from Greek demokratikos "of or for democracy; favoring democracy," from demokratia "popular government" (see democracy). Earlier was dem

 republic 

 "state in which supreme or executive power rests in the people via representatives chosen by citizens entitled to vote," c. 1600, from French république (15c.), from Latin respublica (ablative republica) "the common weal, a commonwealth, state, republic," literally res publica "p

 doublethink 

 believing in both of them, to use logic against logic, to repudiate morality while laying claim to it, to believe that democracy...was impossible and that the Party was the guardian of democracy, to forget whatever it was necessary to forget, then to...

 oligarchy 

 Aristotle, after some preliminary remarks, concludes by defining a democracy to be, when the freemen and those not the rich...It might be inferred, on the other hand, that in this definition of a democracy the few are excluded from the sovereign power...

 isonomia 

 before the law," c. 1600, from Italian or Latin, ultimately from Greek isonomia "equality of rights, the equality of a Greek democracy...

 psephocracy 

 dropping pebbles in different marked urns, and thus the word for "pebble" figures largely in the ancient Greek vocabulary of democracy...

 commonwealth 

 mid-15c., commoun welthe, "a community, whole body of people in a state," from common (adj.) + wealth (n.). Specifically "state with a republican or democratic form of government" from 1610s. From 1550s as "any body of persons united by some common interest." Applied specifically

 philosophy 

 c. 1300, philosophie, "knowledge, learning, scholarship, scholarly works, body of knowledge," from Old French filosofie "philosophy, knowledge" (12c., Modern French philosophie) and directly from Latin philosophia, from Greek philosophia "love of knowledge, pursuit of wisdom; sys

 ideology 

 1796, "science of ideas," originally "philosophy of the mind which derives knowledge from the senses" (as opposed to metaphysics), from French idéologie "study or science of ideas," coined by French philosopher Destutt de Tracy (1754-1836) from idéo- "of ideas," from Greek idea (

 Share democracy 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/democracy Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/democracy">Etymology of democracy by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of democracy. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/democracy Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of democracy," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/democracy. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of democracy." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/democracy. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of democracy." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/democracy (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near democracy 
 demiurge 
 demo 
 demob 
 demobilization 
 demobilize 
 democracy 
 democrat 
 democratic 
 democratization 
 democratize 
 demodulation 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close