URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/heir
FETCHED: 2026-09-05T20:59:45Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Heir - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Heir - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of heir 

 heir (n.) 

 "one who inherits, or has right of inheritance in, the property of another," c. 1300, from Anglo-French heir , Old French oir "heir, successor; heritage, inheritance," from Latin heredem (nominative heres ) "heir, heiress" (see heredity ). Heir apparent (late 14c.) has the French order of noun-adjective, though it was not originally so written in English. It is the heir of one still alive whose right is clear. After death the heir apparent becomes the heir-at-law . Related: Heir-apparency .
 also from c. 1300 

 Entries linking to heir 

 heredity (n.) 

 1530s, "inheritance, succession," from French hérédité , from Old French eredite "inheritance, legacy" (12c.), from Latin hereditatem (nominative hereditas ) "heirship, inheritance, an inheritance, condition of being an heir," from heres (genitive heredis ) "heir, heiress" (from PIE root *ghe- "to be empty, left behind," source also of Greek khēra "widow"). Legal sense of "inheritable quality or character" first recorded 1784; the modern biological sense "transmission of qualities from parents to offspring" seems to be found first in 1863, introduced by Herbert Spencer.

 apparent (adj.) 

 late 14c., "indisputable, clearly understood;" c. 1400, "easily seen or perceived," from Old French aparant "evident, obvious, visible," from Latin apparentem (nominative apparens ) "visible, manifest," present participle of apparere "appear, come in sight" (see appear ).

 First attested in phrases such as heir apparent (see heir ). The meaning "superficial, spurious" is from c. 1400; that of "appearing to the senses or mind but not necessarily real" is from 1640s. Apparent magnitude in astronomy (how bright a heavenly body looks from earth, as opposed to absolute magnitude , which is how bright it really is) is attested from 1875. Middle English had noun forms apparence , apparency , but both are obsolete since 17c.

 coheir 
 H 
 heiress 
 heirless 
 heirloom 
 See All Related Words (7) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 inherit 

 c. 1300, "to make (someone) an heir" (a sense now obsolete), from Old French enheriter "make heir, attribute the right of...inheretance to, appoint as heir," from Late Latin inhereditare "to appoint as heir," from in- "in" (from PIE root *en "in...") + Latin hereditare "to inherit," from heres (genitive heredis) "heir" (see heredity)....

 dowager 

 1520s, "title given to a widow of rank to distinguish her from the wife of her husband's heir bearing the same name," from...

 relief 

 was used earlier in English as "that which is left over or left behind," also "feudal payment to an overlord made by an heir...

 partner 

 partaker in anything," altered from parcener (late 13c.), from Old French parçonier "partner, associate; joint owner, joint heir...

 katydid 

 [T]heir noise is loud and incessant, one perpetually and regularly answering the other in notes exactly similar to the words...

 orphan 

 harb- "change allegiance," Latin orbus "bereft," Sanskrit arbhah "weak, child," Armenian orb "orphan," Old Irish orbe "heir...," Old Church Slavonic rabu "slave," rabota "servitude" (see robot), Gothic arbja, German erbe, Old English ierfa "heir,"...

 scion 

 The meaning "an heir, child, a descendant" in English is from mid-14c., a figurative use....

 recipient 

 "a receiver or taker," especially "one who receives or accepts something given," 1550s, from French récipient (16c.) and directly from Latin recipientem (nominative recipiens), present participle of recipere  "to hold, contain" (see receive). As an adjective in English, "rec

 offspring 

 Old English ofspring "children or young collectively, descendants," literally "those who spring off (someone)," from of "away, away from" (see off (prep.)) + springan "to spring" (see spring (v.)). Similar formation in Old Norse afspringr. The figurative sense "that which is prod

 progeny 

 early 14c., progenie, "children, offspring" (of humans or animals); late 14c., "descent, lineage, family, ancestry," from Old French progenie (13c.) and directly from Latin progenies "descendants, offspring, lineage, race, family," from stem of progignere "beget," from pro "forth

 Share heir 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/heir Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/heir">Etymology of heir by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of heir. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/heir Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of heir," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 5, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/heir. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of heir." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/heir. Accessed 5 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of heir." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/heir (accessed September 5, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near heir 
 heil 
 Heimlich maneuver 
 Heimweh 
 Heinie 
 heinous 
 heir 
 heiress 
 heirless 
 heirloom 
 Heisenberg 
 heist 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix