URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/hue
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:04:58Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Hue - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Hue - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of hue 

 hue (n.1) 

 "color," Old English hiw "color; form, appearance; species, kind; beauty," earlier heow , hiow , from Proto-Germanic *hiwam , which according to Watkins is reconstructed to be from PIE *kiwo- , suffixed form of root *kei- (2), a color adjective of broad application (source also of Sanskrit chawi "hide, skin, complexion, color, beauty, splendor," Lithuanian šyvas "white"). Germanic cognates include Old Norse hy "bird's down," Swedish hy "skin, complexion," Gothic hiwi "form, appearance."

 A common word in Old English, squeezed into obscurity after c. 1600 by color (n.), revived 1850s in chemistry and chromatography often in a distinctive sense in reference to the quality of color other than luminosity and chroma.

 hue (n.2) 

 "a shouting," mid-13c., from Old French huee "outcry, noise, tumult; war or hunting cry," probably of imitative origin (compare French hue "gee!" a cry to horses). Hue and cry is late 13c. as an Anglo-French legal term meaning "outcry calling for pursuit of a felon" (the Medieval Latin version is huesium et clamor ); extended sense of "cry of alarm" is 1580s.
 also from mid-13c. 

 Entries linking to hue 

 color (n.) 

 early 13c., "skin color, complexion," from Anglo-French culur, coulour , Old French color "color, complexion, appearance" (Modern French couleur ), from Latin color "color of the skin; color in general, hue; appearance," from Old Latin colos , originally "a covering" (akin to celare "to hide, conceal"), from PIE root *kel- (1) "to cover, conceal, save." Old English words for "color" were hiw ("hue"), bleo . For sense evolution, compare Sanskrit varnah "covering, color," which is related to vrnoti "covers," and also see chroma .

 Colour was the usual English spelling from 14c., from Anglo-French. Classical correction made color an alternative from 15c., and that spelling became established in the U.S. (see -or ). 

 Meaning "a hue or tint, a visible color, the color of something" is from c. 1300. As "color as an inherent property of matter, that quality of a thing or appearance which is perceived by the eye alone," from late 14c. From early 14c. as "a coloring matter, pigment, dye." From mid-14c. as "kind, sort, variety, description." From late 14c. in figurative sense of "stylistic device, embellishment. From c. 1300 as "a reason or argument advanced by way of justifying, explaining, or excusing an action," hence "specious reason or argument, that which hides the real character of something" (late 14c.).

 From c. 1300 as "distinctive mark of identification" (as of a badge or insignia or livery, later of a prize-fighter, horse-rider, etc.), originally in reference to a coat of arms. Hence figurative sense as in show one's (true) colors "reveal one's opinions or intentions;" compare colors .

 In reference to "the hue of the darker (as distinguished from the 'white') varieties of mankind" [OED], attested from 1792, in people of colour , in translations from French in reference to the French colony of Saint-Domingue (modern Haiti) and there meaning "mulattoes."

 In reference to musical tone from 1590s. Color-scheme is from 1860. Color-coded is by 1943, in reference to wiring in radios and military aircraft. Color-line in reference to social and legal discrimination by race in the U.S. is from 1875, originally referring to Southern whites voting in unity and taking back control of state governments during Reconstruction (it had been called white line about a year earlier, and with more accuracy).

 Herr 

 German equivalent of Mister (but also used without a name), 1650s, originally "nobler, superior," from Middle High German herre , from Old High German herro , comparative of hēr "noble, worthy, important, exalted," from PIE *kei- (2), a color adjective (see hue (n.1)), in suffixed form *koi-ro- here meaning "gray, hoary," hence "gray-haired, venerable." Cognate with Old Frisian hera , Dutch heer ; perhaps in this usage a loan-translation of Latin senior in the High German area that spread into other Germanic languages. Hence also Herrenvolk "master race," the concept of the German people in Nazi ideology.

 hoar 
 hued 
 hueless 
 See All Related Words (5) 

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 hoar 

 Old English har "hoary, gray, venerable, old," the connecting notion being gray hair, from Proto-Germanic *haira (source also of Old Norse harr "gray-haired, old," Old Saxon, Old High German her "distinguished, noble, glorious," German hehr), from PIE *kei- (2), source of color a

 imbue 

 early 15c., "to keep wet; to soak, saturate;" also figuratively "to cause to absorb" (feelings, opinions, etc.), from Latin imbuere "moisten, wet, soak, saturate," figuratively "to fill; to taint," a word of uncertain origin, perhaps from the same root as imbrication. Compare als

 chroma 

 in reference to color, "intensity of distinctive hue, degree of departure of a color-sensation from that of white or gray...," a verbal noun from khroizein "to color, stain, to touch the surface of the body," khrosthenai "to take on a color or hue...

 coloring 

 From 1762 in figurative or transferred sense "peculiar character or effect analogous to the effect of hue or tint."...

 colored 

 late 14c., "having a certain color, having a distinguishing hue," also (c. 1400) "having a certain complexion," past-participle...

 rosy 

 c. 1200, "rose-colored, having a pink hue," of a color, from rose (n.1) + -y (2), probably modeled on Old French rose....

 Hugh 

 masc. proper name, from Old North French Hugues, Old French Hue, from a Frankish name meaning "heart, mind," cognate with...

 alert 

 "on the watch," 1610s, from French alerte "vigilant" (17c.), from prepositional phrase à l'erte "on the watch," from Italian all'erta "to the height." The second element is from erta "lookout, high tower," noun use of fem. of erto, past participle of ergere "raise up," from Latin

 alter 

 late 14c., "to change (something), make different in some way," from Old French alterer "to change, alter," from Medieval Latin alterare "to change," from Latin alter "the other (of the two)," from PIE root *al- (1) "beyond" + comparative suffix -ter (as in other). Intransitive s

 change 

 c. 1200, "to alter, make different, change" (transitive); early 13c. as "to substitute one for another;" mid-13c. as "to make (something) other than what it was, cause to turn or pass from one state to another;" from late 13c. as "to become different, be altered" (intransitive), 

 Share hue 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/hue Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/hue">Etymology of hue by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of hue. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/hue Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of hue," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hue. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of hue." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/hue. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of hue." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/hue (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near hue 
 huckster 
 hud 
 huddle 
 Hudibras 
 Hudson 
 hue 
 hued 
 hueless 
 huff 
 huffy 
 hug 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix