URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/accordion
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T16:22:20Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Accordion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Accordion - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of accordion 

 accordion (n.) 

 "small, keyed, bellows-like wind instrument," 1830, from German Akkordion , from Akkord "musical chord, concord of sounds," from a verb similar to Old French acorder "agree, be in harmony," from Vulgar Latin *accordare (compare Italian accordare "to attune a musical instrument;" see accord (v.)), with suffix on analogy of clarion , etc. Invented 1829 by piano-maker Cyrill Demian of Vienna. The type with a keyboard instead of buttons is a piano accordion . Related: Accordionist .
 also from 1830 

 Entries linking to accordion 

 accord (v.) 

 early 12c., accorden , "come into agreement," also "agree, be in harmony," from Old French acorder "agree, be in harmony" (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *accordare "make agree," literally "be of one heart, bring heart to heart," from Latin ad "to" (see ad- ) + cor (genitive cordis ) "heart" (used figuratively for "soul, mind"), from PIE root *kerd- "heart." Compare concord , discord . Related: Accorded ; according .

 clarion (n.) 

 "small, high-pitched trumpet," early 14c., from Old French clarion "(high-pitched) trumpet, bugle" and directly from Medieval Latin clarionem (nominative clario ) "a trumpet," from Latin clarus "clear" (see clear (adj.)). Clarion call in the figurative sense "call to battle" is attested from 1838 ( clarion's call is from 1807).

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 clavier 

 1708, "keyboard of a pianoforte, organ, etc.," from French clavier, originally "a key-bearer," from Latin clavis "key" (from PIE root *klau- "hook"). The French word also is the source of German Klavier, Dutch klavier, Danish klaver, etc. The German word was used generally of key

 piano 

 "percussion musical instrument in which tones are produced by blows of hammers upon stretched strings, the hammers being operated from a keyboard," 1803, from French piano (18c.), Italian piano, shortened forms of pianoforte (q.v.). Essentially, the pianoforte is a large dulcime

 squeeze 

 c. 1600, "press forcibly" (transitive), perhaps an alteration of quease (Middle English quisen), from Old English cwysan "to squeeze," a word of unknown origin, perhaps imitative (compare German quetschen "to squeeze"). It perhaps also has been altered by influence of many words 

 box 

 "rectangular wooden container," usually with a lid, Old English box, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from Greek pyxis "boxwood," pyxion "writing table, box," made of boxwood, from pyxos "box tree," which is of uncertain origin. Beekes suggests a loan-word

 ragamuffin 

 mid-14c., "demon;" late 14c., "a ragged lout," also in surnames (Isabella Ragamuffyn, 1344), from Middle English raggi "ragged" ("rag-y"?) + "fanciful ending" [OED], or else perhaps second the element is Middle Dutch muffe "mitten." Or, as Johnson has it, "From rag and I know not

 disaster 

 "anything that befalls of ruinous or distressing nature; any unfortunate event," especially a sudden or great misfortune, 1590s, from French désastre (1560s), from Italian disastro, literally "ill-starred," from dis-, here merely pejorative, equivalent to English mis- "ill" (see 

 profane 

 "desecrate, treat (holy things) with irreverence," late 14c., prophanen, from Old French profaner, prophaner (13c.) and directly from Latin profanare (in Medieval Latin often prophanare) "to desecrate, render unholy, violate," from profanus "unholy, not consecrated" (see profane 

 Eucharist 

 "sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Communion," mid-14c., from Old French eucariste, from Late Latin eucharistia, from Greek eukharistia "thanksgiving, gratitude," later "the Lord's Supper," from eukharistos "grateful," from eu "well" (see eu-) + stem of kharizesthai "show favor

 calamity 

 early 15c., "damage, state of adversity;" 1550s, "a great misfortune or cause of misery," from Old French calamite (14c.), from Latin calamitatem (nominative calamitas) "damage, loss, failure; disaster, misfortune, adversity," a word of obscure origin. Early etymologists associat

 sleuth 

 late 12c., sloth, "track or trail of a person or beast," from Old Norse sloð "trail or track," as of a person in snow, a word of uncertain origin. The meaning "detective" is attested by 1872, a shortening of sleuth-hound "keen investigator" (1849), a figurative use of that word, 

 Share accordion 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/accordion Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/accordion">Etymology of accordion by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of accordion. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/accordion Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of accordion," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/accordion. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of accordion." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/accordion. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of accordion." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/accordion (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near accordion 
 accord 
 accordance 
 accordant 
 according 
 accordingly 
 accordion 
 accost 
 accouchement 
 accoucheur 
 account 
 accountability 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix