URL: https://www.etymonline.com/word/penalty
FETCHED: 2026-09-06T22:10:19Z
STATUS: 200
TITLE: Penalty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Penalty - Etymology, Origin & Meaning 

 Search 
 Log in 

 Columns 
 Forum 
 Apps 
 Premium 

 Log in 

 Advertisement Remove Ads 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Origin and history of penalty 

 penalty (n.) 

 c. 1500, "punishment," from Old French penalite and directly from Medieval Latin penalitatem (nominative penalitas ), from Latin poenalis "pertaining to punishment" (see penal ). Specifically as "the punishment laid out by law or judicial decision for a violation of the law" is by 1510s (also later for non-fulfillment or violation of an obligation or agreement). The sporting sense of "disadvantage imposed on a competitor for a breach of the rules" is by 1885; the ice hockey penalty box is attested by 1931.
 also from c. 1500 

 Entries linking to penalty 

 penal (adj.) 

 "of or pertaining to punishment by law," mid-15c., from Old French peinal (12c., Modern French pénal ) and directly from Medieval Latin penalis , from Latin poenalis "pertaining to punishment," from poena "punishment," from Greek poinē "blood-money, fine, penalty, punishment," from PIE *kwoina , from root *kwei- "to pay, atone, compensate" (source also of Greek timē "price, worth, honor, esteem, respect," tinein "to pay a price, punish, take vengeance;" Sanskrit cinoti "observes, notes;" Avestan kaena "punishment, vengeance;" Old Church Slavonic cena "honor, price;" Lithuanian kaina "value, price").

 casualty (n.) 

 early 15c., casuelte , caswelte , "chance, accident; incidental charge," from casual (adj.) on the model of royalty , penalty , etc. From the earliest use especially of untoward events or misfortunes. The meaning "losses in numbers from a military or other troop" is from late 15c. The meaning "an individual killed, wounded, or lost in battle" is from 1844. Casuality had some currency 16c.-17c. in the sense "chance, a chance occurrence," especially an unfortunate one, but now is obsolete.

 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 More to explore

 reward 

 mid-14c., "what one deserves, just desserts," from Anglo-French and Old North French reward, rouwart, back-formation from rewarder (see reward (v.)). The meaning "return or payment for service, hardship, etc.," also "something given in recognition of merit, virtue, etc., a prize"

 punishment 

 late 14c., punishement, in law, "the assessing or inflicting of pain, suffering, loss, confinement, etc. on a person for a crime or offense," from Anglo-French punisement (late 13c.), Old French punissement, from punir (see punish). From early 15c. as "suffering or hardship infli

 subpoena 

 "legal writ or process commanding attendance in a court of justice of person on whom it is served, under penalty of a fine..., etc.," early 15c., sub pena, from Medieval Latin sub poena "under penalty," the first words of the writ commanding the...presence of someone under penalty of failure, from Latin sub "under" (see sub-) + poena, ablative of poena "penalty" (see...

 punish 

 c. 1300, punishen, "inflict a penalty on," from Old French puniss-, extended present-participle stem of punir "to punish,..." from Latin punire "punish, correct, chastise; take vengeance for; inflict a penalty on, cause pain for some offense," earlier...poenire, from poena "penalty, punishment" (see penal)....

 boot 

 Compare Old Frisian bote "fine, penalty, penance, compensation," German Buße "penance, atonement," Gothic botha "advantage...

 Eurydice 

 usage," and, via the notion of "right as dependent on custom," "law, a right; a judgment; a lawsuit, court case, trial; penalty...

 mulct 

 Latin mulctare, altered (Barnhart calls it "false archaism") from multare "punish, to sentence to pay a fine," from multa "penalty...

 discipline 

 c. 1200, "penitential chastisement; punishment for the sake of correction," from Old French descepline "discipline, physical punishment; teaching; suffering; martyrdom" (11c., Modern French discipline) and directly from Latin disciplina "instruction given, teaching, learning, kno

 detention 

 mid-15c., detencioun, "act of keeping back or withholding," from Old French détention (13c.) and directly from Late Latin detentionem (nominative detentio), noun of action from past-participle stem of Latin detinere "hold back, keep off" (see detain). Sense of "confinement, restr

 warder 

 c. 1400, "guardian of an entrance," from Anglo-French wardere, wardour "guardian, keeper, custodian" (Old French gardeor), agent noun from Old North French warder "to guard, keep, maintain, uphold" (Old French garder), from Frankish *wardon, from Proto-Germanic *wardon "to guard,

 Share penalty 

 ‘ cite ’ 
 Page URL :
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/penalty Copy 

 HTML Link :
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/penalty">Etymology of penalty by etymonline</a> Copy 

 APA Style :
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of penalty. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved September 6, 2026, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/penalty Copy 

 Chicago Style :
 Harper Douglas, "Etymology of penalty," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed September 6, 2026, https://www.etymonline.com/word/penalty. Copy 

 MLA Style :
 Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of penalty." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/penalty. Accessed 6 September, 2026. Copy 

 IEEE Style :
 D. Harper. "Etymology of penalty." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/penalty (accessed September 6, 2026). Copy 

 Remove Ads 
 Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Trending 

 Dictionary entries near penalty 
 pen- 
 pen 
 penal 
 penalise 
 penalize 
 penalty 
 penance 
 Penates 
 pence 
 penchant 
 pencil 

 Advertisement Close 
 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads.

 Close 

 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 

 Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple.

 About
 Who Did This 
 Sources 
 Introduction 
 Links 

 Support
 Premium 
 Patreon 
 Donate with PayPal 
 Merch 

 Apps

Get Chrome Extension 

Get iOS App 

Get Android App 

 Dark
 Auto
 Light

 Terms of Services Privacy Policy 

 English (English) 
 © 2001–2026 Douglas Harper & Talia Felix